                                                     WPS8033


Policy Research Working Paper                       8033




         Is Poverty in Africa Mostly Chronic
                     or Transient?
                Evidence from Synthetic Panel Data

                                Hai-Anh H. Dang
                                Andrew L. Dabalen




Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
  &
Development Data Group
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8033


  Abstract
 Absent actual panel household survey data, this paper con-                         The region also saw a 9 percent reduction in poverty
 structs, for the first time, synthetic panel data for more                         and a 28 percent increase in the size of the middle class.
 than 20 countries accounting for two-thirds of the popu-                           However, chronic poverty remains high, and a consider-
 lation in Sub-Saharan Africa. In this process, the analysis                        able proportion of the population is vulnerable to falling
 employs repeated cross sections that span, on average, a                           into poverty. There is some limited evidence that most
 six-year period for each country. The analysis suggests that                       resource-rich and middle-income countries have more
 all these countries as a whole have had pro-poor growth.                           upward mobility than downward mobility. Post-second-
 One-third of the poor population escaped poverty during                            ary education is especially strongly associated with higher
 the studied period, which is larger than the proportion of                         upward mobility and less downward mobility, which holds
 the population that fell into poverty in the same period.                          to some extent for female-headed and urban households.




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group and the Development Data Group. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at hdang@worldbank.org and adabalen@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                         Is Poverty in Africa Mostly Chronic or Transient?
                                Evidence from Synthetic Panel Data



                                Hai-Anh H. Dang and Andrew L. Dabalen*




JEL: C15, D31, I31, O10, O57

Key words: welfare dynamics, poverty, vulnerability, middle class, pro-poor growth, synthetic
panel, household surveys, Africa




*
  Hai-Anh Dang (hdang@worldbank.org) and Andrew Dabalen (adabalen@worldbank.org) are respectively
Economist with the Survey Unit, Development Data Group, and Manager, Global Poverty Practice, the World Bank.
We are grateful to Kathleen Beegle, Luc Christiaensen, Francisco H.G. Ferreira, Tomoki Fuji, Isis Gaddis, Yoseph
Getachew, Stephan Klasen, Peter Lanjouw, Michael Lokshin, Jacques Morisset, Erik Thorbecke, and participants at
the CSAE conference (Oxford), workshops and seminars at Singapore Management University and the World Bank
for helpful discussions on earlier versions. We thank Rose Mungai, Vasco Molini, Shinya Takamatsu, and Ayago
Wambile for their help with the data. We would further like to thank the UK Department of International Development
for funding assistance through its Strategic Research Programs.
I. Introduction
    Static poverty measures fail to distinguish between an individual who has been in poverty all

her life, and another who happens to have had a small misfortune for the year the measurement

was carried out. But these distinctions matter. The forces that conspire to condemn some

individuals to remain stuck in poverty for years are generally somewhat different from those that

randomly drag them down for a brief period. The latter group may need only some temporary

relief—perhaps only some short-term employment insurance till they secure the next decent-

paying job—while the former would also need longer-term interventions aimed at breaking the

persistence of poverty. Indeed, the longer people spend in poverty, the lesser tends to be their

chance of exiting it. As living standards in Africa continue to rise, has its poverty remained mainly

chronic, or has it become more transient?

    Researchers interested in understanding welfare dynamics in Africa now have access to an

emerging collection of nationally representative panel surveys, which represents a vast

improvement over the situation just a decade ago.1 However, data coverage remains low—data are

available for only seven countries—and the time periods spanned by these panel surveys are

mostly limited to short periods of three years or less. We attempt to overcome these obstacles by

applying recently developed statistical methods to construct synthetic panels from cross sectional

surveys (Dang et al., 2014; Dang and Lanjouw, 2013), which are far more widely available. We

construct these synthetic panels for 21 countries with at least two comparable cross sectional

surveys accounting for two-thirds of the Sub-Sahara African population and spanning on average

six years. Thus by covering the largest number of countries and the longest time periods for Sub-




1
  See, for example, the Living Standards Measurement Study–Integrated Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA) that are
financed by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, but implemented by the World Bank and member countries.

                                                         2
Saharan Africa compared to the existing literature, our paper provides the most comprehensive, to

date, study of welfare dynamics for the region as a whole.2

    In addition to generating newer and more data, this synthetic panels approach also enables us

to offer a more consistent measurement of poverty dynamics since it applies the same methodology

and employs the same standard and welfare measure for all countries, which is not the case in most

existing studies that use panel surveys. Furthermore, since synthetic panel data are constructed

from cross sectional surveys, these data are also exempt from issues that usually plague panel data

quality such as attrition.

    Our findings suggest that on average—that is when all the 21 countries are taken together—

the region experienced pro-poor growth. Even though chronic poverty remains high, one-third of

those considered poor in the first period moved out of poverty in the second period, which exceeds

the proportion of the population that fell into poverty in the same period. The region also saw a 9

percent (or a five percentage points) reduction in poverty and a 28 percent increase in the size of

the middle class, albeit from a somewhat low base. However, the vulnerable category also grew

by 12 percent. Our pro-poor growth definition suggests that countries with positive growth are

Mauritania, Ethiopia, Togo, Swaziland, Malawi, Chad, Botswana, Ghana, Uganda, Congo DRC,

Mozambique, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Sierra Leone. On the other hand, countries with growth that

is not pro-poor are Burkina Faso, Zambia, Madagascar, Cote d’Ivoire, Cameroon, Senegal, and

Nigeria. There is also some indicative evidence that most resource-rich and middle-income

countries have more upward mobility than downward mobility. Post-secondary education is




2
  Similar analyses using synthetic panel data have been done for other regions such as Latin America (e.g., Ferreira et
al., 2013; Vakis et al., 2016) or Middle East and North Africa (Dang and Ianchovichina, 2016). For an analysis of
poverty based on asset indexes for 11 countries in Africa in the 1990s, see Sahn and Stifel (2000); but also see, e.g.,
Harttgen et al. (2013) who argue that asset indexes may not be able to capture the trends in welfare over time as
consumption-based measures do.

                                                             3
especially strongly associated with higher upward mobility and less downward mobility, which

holds true to some extent for households with a female household head and urban residence.

    This paper consists of four sections. We provide a brief overview of the analytical framework,

including the synthetic panel method and our definitions of vulnerability and shared prosperity,

and data in the next section. We discuss estimation results regarding welfare dynamics in Section

III, before offering concluding remarks and some policy recommendations in Section IV.


II. Analytical Framework
    We provide in this section a brief overview of the methods that will be employed to construct

the synthetic panels, as well as some simple but useful decomposition formulae for poverty

mobility (Section II.1). We then describe our definitions of vulnerability and shared prosperity

(Section II.2), which have a strong pro-poor growth focus. We discuss the data in the last sub-

section (Section II.3).


II.1. Constructing Synthetic Panels and Decomposing Poverty Mobility
    We apply recent statistical methods developed by Dang et al. (2014) and Dang and Lanjouw

(2013) to construct synthetic panel data from repeated cross sections.3 These methods essentially

decompose the change in poverty (or welfare) into two components: one that is due to time-

invariant individual characteristics (e.g., ethnicity, religion, place of birth, or completed

education), and the other due to unobserved time-varying factors (e.g., unexpected shocks to

household consumption). Certain deterministic variables such as age can also be included in the

first component, since given its value in one survey round, age can then be determined given the

time interval between the two survey rounds. Similarly, time-varying household characteristics


3
 Validation exercises were implemented for the synthetic panel methods using both synthetic panel data and actual
panel data for several different countries in the cited papers. Other recent applications (and validations) include
Ferreira et al. (2013) and Cruces et al. (2015) for Latin American countries, Dang et al. (2017) for Senegal, and Dang
and Lanjouw (in press) for India, the United States, and Vietnam.

                                                            4
can also fall under the first component if retrospective questions about the values of such

characteristics in the first survey round are asked in the second round. An overview of these

methods is provided in Appendix 1.

    To reduce spurious changes due to changes in household composition over time, we follow the

literature on pseudo-panel analysis and restrict the estimation samples to household heads age 25

to 55 in the first cross section and adjust this age range accordingly in the second cross section.

This restriction also helps ensure certain variables such as heads’ education attainment remain

relatively stable over time (assuming most heads are finished with their schooling).4 This age range

is usually used in traditional pseudo-panel analysis but can vary depending on the cultural and

economic factors in each specific setting. Population weights are then employed to provide

estimates that represent the whole population.

    Then let yij and zj respectively represent household consumption (income) and the poverty line

in survey round j, j= 1 or 2, we are interested in knowing such quantities as

                                     P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 )                             (1a)

which represents the percentage of households that are poor in the first survey round (year) but

non-poor in the second survey round, or

                                     P(yi2  z2 | yi1  z1 )                                (1b)

which represents the percentage of poor households in the first round that escape poverty in the

second round.5 In other words, for the average household, quantity (1a) provides the joint

(unconditional) probability of household poverty status in both years, and quantity (1b) the


4
 While household heads may still increase their education achievement in theory, this rarely happens in practice.
5
  Note that quantities (1a) and (1b) respectively represent the probability that household i is poor in the first survey
round (year) but nonpoor in the second survey round and the probability that the poor household i (in the first round)
escapes poverty in the second round. At the population level, these quantities can also be interpreted as percentages
of the population groups of interest as discussed above.

                                                             5
conditional probability of household poverty status in the second year given their poverty status in

the first year. For convenience, we also refer to (1a)-type quantities and (1b)-type quantities

respectively as the unconditional measure and the conditional measure of poverty mobility.

   Some straightforward decompositions are useful for interpretation of results. Note that the

following equality holds for the unconditional probabilities

    P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 )  P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 )  P( yi1  z1 )    (2a)

where the first and second terms on the left-hand side respectively represent chronic poverty (i.e.,

the percentage of households that are poor in both years) and upward mobility (i.e., the percentage

of households that are poor in the 1st year but escape poverty in the 2nd year). These two terms

together make up the percentage of the population that are poor in the 1st year (i.e., the headcount

poverty rate in the 1st year). Thus given the same (headcount) poverty rate, Equation (2a) implies

an inverse relationship between chronic poverty and upward mobility.

   We can have a similar decomposition for the poverty rate in the 2nd period by simply reversing

the inequality signs in the 2nd term in the left-hand side, which results in

    P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 )  P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 )  P( yi2  z2 )    (2b)

The 2nd term on the left-hand side now represents downward mobility (i.e., the percentage of

households that are non-poor in the 1st year but slide into poverty in the 2nd year), which together

with chronic poverty (the 1st term on the left-hand side) sums up to the poverty rate in the 2nd

period.

   Equations (2a) and (2b) provide the unconditional versions of poverty mobility, which do not

take into account the information that is offered by a household’s poverty status in any given year.

We can further extend these equalities by conditioning on household poverty status in either period




                                                      6
to obtain the conditional versions. In particular, dividing all terms in Equations (2a) and (2b) by

the right-hand side, we have the conditional versions of these equalities

       P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 | yi1  z1 )  P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 | yi1  z1) 1             (3a)

       P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 | yi2  z2 )  P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 | yi2  z2 ) 1            (3b)

      It is useful to note that since there are two different components on the left-hand side of

Equation (3a), there is not necessarily a correlation between either of these two components and

their total. A similar result applies for Equations (2a), (2b), and (3b). Put differently, there may be,

for instance, no correlation between (unconditional) chronic poverty and the headcount poverty

rate.6 This further indicates that analyzing panel data can reveal dynamic patterns that are masked

by cross sectional data. We return to this interesting result in the empirical analyses.

      Yet, another conditional version of Equations (2a) and (2b) can be obtained by further

decomposing poverty mobility, conditional on household poverty status in both periods

P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 | yi1  z1 or yi2  z2 )  P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 | yi1  z1 or yi2  z2 ) 
 P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 | yi1  z1 or yi2  z2 )  1
                                                                                        (4)
      In Equation (4), the first term on the left-hand side represents the proportion of the population

that are chronic poor out of those who were ever poor (i.e., the conditional chronic poverty for

those who were ever poor). Similarly, the second term on the left-hand side represents upward

mobility, and the third term on the left-hand side downward mobility, both terms conditional on

those who were ever poor. Compared to Equations (3a) and (3b), Equation (4) is more general and

considers as the denominator a larger set of the poor population—the ever-poor—that include not

just the poor in either period 1 or period 2, but in both periods. Put differently, the decomposition




6
    But chronic poverty should always be less than or equal to headcount poverty as shown by Equations (2a) and (2b).

                                                             7
in Equation (4) offers an analysis of mobility that takes into account both the transiently poor and

the chronically poor.

   To keep our presentation more concise, unless otherwise noted, hereafter when discussing

poverty mobility we refer to the conditional versions (including chronic poverty, upward mobility,

and downward mobility).



II.2. Defining Vulnerability and Shared Prosperity
Vulnerability

   Using the given poverty lines zj, Equalities (1a) and (1b) classify the population into two

groups, one is poor and the other non-poor. But we can obtain richer analysis by further identifying

an additional group out of the latter, the vulnerable that are defined as those that are non-poor but

still face a significant risk of falling into poverty. Clearly, poverty reduction can be achieved by

not just lifting those who are currently poor out of poverty, but also by providing safety net

programs to shield the vulnerable from sinking into this undesirable outcome. Once the vulnerable

group is identified, we can (loosely) define as the middle class the remaining population that have

higher consumption levels and much lower risk of falling into poverty.

   Building on the literature that studies vulnerability to poverty, Dang and Lanjouw (in press)

derives the vulnerability line from a specified vulnerability index P. While sharing a similar

conceptual approach with existing studies on vulnerability (such as Pritchett et al., 2000;

Chaudhuri, 2003, or Christiaensen and Subbarao, 2005), this approach is notably different in

several respects. First, it explicitly provides a framework to estimate the vulnerability line that was

not discussed in previous studies. This vulnerability line is associated with a vulnerability index

that can in turn be derived in various ways including budgetary planning, (ideal or desirable) social

welfare objectives, or relative concepts of well-being. For example, if the available resources for

                                                    8
social protection programs can only be deployed to assist a certain proportion (say, 20 percent) of

the vulnerable population, this proportion can be a good starting point to derive the vulnerability

index. Second, and perhaps more importantly, this approach allows the vulnerability line (and

index) to be estimated using cross sectional household surveys, or the synthetic panels that are

constructed from these cross sections.7

    Given a vulnerability line vj, we can extend Equality (1a) to analyze the dynamics for these

three categories: poor, vulnerable, and middle class. For example, the percentage of poor

households in the first period that escape poverty but still remain vulnerable in the second period

(joint probability) can be calculated using the following quantity P ( yi1  z1 and z 2  yi 2  v2 ) .

    Table 1 shows a range of values of the vulnerability line that correspond to different

vulnerability indexes for all countries. The vulnerability index falls within the range [10, 33],

which is comparable to those for India or countries in the Middle East and North Africa region,

but higher than that for the United States and Vietnam (Dang and Ianchovichina, 2016; Dang and

Lanjouw, in press, forthcoming).8 The vulnerability line ranges from $2.1 to $9.3 dollars per day,

in 2011 PPP prices. We will employ a vulnerability index of 15 percent and the associated

vulnerability line of $4.3 for our welfare analysis in the next section.


Shared Prosperity

    To provide a summary measure of the different growth rates for the three welfare groups, we

employ a simple typology of growth scenarios (Dang and Lanjouw, 2016). This typology has a



7
  In addition, other differences are that the target population consists of the currently non-poor households rather than
all households; and this approach employs simpler non-parametric estimation methods to estimate vulnerability as a
function of consumption alone. See Dang and Lanjouw (in press) for a more detailed comparison of this approach
with existing studies. See also Hoddinott and Quisumbing (2010) for a recent review of other approaches to measuring
vulnerability.
8
  All numbers are in 2011 PPP dollars per capita per day.

                                                              9
strong pro-poor growth focus, and offers a ranking of the different growth scenarios. For the case

of the three welfare categories, there are in total six possible growth scenarios depending on

whether (the population share for) each of the three categories is expanding or shrinking.9 The first

three scenarios relate to the reduction of the lowest income category, while the remaining three

scenarios concern the expansion of this category. Thus, by our pro-poor definition, these first three

scenarios indicate positive pro-poor growth, and the remaining scenarios suggest negative pro-

poor growth. The growth of the middle income category helps further determine the rate of pro-

poor growth, for example, whether pro-poor growth is more positive or simply positive.

    Table 2.1 shows this typology. The most positive pro-poor growth scenario is one where both

the low-income and middle-income categories decrease while the top income category expands

(Scenario 1). This is also the best general economic growth scenario, as everyone—regardless of

their welfare category—is on average better off. The opposite happens with the worst pro-poor

growth scenario (Scenario 6) where both the low-income and middle-income categories expand

while the top income category shrinks. Put differently, everyone on average is worse off under this

scenario. All the remaining scenarios fall in between these two extremes and can be classified

based on the changes in the sizes of the three welfare categories.

    Some remarks are in order for this simple typology. First, consistent with a pro-poor criterion,

pro-poor growth is considered strongest when the two lower income groups are reduced. Second,

the ranking provided in Table 2.1 provides a strong focus on the low-income groups, rather than

the mean of the distribution. From this perspective, a growth scenario where the whole economy




9
 Since these three groups add up to 100 percent, two other scenarios of either expanding or shrinking for all these
groups as shares of the population are out of the question. In other words, the increases and decreases in the population
shares of the three groups should cancel out each other in the total.

                                                             10
may grow on average but poor households become poorer is less desirable than another where the

economy can slightly contract but poor households are better off.

       Finally, the typology provided in Table 2.1 is general enough to be employed with different

(absolute or relative) definitions of welfare categories, as well as different welfare outcomes

including objective measures and subjective measures. As proposed in Dang and Lanjouw (2016),

the cutoff points delineating the different income groups can also be obtained using a variety of

approaches, such as employing a range of fixed percentiles of the income distribution (say,

between the 40th and 80th percentiles as in Alesina and Perotti, 1996) or some absolute cutoff

thresholds such as between $2 and $10 PPP dollars (Banerjee and Duflo, 2008).

       We also show for supplementary analysis estimates that employ the World Bank’s definition

of shared prosperity, which is growth in mean consumption for the bottom 40 percent of the income

distribution (see, e.g., Basu, 2013; Jolliffe et al., 2015).10 But note that this definition is perhaps

more relevant for anonymous growth analysis, where the consumption level for the bottom 40

percent, rather than for the poor population, in each period is tracked. Our typology is more

explicitly related to pro-poor growth analysis, where we track welfare of the different population

groups over time.



II.3. Data
    Construction of the synthetic panel requires a country to have at least two cross sectional

surveys. These two surveys should preferably be comparable: that is, they are nationally

representative, are conducted around the same time in the calendar year (e.g., to avoid seasonality),

and the reporting period and instruments (diary or recalled consumption) are consistent in both

surveys. This follows from Equations (1), where it is assumed that to obtain the counterfactual


10
     In a slight abuse of notation, we use the pairs of terms “income” and “consumption” interchangeably in this paper.

                                                             11
welfare measure (e.g. consumption for the second period), the actual welfare distributions

conditional on observable characteristics should be identical. This (somewhat strong) assumption

implies that the distributions (for both the welfare measure and the observable characteristics)

should be drawn from the same population. It also implies that the variables, especially the welfare

measure, must have been collected in the same way—that is, the survey design should be the same.

If the two distributions are not comparable, the counterfactual distributions would not be deemed

to come from the same data generating process or model; the resultant mobility estimates would

be incorrect as a result.

    Between 1990 and 2012, at least 148 multi-topic surveys that collected consumption data were

completed across countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. More recently, more than half of the countries

have conducted a consumption survey between 2011 and 2015 (see Beegle, Christiaensen, Dabalen

and Gaddis, 2016). However, only 27 of the 48 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa had at least two

comparable household surveys for the period between 1990 and 2012. Among these 27 countries,

we are able to use two survey rounds for each of 21 countries to create synthetic panels. These

countries and their surveys, which are listed in Table 2, represent around two-thirds of the

population of the region and an even higher fraction of its poor population. Nearly all the surveys

were conducted in the 2000s, and the two survey rounds in each pair are, on average, separated by

about 6 years. Notably, this was also a period of sustained economic growth for the region.

    Table 2 shows the estimated poverty rate for each country for each of the two periods, and the

net changes in poverty between the two periods. Most of the countries witnessed a downward trend

in poverty. More than three-fourths (i.e., 16 out of 21) of the countries saw poverty reduction that

ranges from around one percentage point (e.g., Nigeria and Togo) to 12 percentage points (e.g.,

Botswana, Mozambique, and Uganda). Almost half of the countries – 10 of 21 – had a poverty



                                                  12
reduction rate of 6 percentage points or larger. At the regional level, the (unweighted) regional

poverty rate declined by almost five percentage points, or 9 percent (= 4.7/50.4).

     The estimates in Table 2 are cross sectional estimates, meaning that the poor in each period

are anonymous. They only show the net change in poverty over time, but not the composition of

the change as measured by quantities (1a) and (1b). Analysis of the latter provides insights into

the dynamic process of poverty mobility, but would require panel data that track households (or

individuals) over time as discussed earlier. However, panel data are more often than not affected

by various issues such as attrition, measurement errors, and sample selection bias which can

severely reduce the accuracy of estimates. In addition, even though more household panel surveys

have been implemented in recent years with the introduction of the LSMS-ISA program, most of

the panel surveys in Africa (which are not part of the LSMS-ISA) are not nationally

representative.11 We turn next to the analysis that is based on the synthetic panels.


III. Welfare Analysis Using the Synthetic Panels
     We discuss in this section the results on poverty mobility (Section III.1) before discussing the

results on welfare dynamics. While the former focuses on two-by-two transition matrixes (i.e., by

cross cutting a household’s poor/non-poor status in the 1st period against its poor/non-poor status

in the 2nd period), the latter concerns the more general two-by-two transition matrixes (i.e., by

cross cutting the household’s poor/vulnerable/middle-class status in the 1st period against its

poor/non-poor status in the 2nd period).


III.1. Poverty Mobility

11
  Reviewing studies that use the existing panel data for African countries, Beegle et al. (2016) find much variation in
the estimates for chronic poverty and transient poverty. Furthermore, chronic poverty estimates for the same country,
and in some cases using the same data sets, could also vary widely depending on the method being used. How much
of this poverty mobility is due to measurement errors is still a matter of debate. Some researchers argue that up to 50
percent of the transitory poverty may be accounted for by measurement error in income or consumption (Dercon and
Krishnan, 2000; Glewwe, 2012; Lee et al., 2016).

                                                            13
   Using Equations (2a) and (2b), we decompose the headcount poverty rate in the second period

and show the estimates in Table 3. The headcount poverty rate (column 4) is decomposed into two

components: unconditional chronic poverty (i.e., the incidence of those who remain poor in both

periods; column 5) and unconditional downward mobility (i.e., those who were non-poor in the

first period but became poor in the second period; column 6). Similarly, the poverty rate in the first

period (column 3) can also be decomposed into (unconditional) chronic poverty (column 5) and

unconditional upward mobility (i.e., those who were poor in the first period but who became non-

poor in the current period; column 7). We rank countries in an increasing order of the headcount

poverty in the most recent period. For comparison, the net change in poverty (column 8) is obtained

by simply subtracting the poverty rate in the first period from that in the second period. As

discussed earlier, we have to restrict the estimation samples to household heads age 25-55 in the

first survey; consequently, while the poverty estimates in Table 3 are similar to those in Table 2,

they are not identical.

    Table 3 reveals three interesting aspects of unconditional poverty dynamics in Africa,

considering the two survey periods together. First, one-third of the population in Africa is

chronically poor (column 5). About 17 percent of the population emerged from poverty (that is,

were poor in the first period but not the second; column 7), which is slightly higher than the

proportion of the population that fell into poverty (13 percent. column 6). Still, this group could

be considered vulnerable to falling back into poverty. Second, countries that are similar in terms

of poverty rates may be dissimilar in terms of poverty dynamics. For instance, Swaziland and

Uganda both show a similar headcount poverty rate that hovers just above 40 percent in the most

recent period (column 2), but the chronic poverty rate in the former (18 percent, column 5) is

almost half of that in the latter (32 percent, column 5). Similarly, a country may have both more



                                                   14
headcount poverty and less chronic poverty than another at the same time. For example, Tanzania

has a poverty rate that is 10 percentage points higher than Senegal (i.e., 48.8 percent versus 39

percent), but its chronic poverty is 2 percentage points lower than that of Senegal.

    This provides supportive evidence for our earlier theoretical finding that there can be no

correlation between poverty dynamics and the headcount poverty rate. Consequently, for an

alternative interpretation of the data that focuses on the poverty dynamics, we graph in Figure 1

the results in Table 3, but we rank countries in an increasing order of unconditional chronic poverty

in this figure.

    As discussed earlier with Equations (2a) and (2b), the unconditional poverty dynamics does

not take into account the information that is offered by a household’s poverty status in any given

year. The decomposition offered by Equations (3a) and (3b) allows us to detect mobility patterns

that control for a household’s poverty status. For example, even though Mauritania has the lowest

poverty rate in both periods, its conditional chronic poverty out of the headcount poverty in the 2nd

period is as large as 62 percent (i.e., divide column 5 by column 4), pushing it down to the middle

on this ranking. Another notable example is Madagascar which, despite being the poorest country

in the 2nd period, also ranks in the middle in terms of conditional chronic poverty in the same

period.

    But overall, the 21 countries as a whole show a reasonable performance in terms of poverty

mobility. (Conditional) chronic poverty was high at 72 percent (i.e., divide column 5 by column

4). One-third of the poor in the first period moved out of poverty in the second period (i.e., divide

column 7 by column 3 to get 33 percent), which is higher than the downward mobility rate of 28

percent (i.e., divide column 6 by column 4).




                                                   15
   The estimation results in Table 3 consider the mobility of those who are poor in either period

1 or period 2. We extend this analysis by adding to this population those who are poor in both

periods such that the population under investigation now includes the ever poor—that is composed

of the transiently poor and the chronically poor (see Equation (4)). We plot the results in Figure 2,

which ranks all countries in a decreasing order of conditional chronic poverty. For this larger

population, the conditional chronic poverty and upward mobility rates for all countries are

unsurprisingly lower, at 51 percent and 27 percent respectively (compared with the corresponding

figures of 72 percent and 33 percent in Table 3). Still, even by this measure, the considerable

proportion of chronic poverty suggests that greater efforts can be made to help lift the “poorest of

the poor” out of this undesirable welfare status.



III.2. Welfare Dynamics
    We now extend the analysis to include the vulnerable population and the middle class and

show estimation results in Table 4. The changes in the share of each of the three welfare categories

(the poor, the vulnerable, and the middle class) are shown in columns 3 to 5. The corresponding

pro-poor growth scenarios to these changes are shown in column 6 in a decreasing order, so that

countries with more positive growth rank higher. Countries that fall in the same growth scenario

are then ranked in an increasing order for their poverty and vulnerability reduction, so that

countries with more poverty reduction are ranked higher. For richer analysis and also for

comparison purposes, we also show the growth in the mean consumption for the bottom 40 percent

in column 7.

   The region as a whole experienced pro-poor growth, with a 5 percent reduction in poverty and

a 28 percent increase in the size of the middle class (Table 4, last row). However, the vulnerable

category also grows by 12 percent, suggesting that this expansion may be driven by (some of)

                                                    16
those who escaped poverty. The average consumption level for the bottom 40 percent also

increases by 11 percent, which provides further supportive evidence for more growth for the poorer

population in the region. The five countries that have the most positive pro-poor growth are

Mauritania, Ethiopia, Togo, Swaziland, and Malawi. The countries with more positive pro-poor

growth include Chad, Botswana, Ghana, Uganda, Congo DRC, Mozambique, Rwanda, and

Tanzania, which is followed by Sierra Leone which has positive pro-poor growth. Countries with

more negative pro-poor growth are Burkina Faso, Zambia, Madagascar, Cote d’Ivoire, and

Cameroon, which are followed by Senegal and Nigeria, which have the most negative pro-poor

growth.

   As discussed earlier, our definition of pro-poor growth has a stronger focus on the poor than

the growth in the consumption of the bottom 40 percent. Table 4 provides several useful

illustrations of this nuanced difference. For example, Congo DRC has a quite impressive growth

rate of 75 percent for the consumption of the bottom 40 percent, which is the largest growth rate

for all countries; however, while its poverty reduction is also quite good at 14 percent, this figure

is still lower than several other countries. Furthermore, the vulnerable population of Congo DRC

expands significantly by around one and a half times rather than contracts, which can raise

concerns about sustainable poverty reduction. As a result, this country has a more pro-poor growth

scenario.

   It can also be useful to compare the growth scenario of Congo DRC with Chad. While the latter

has much lower increase in the consumption of the bottom 40 percent, it has much higher poverty

reduction and a smaller growth of the vulnerable population, which combined together ranks it

higher in our definition of pro-poor growth. Clearly, a country can have both good poverty and

vulnerability reduction and growth in the consumption of the bottom 40 percent; Mauritania stands



                                                   17
out as a country that meets all these criteria and ranks highest out of all countries for pro-poor

growth. The opposite situation can also happen, where Senegal and Nigeria rank lowest in term of

pro-poor growth because of an expansion in their poor and vulnerable population; these countries

also have negative growth in the consumption of the bottom 40 percent.12

     While Table 4 focuses on the increase or decrease of the population size across (of) each

welfare groups, Table 5 extends this analysis by probing more deeply into the dynamics among

the groups. For the region as a whole, 14 percent of the population moves up one or two welfare

categories (i.e., the sum of the upper off-diagonal cells), which is almost half a times higher than

the percent of the population that who move down one or two welfare categories (i.e., 10 percent,

or the sum of the lower off-diagonal cells). Still, a large degree of immobility exists in the region

where as much as 76 percent (=100- 14-10) of the population remains in the same welfare category

in both periods.13



III.3. Profiling Countries and Population Groups
    Following the classification employed in the recent World Bank’s regional report on poverty

in Africa (Beegle et al., 2016), we probe more deeply into mobility patterns by dividing countries

into four groups: fragile situations, landlocked, resource-poor, and income status. These

classifications have also been employed by earlier studies to investigate poverty in the region. For

example, Bloom and Sachs (1998) argue that landlocked countries perform worse than coastal

countries because of lower competitiveness and fewer trading activities due to higher transport



12
   In addition, rows 2 to 5 (Table 4) also show that poverty reduction can occur with reduced consumption for the
bottom 40 percent. More generally, Table 4 illustrates our earlier discussion that the bottom 40 percent can comprise
a wide variety of poverty situations and thus their growth scenarios. Also note that Table 4 provides a discussion of
the dynamics of the different welfare categories over time; see Figure 2.1 in the Appendix for the decomposition of
these categories in the most recent period. See also Dang et al. (2017) for a more detailed analysis for Senegal.
13
   We provide the specific estimates for upward and downward mobility for each country in Table 2.3 in the Appendix.
This table also offers estimates for the transitions between the vulnerable group and the middle class.

                                                           18
costs which impede trade. Frankel (2010) offers a comprehensive survey of the relationship

between resources and economic growth for countries around the world. We provide the

definitions of these classifications and the detailed list of the countries in Table 2.4 in the

Appendix.

     We show in Figure 3 the transitions across the three categories for countries, conditional on

the welfare status in the 1st period, in each classification. In particular, we plot for each country

upward mobility (i.e., the percentage of the population that moves up one or two welfare categories

in the 2nd period) against downward mobility (i.e., the percentage of the population that moves

down one or two welfare categories in the 2nd period). To help with interpretation, we plot a 45-

degree line that separates countries into two groups: one group with more upward mobility, and

the other group with more downward mobility (or less upward mobility); those in the former group

are thus graphed above this line and the latter group below this line. We use the plus (+) symbol

to mark the countries that are in fragile situation (Panel A), landlocked (Panel B), resource-poor

(Panel C), and low-income (Panel D).

     Several observations are in order for Figure 3. First, there appears to be no clear relationship

between being in a fragile situation or being landlocked and economic mobility (Panels A and B),

since the countries are scattered rather evenly above and below the 45-degree line. Second,

resource-rich and middle-income countries mostly have more upward mobility than downward

mobility. Indeed, Figure 3 indicates that out of these two groups, only Zambia—a resource-rich

and middle-income country—has more downward mobility (Panels C and D).14 Finally, notable




14
  We plot a similar graph for economic mobility versus pro-poor growth and show results in Figure 2.2. Interestingly,
several countries remarkably have both more (or most) positive pro-poor growth scenarios and more upward mobility
than downward mobility. These countries include Botswana, Chad, Mauritania, Ghana, Uganda, Sierra Leone, Congo
DRC, Ethiopia, and Rwanda. On the other hand, two countries, Zambia and Madagascar, also stand out as having both
negative pro-poor growth scenarios and more downward mobility.

                                                           19
examples in all the groups stand out. For example, three countries with much higher upward

mobility than downward mobility, including Botswana, Mauritania, and Ghana, are also countries

that are mostly on the favorable side of the classifications (i.e., being non-fragile, coastal, resource-

rich and middle-income). On the other hand, Madagascar is the country with the most downward

mobility, which is also on the unfavorable side of the classification except for being coastal. The

remaining countries are found somewhat in between these two extremes. For example, Burkina

Faso has a good performance with more upward mobility than downward mobility, but this country

for most part is on the unfavorable side of the classification except for being non-fragile. Another

good performer, Cote d’Ivoire has an equal share of both sides with being coastal and resource-

rich but fragile and low-income.

     We turn next to examining mobility for different population groups. Figure 4 depicts the

population characteristics that are associated with upward mobility (Panel A) and downward

mobility (Panel B). Factors that have a stronger-than-average correlation with upward mobility

include higher education achievement, having a female household head, and urban residence.

These are also the characteristics that are more strongly associated with preventing downward

mobility. Out of these factors, attaining (some) tertiary education, including post-secondary

technical education, is remarkably strongly associated with more upward (less downward)

mobility.15




15
  These results are mostly similar to those in other contexts including countries in Latin America (Vakis et al., 2016),
Middle East and North Africa (Dang and Ianchovichina, 2016), and India (Dang and Lanjouw, forthcoming). One
exception is that secondary education achievement is associated with less upward (more downward) mobility for Sub-
Saharan Africa than other regions. One reason can be that those with secondary education have a higher unemployment
rate than those with no education (represented by the “Other education” group in Figure 4) or primary education,
perhaps because of higher job expectations (see, e.g., African Development Bank, 2012; ILO, 2015). As such, the
former group are more likely to be classified as poor.

                                                            20
IV. Conclusion

   In this paper we provide an analysis of welfare dynamics in the Sub-Saharan Africa region. In

the absence of actual panel data, we construct synthetic panel data from cross sectional surveys

using recently developed statistical methods that can offer insights into welfare dynamics for the

region. Our findings generally point to strong performance for the region in terms of pro-poor

growth and upward mobility. We find that one-third of the poor population escaped poverty, and

the size of the middle class increased by 28 percent, albeit from a low base. Chronic poverty,

however, still remains high for a number of countries. Furthermore, while many escaped poverty,

they remain vulnerable, as is evident from the 12 percent increase in the share of the vulnerable

population.

   We also find some limited evidence suggesting that resource-rich and middle-income countries

mostly have more upward mobility than downward mobility, and that (some) tertiary education is

strongly associated with higher upward mobility and less downward mobility, which holds true to

some extent for households with a female household head and urban residence.

   These mostly positive outcomes were possible because of favorable global economic

conditions from which many African countries benefited in the 2000s. However, the circumstances

are changing and domestic economic conditions have deteriorated for many African countries.

Although the long-term goal is to increase upward mobility, or exit from poverty, the immediate

and medium term goals may be to protect the incomes of the poor and to minimize downward

mobility, especially for the vulnerable. Some of the policies that have been shown to achieve these

goals include safety net programs and building the assets (especially human capital – education

and health) of the poor and the vulnerable, such as investments in early years of the children of the

poor, and providing a basic package of health services.


                                                   21
   The policy implications of our findings are subject to the caveat that these relationships

between welfare dynamics and the country classifications or population characteristics should be

interpreted as associational rather than causal. Furthermore, these results should be interpreted

with respect to the specific countries that we study in this paper, and may not be extrapolated to

other countries in the region or elsewhere. A fertile direction for research is thus deeper research

into specific country contexts, which promises more granularities to policy advice than the regional

analysis attempted in our study.




                                                  22
References
African Development Bank. (2012). African Economic Outlook 2012. Retrieved on February 3,
   2017 at http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/.

Alesina, Alberto and Roberto Perotti. (1996). “Income Distribution, Political Instability, and
   Investment”. European Economic Review, 40(6): 1203–1228.

Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo. (2008). “What Is Middle Class about the Middle Classes
   around the World?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(2): 3–28.

Basu, Kaushik. (2013). “Shared Prosperity and the Mitigation of Poverty: In Practice and in
   Precept.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 6700. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

Beegle, Kathleen, Luc Christiaensen, Andrew Dabalen, and Isis Gaddis. (2016). Poverty in a
   Rising Africa. Washington DC: The World Bank.

Bloom, David, and Jeffrey Sachs. (1998). “Geography, Demography, and Economic Growth in
   Africa.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 207–95.

Chaudhuri, Shubham. (2003). “Assessing Vulnerability to Poverty: Concepts, Empirical Methods
   and Illustrative Examples.” Working paper, Columbia University, Department of Economics.

Christiaensen, Luc J. and Kalanidhi Subbarao. (2005). “Towards an Understanding of Household
   Vulnerability in Rural Kenya”. Journal of African Economies 14, no. 4:520-558.

Cruces, Guillermo, Peter Lanjouw, Leonardo Lucchetti, Elizaveta Perova, Renos Vakis, and
   Mariana Viollaz. (2015). “Estimating Poverty Transitions Repeated Cross-Sections: A Three-
   country Validation Exercise”. Journal of Economic Inequality, 13:161–179.

Dang, Hai-Anh and Elena Ianchovichina. (2016). “Welfare Dynamics with Synthetic Panels: The
   Case of the Arab World in Transition”. World Bank Policy Research Paper no. 7595, World
   Bank, Washington, DC.

Dang, Hai-Anh and Peter Lanjouw. (2013). “Measuring Poverty Dynamics with Synthetic Panels
   Based on Cross-Sections”. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper # 6504. Washington
   DC: The World Bank.

---. (in press). “Welfare Dynamics Measurement: Two Definitions of a Vulnerability Line”.
     Review of Income and Wealth.

---. (forthcoming). “Poverty Dynamics in India between 2004-2012: Insights from Longitudinal
     Analysis Using Synthetic Panel Data”. Economic Development and Cultural Change.

---. (2016). “Toward a New Definition of Shared Prosperity: A Dynamic Perspective from Three
     Countries”. In Kaushik Basu and Joseph Stiglitz. (Eds). Inequality and Growth: Patterns and
     Policy. Palgrave MacMillan Press.

                                                23
Dang, Hai-Anh, Peter Lanjouw, and Rob Swinkels. (2017). “Who Remained in Poverty, Who
   Moved Up, and Who Fell Down? An Investigation of Poverty Dynamics in Senegal in the
   2000’s.” In Machiko Nissanke and Muna Ndulo. (Eds). Poverty Reduction in the Course of
   African Development, Festschrift for Erick Thorbecke. Oxford University Press.

Dang, Hai-Anh, Peter Lanjouw, Jill Luoto, and David McKenzie. (2014). “Using Repeated Cross-
   Sections to Explore Movements in and out of Poverty”. Journal of Development Economics,
   107: 112-128.

Dercon, Stefan, and Pramila Krishnan. (2000). “Vulnerability, Seasonality and Poverty in
   Ethiopia.” Journal of Development Studies 36 (6): 25–53.

Ferreira, Francisco H. G., Julian Messina, Jamele Rigolini, Luis-Felipe López-Calva, Maria Anna
   Lugo, and Renos Vakis. (2013). Economic Mobility and the Rise of the Latin American Middle
   Class. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. (2010). “The Natural Resource Curse: A Survey”. HKS Faculty Research
   Working Paper Series, RWP10-005, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard
   University.

Glewwe, Paul. (2012). “How Much of Observed Economic Mobility Is Measurement Error? IV
   Methods to Reduce Measurement Error Bias, with an Application to Vietnam.” World Bank
   Economic Review 26 (2): 236–64.

Harttgen, Kenneth, Stephan Klasen, and Sebastian Vollmer. (2013). “An African Growth Miracle?
   Or: What Do Asset Indices Tell Us about Trends in Economic Performance?” Review of
   Income and Wealth, 59(S1): S37–S61.

Hoddinott, John and Agnes R. Quisumbing. (2010). “Methods for Microeconometric Risk and
   Vulnerability Assessment”. In Risk, Vulnerability and Human Development: On the Brink, ed.
   Ricardo Fuentes-Nieva and Papa A. Seck. London: Palgrave Macmillan- United Nations
   Development Programme.

International Labor Organization. (2015). Global Employment Trends for Youth 2015: Scaling up
    Investments in Decent Jobs for Youth. Geneva, Switzerland.

Jolliffe, Dean, Peter Lanjouw, Shaohua Chen, Aart Kraay, Christian Meyer, Mario Negre, Espen
    Prydz, Renos Vakis, and Kyla Wethli. (2015). A Measured Approach to Ending Poverty and
    Boosting Shared Prosperity: Concepts, Data and the Twin Goals. Washington, DC: the World
    Bank.

Lee, Nayoung, Geert Ridder, and John Strauss. (2016). “Estimation of Poverty Transition Matrices
   with Noisy Data”. Journal of Applied Econometrics, doi: 10.1002/jae.2506.




                                                24
Pritchett, Lant, Asep Suryahadi, and Sudarno Sumarto. (2000). “Quantifying Vulnerability to
    Poverty: A Proposed Measure, Applied to Indonesia”. World Bank Policy Research Working
    Paper no. 2437, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Sahn, David E. and David C. Stifel. (2000). “Poverty Comparison over Time and across Countries
   in Africa”. World Development, 28(12): 2123-2155.

Vakis, Renos, James Rigolini, and Leonardo Lucchetti. (2016). Left Behind: Chronic Poverty in
   Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                               25
Table 1: Vulnerability Lines at Given Vulnerability Indexes for All Countries
                                                                                     Pop. share with
            Vulnerability index Vulnerability line                                consumption above
   No                                                         Increase (%)
                     (%)                   ($PPP)                                 poverty line but less
                                                                                     than V-line (%)
    1                 33                     2.10                   11                      5
    2                 32                     2.18                   15                      7
    3                 31                     2.26                   19                      8
    4                 30                     2.32                   22                     10
    5                 29                     2.40                   26                     11
    6                 28                     2.48                   31                     12
    7                 27                     2.58                   36                     14
    8                 26                     2.64                   39                     15
    9                 25                     2.74                   44                     17
   10                 24                     2.84                   49                     18
   11                 23                     2.92                   54                     19
   12                 22                     3.02                   59                     21
   13                 21                     3.16                   66                     22
   14                 20                     3.28                   73                     24
   15                 19                     3.44                   81                     26
   16                 18                     3.62                   91                     28
   17                 17                     3.78                   99                     29
   18                 16                     4.06                  114                     32
   19                 15                     4.30                  126                     34
   20                 14                     4.74                  149                     37
   21                 13                     5.20                  174                     39
   22                 12                     5.88                  209                     42
   23                 11                     7.00                  268                     46
   24                 10                     9.30                  389                     51
Note: Vulnerability lines are in 2011 PPP dollars per capita per day. The relative increases of the
vulnerability line from the poverty line is shown under the column "Increase" (column 4). All numbers
are estimated with synthetic panel data and weighted with population weights. The incremental value
for iteration is 0.02 dollars.




                                                      26
Table 2: Survey Years and Headcount Poverty by Country (percentage)

                                                                                                            Headcount poverty
                                                                                                                                 Net
 No         Country                                 Survey name
                                                                                             Survey years 1st period 2nd period change

  1    Bostwana             Botswana Core Welfare Indicators Survey (BCWIS)                     2002-2009      29.8         18.2      -11.6
                            Enquête burkinabé sur les conditions de vie des ménages
   2 Burkina Faso           (EBCVM)                                                             2003-2009      57.3         55.3       -2.0
   3 Cameroon               Enquete Camerounaise Aupres des Menages (ECAM)                      2001-2007      23.1         29.3        6.2
                            Enquête sur la consommation des ménages et le secteur informel
   4 Chad                   au Tchad (ECOSIT)                                                   2003-2011      62.9         38.4      -24.5
                            Enquête 1-2-3 sur l'Emploi, le Secteur Informel et les Conditions
   5 Congo, Dem. Rep. de Vie des Ménages (E123)                                                 2004-2012      91.2         77.2      -14.0
   6 Cote d'Ivoire          Enquête sur le Niveau de Vie des Ménages                            2002-2008      23.0         29.0        6.0
   7 Ethiopia               Household Income Consumption Expenditure Survey (HICES)             2004-2010      36.3         33.5       -2.8
   8 Ghana                  Ghana Living Standards Survey (GLSS)                                1998-2005      33.8         25.1       -8.7
   9 Madagascar             Enquêtes Périodiques auprès des Ménages (EPM)                       2005-2010      74.1         81.8        7.7
  10 Malawi                 Integrated Household Survey (IHS)                                   2004-2010      73.6         70.9       -2.7
  11 Mauritania             Enquête permanente sur les conditions de vie des ménages            2004-2008      14.4         10.9       -3.5
  12 Mozambique             Inquérito Sobre Orçamento Familiar (IOF)                            2002-2008      80.6         69.1      -11.5
  13 Nigeria                General Household Survey-Panel (GHS)                                2011-2013      20.4         20.2       -0.2
  14 Rwanda                 Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey (EICV)                2005-2010      68.7         60.4       -8.3
  15 Senegal                Enquête de Suivi de la Pauvreté au Sénégal (ESPS)                   2005-2011      37.6         38.0        0.4
  16 Sierra Leone           Sierra Leone Integrated Household Survey (SLIHS)                    2003-2011      58.6         52.3       -6.3
  17 Swaziland              Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES)                      2000-2009      48.4         42.0       -6.4
  18 Tanzania               Household Budget Survey (HBS)                                       2007-2011      55.1         49.0       -6.1
                            Questionnaire Unifie Des Indicateurs de base du Bien-etre
  19 Togo                   (QUIBB)                                                             2006-2011      55.6         54.2       -1.4
  20 Uganda                 Uganda National Household Survey (UNHS)                             2005-2009      53.2         41.5      -11.7
  21 Zambia                 Living Conditions Monitoring Survey (LCMS)                          2006-2010      60.5         64.4        3.9
                            Regional average                                                                   50.4         45.7       -4.7
Note : Authors' calculation based on household survey data. Poverty rates are estimated without any age restriction. The poverty line is set
at $1.90/day in 2011 PPP dollars for both periods. Countries are sorted in an alphabetic order. The regional average is a simple average
(unweighted).




                                                                       27
Table 3: Net and Gross Changes in Poverty over Time for Each Country (percentage)
 (1)           (2)              (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)          (7)          (8)
                                         Headcount poverty in 2nd period
                           Headcount
                                                                                 Upward        Net
 No         Country        poverty in                      Decomposition
                                                                                  mobile     change
                           1st period       Total       Chronic Downward
                                                        poverty      mobile
   1 Mauritania                 14.6         10.5          6.5         4.0          8.1         -4.0
   2 Botswana                   25.1         17.6          8.9         8.7         16.2         -7.5
   3 Nigeria                    19.8         21.5         11.7         9.8          8.1          1.7
   4 Ghana                      33.1         26.1         20.4         5.7         12.7         -7.0
   5 Cote d'Ivoire              23.5         28.5         17.3        11.2          6.2          5.0
   6     Cameroon               21.5         29.6         13.9        15.7          7.6          8.1
   7 Ethiopia                   38.8         37.2         28.6         8.6         10.2         -1.6
   8 Senegal                    37.2         39.0         29.5         9.5          7.7          1.8
   9 Chad                       64.2         40.7         24.8        15.9         39.4        -23.4
   10 Swaziland                 44.2         43.0         18.0        25.0         26.2         -1.3
   11 Uganda                    54.5         43.4         32.4        11.0         22.1        -11.1
   12 Tanzania                  54.1         48.8         27.6        21.2         26.5         -5.3
   13 Togo                      54.3         53.4         41.1        12.3         13.2         -0.9
   14    Sierra Leone           58.4         53.5         37.8        15.7         20.6         -4.9
   15 Burkina Faso              54.6         56.9         47.6         9.3          7.0          2.3
   16 Rwanda                    68.9         62.0         50.8        11.2         18.1         -6.9
   17 Zambia                    58.7         63.5         45.1        18.4         13.6          4.9
   18 Mozambique                80.8         69.9         51.1        18.8         29.7        -11.0
   19 Malawi                    73.5         72.5         54.1        18.4         19.4         -1.1
   20 Congo, DRC                91.7         78.0         72.8         5.2         18.9        -13.7
   21 Madagascar                74.3         82.3         59.9        22.4         14.4          8.0
         Regional average       49.8         46.6         33.3        13.2         16.5         -3.2
Note : Authors' calculation based on household survey data. Household heads' age is between 25 and 5
in the first survey round and adjusted accordingly for the second survey round. The poverty line is set a
$1.9/ day in 2011 PPP dollars for both periods. Estimates for chronic poverty are based on the synthetic
panels. Countries are ranked in an increasing order of poverty in the 2nd period. Columns 5 and 6 add u
to column 4, and columns 5 and 7 add up to column 3. Column 8 is obtained by subtracting column 4
from column 3. The regional average is a simple average (unweighted).




                                                      28
Table 4: Change in Poverty and Shared Prosperity for Each Country (percentage)
  (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)               (6)               (7)
                             Growth in the population share of
                                                                        Pro-poor      Growth in mean
                                   each welfare category
 No         Country                                                      growth         consumption
                               Poor       Vulnerable Middle class       scenario      for bottom 40%
   1     Mauritania               -27.7          -18.8         34.7          ***               13.2
   2     Ethiopia                  -3.9           -1.2         26.7          ***               -4.0
   3     Togo                      -1.4           -4.5         14.9          ***               -7.8
   4     Swaziland                 -1.3           -1.3          4.0          ***               -7.4
   5     Malawi                    -1.0           -3.8         28.4          ***               -8.1
   6     Chad                     -36.1           42.6        192.1           **               35.3
   7     Botswana                 -28.7           6.6          12.5           **               28.9
   8     Ghana                    -20.7            4.4         21.7           **               14.9
   9     Uganda                   -19.1           26.3         24.9           **               21.3
  10     Congo, DRC               -13.5          149.7        249.4           **               75.0
  11     Mozambique               -12.6           70.0         30.9           **               20.9
  12     Rwanda                    -8.7           19.3         24.4           **               27.0
  13     Tanzania                  -6.7           10.5          3.6           **               14.6
  14     Sierra Leone              -6.5           16.6         -6.7            *               14.9
  15     Burkina Faso               6.3           -4.4        -18.0           --                7.6
  16     Zambia                     7.8          -12.0        -12.1            --               3.7
  17     Madagascar                9.5           -32.5        -23.6           --               -5.6
  18     Cote d'Ivoire             15.1           -5.3         -5.6            --              -3.4
  19     Cameroon                  34.5          -12.3         -8.9           --               -5.7
  20     Senegal                    0.9            3.3         -7.9           ---              -3.1
  21     Nigeria                    5.5            1.4         -6.4           ---              -1.7
         Regional average          -5.2           12.1         27.6           **               11.0
Note: Authors' calculation based on household survey data. Household heads' age is between 25 and 55
in the first survey round and adjusted accordingly for the second survey round. The poverty line and
vulnerability line are respectively set at $1.9/day and $4.3/day in 2011 PPP dollars for both periods.
Pro-poor growth scenarios are based on the classification provided in Table 1.3 in Appendix 1. Countries
are ranked first in a decreasing order of pro-poor growth scenario, and then in an increasing order of
growth in the population share of poverty and vulnerability. The regional average is a simple average
(unweighted).




                                                     29
Table 5: Transition Dynamics among the Three Welfare Groups, All Countries (percentage)
                                                                                  Second year
                                                    Poor                Vulnerable           Middle class              Total
             Poor                                   35.9                    8.0                   0.1                   44.0
                                                    (0.1)                  (0.0)                 (0.0)                  (0.1)
             Vulnerable                              5.2                   22.3                   5.7                   33.2
                                                    (0.0)                  (0.0)                 (0.0)                  (0.0)
 First year
             Middle class                            0.1                    4.3                  18.4                   22.8
                                                    (0.0)                  (0.0)                 (0.1)                  (0.1)
             Total                                  41.2                   34.6                  24.2                    100
                                                    (0.1)                  (0.0)                 (0.1)
Note: Authors' calculation based on household survey data. Bootstrap standard errors in parentheses are estimated with 1,000
bootstraps. Household heads' age is between 25 and 55 in the first survey round and adjusted accordingly for the second survey
round. The poverty line and vulnerability line are respectively set at $1.9/day and $4.3/day in 2011 PPP dollars for both periods,
with the latter corresponding to a vulnerability index of 0.15. Estimates are obtained with synthetic panel data and weighted with
population weights where the second survey round is used as the base year. Estimation sample size of the base year is 149,820
households.




                                                                  30
Figure 1: Decomposition of Unconditional Poverty Mobility

    Mauritania
     Botswana
        Nigeria
    Cameroon
   Cote d'Ivoire
     Swaziland
         Ghana
          Chad
      Tanzania
       Ethiopia
       Senegal
       Uganda
  Sierra Leone
          Togo
        Zambia
  Burkina Faso
       Rwanda
  Mozambique
        Malawi
   Madagascar
  Congo, DRC
   All countries

                   0   10      20          30     40           50          60           70        80      90        100
                                                          percentage (%)

                            chronic poor        downwardly mobile               upwardly mobile        never poor




                                                                    31
Figure 2: Proportions of Chronic Poverty, Downward Mobility, and Upward Mobility out of
Those Who Were Ever Poor


     Swaziland
      Botswana
          Chad
     Mauritania
      Tanzania
     Cameroon
        Nigeria
       Uganda
   Cote d'Ivoire
   Sierra Leone
   Mozambique
         Ghana
        Zambia
        Malawi
       Ethiopia
          Togo
   Madagascar
       Senegal
       Rwanda
   Burkina Faso
   Congo, DRC
   All countries

                   0   10   20       30         40        50           60   70           80        90   100
                                                     percentage (%)

                                 chronic poor          downwardly mobile         upwardly mobile




                                                     32
Figure 3: Upward Mobility and Downward Mobility by Country Groupings
                                             Panel A: Fragile vs. Non−fragile                                        Panel B: Landlocked vs. Coastal
                       60




                                                                                                                                                                             60
                                       BWA                                                                     BWA


                                                                                TCD                                                                     TCD
                                                                                        SWZ                                                                     SWZ
                       40




                                                                                                                                                                             40
 upward mobility (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                  upward mobility (%)
                                  MRT                                                                      MRT

                                             GHA                                                                     GHA
                                                       UGANGA                                                                  UGANGA
                            BFA                          SLE                                         BFA                         SLE
                                                       SEN
                                                       CMR                                                                     SEN
                                                                                                                               CMR
                       20




                                                                                                                                                                             20
                            COD                    CIV                                               COD                   CIV
                                         ETH        RWA                     TZA MOZ                              ETH        RWA                     TZA MOZ
                                                                                ZMB MWI                                                                 ZMB MWI
                                                                    TGO                                                                    TGO

                                                                                              MDG                                                                     MDG
                       0




                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                  10               20               30             40           50        10               20               30             40           50
                                                        downward mobility (%)                                                   downward mobility (%)

                                   Panel C: Resource−poor vs. Resource−rich                                    Panel D: Low−income vs. Middle−income
                       60




                                                                                                                                                                             60
                                       BWA                                                                     BWA


                                                                                TCD                                                                     TCD
                                                                                        SWZ                                                                     SWZ
                       40




                                                                                                                                                                             40
 upward mobility (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                  upward mobility (%)
                                  MRT                                                                      MRT

                                             GHA                                                                     GHA
                                                       UGANGA                                                                  UGANGA
                            BFA                          SLE                                         BFA                         SLE
                                                       SEN
                                                       CMR                                                                     SEN
                                                                                                                               CMR
                       20




                                                                                                                                                                             20
                            COD                    CIV                                               COD                   CIV
                                         ETH        RWA                     TZA MOZ                              ETH        RWA                     TZA MOZ
                                                                                ZMB MWI                                                                 ZMB MWI
                                                                   TGO                                                                     TGO

                                                                                              MDG                                                                     MDG
                       0




                                                                                                                                                                             0
                              10                   20               30             40           50        10               20               30             40           50
                                                        downward mobility (%)                                                   downward mobility (%)

 Note: ’+’ represents countries that are fragile, landlocked, resource−poor or low−income in Panels A, B, C, and D respectively.




                                                                                                     33
Figure 4: Upward Mobility and Downward Mobility by Population Groups

                               Panel A: Upward mobility                              Panel B: Downward mobility
         35




                                                                                                                              35
         30




                                                                                                                              30
               25




                                                                                                                                            25
  Percentage (%)




                                                                                                                               Percentage (%)
        20




                                                                                                                                     20
 15




                                                                                                                              15
         10




                                                                                                                              10
         5




                                                                                                                              5
                    le      ale r edu imary imary ndary llege      al     le      ale r edu imary imary ndary llege      al
               ma        fem           r               co       rur     ma     fem                           co       rur
                              oth
                                  e
                                    <p     pr      o                                oth
                                                                                        e
                                                                                          <p
                                                                                             r   pr      o
                                               sec                                                   sec

 Note: dashed lines represent the regional averages for upward mobility & downward mobility respectively.




                                                                                        34
Appendix 1: Overview of Synthetic Panel Methods
    We provide an overview of the methods that construct synthetic panels and vulnerability lines
developed by Dang et al. (2014) and Dang and Lanjouw (2013) in this appendix. Let xij be a vector
of household characteristics observed in survey round j (j= 1 or 2) that are also observed in the
other survey round for household i, i= 1,…, N. These household characteristics can include such
time-invariant variables as ethnicity, religion, language, place of birth, parental education, and
other time-varying household characteristics if retrospective questions about the round-1 values of
such characteristics are asked in the second-round survey. To reduce spurious changes due to
changes in household composition over time, we usually restrict the estimation samples to
household heads age, say 25 to 55 in the first cross section and adjust this age range accordingly
in the second cross section.16

    Then let yij represent household consumption or income in survey round j, j= 1 or 2. The linear
projection of household consumption (or income) on household characteristics for each survey
round is given by
                             yij   j ' xij   ij                                (1.1)
    Let zj be the poverty line in period j. We are interested in knowing the unconditional measures
of poverty mobility such as
                              P( yi1  z1 and yi2  z2 )                          (1.2)
which represents the percentage of households that are poor in the first survey round (year) but
nonpoor in the second survey round, or the conditional measures such as
                              P(yi2  z2 | yi1  z1 )                            (1.3)
which represents the percentage of poor households in the first round that escape poverty in the
second round.

    If true panel data are available, we can straightforwardly estimate the quantities in (1.2) and
(1.3); but in the absence of such data, we can use synthetic panels to study mobility. To
operationalize the framework, we make two standard assumptions. First, we assume that the
underlying population being sampled in survey rounds 1 and 2 are identical such that their time-
invariant characteristics remain the same over time. More specifically, coupled with equation (1),
this implies the conditional distribution of expenditure in a given period is identical whether it is
conditional on the given household characteristics in period 1 or period 2 (i.e., x             x implies
y |x 	 and y |x have identical distributions). Second, we assume that                  and 	have a bivariate
normal distribution with positive correlation coefficient  and standard deviations σ 	and σ
respectively. Quantity (1.2) can be estimated by
                                                   z  1 ' xi 2 z2   2 ' xi 2      
                P( yi1  z1 and yi 2  z2 )   2  1            ,               ,      (1.4)
                                                                                   
                                                        1               2            
where  2 (.) stands for the bivariate normal cumulative distribution function (cdf)) (and  2 (.)
stands for the bivariate normal probability density function (pdf)). Note that in Equation (1.4), the
estimated parameters obtained from data in both survey rounds are applied to data from the second

16
  This age range is usually used in traditional pseudo-panel analysis but can vary depending on the cultural and
economic factors in each specific setting.

                                                        35
survey round (x2) (or the base year) for prediction, but we can use data from the first survey round
as the base year as well. It is then straightforward to estimate quantity (1.3) by dividing quantity
            z  1 ' xi 2 
(1.2) by   1              , where (.) stands for the univariate normal cumulative distribution
                         
                 1       
function (cdf).
    In Equation (1.4), the parameters  j and   j are estimated from Equation (1), and  can be
estimated using an approximation of the correlation of the cohort-aggregated household
consumption between the two surveys ( yc1yc2 ). In particular, given an approximation of yc1yc2 ,
where c indexes the cohorts constructed from the household survey data, the partial correlation
coefficient  can be estimated by
                            y           var(yi1 ) var(yi 2 )  1 ' var(xi )2
                             i1 yi 2

                                                    
                                                      1    2

    Note that the standard errors of estimates based on the synthetic panels can in fact be even
smaller than that of the true (or design-based) rate if there is a good model fit (or the sample size
in the target survey is significantly larger than that in the base survey; see Dang and Lanjouw
(2013) for more discussion).

    Equation (1.4) can be extended to the more general case of vulnerability. For example, we can
estimate the percentage of poor households in the first period that escape poverty but still remain
vulnerable in the second period (joint probability) as
                                           z   ' x v  2 ' xi 2           z   ' x z  2 ' xi 2 
    P( yi1  z1 and z2  yi 2  v2 )  2  1 1 i 2 , 2            ,    2  1 1 i 2 , 2            ,
                                                                                                 
                                                1         2                      1        2        
                                                                                        (1.5)
Other formulae and more detailed derivations for other measures of vulnerability dynamics are
provided in Dang and Lanjouw (in press).

   We provide in Table 1.1 below a sample of the regression parameters and the estimates for
chronic poverty with their standard errors.




                                                               36
Table 1.1: Household Consumption Models
                                                                                            Country
                                     Cote d'Ivoire         Mozambique              Malawi             Senegal                   Togo                 Zambia
                                    2002      2008        2002     2008        2004      2010     2005      2011           2006     2011         2006      2010
Head is female                     0.054**    0.029     0.097*** 0.099***      0.024 0.096*** 0.099*** 0.263***          0.196*** 0.157***     0.066*** 0.123***
                                   (0.024) (0.022)       (0.023) (0.021)      (0.018) (0.020) (0.017) (0.025)             (0.022) (0.029)       (0.016) (0.016)
Head's age                        -0.011*** -0.008***     0.002 0.005***     -0.005*** 0.007*** -0.010*** -0.003**       -0.007*** 0.001       -0.010*** -0.004***
                                   (0.001) (0.001)       (0.001) (0.001)      (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)             (0.001) (0.001)       (0.001) (0.001)
Head has less than primary        0.147*** 0.154*       0.288*** 0.090***    0.142*** 0.253*** 0.060*** 0.077**          0.137*** 0.255***     0.169*** -0.000
school                             (0.032) (0.083)       (0.024) (0.024)      (0.018) (0.022) (0.021) (0.036)             (0.025) (0.034)       (0.026) (0.028)
Head completes primary school     0.184*** 0.188***     0.693*** 0.368***    0.232*** 0.362*** 0.141*** 0.226***         0.216*** 0.354***     0.327*** 0.150***
                                   (0.023) (0.022)       (0.047) (0.035)      (0.023) (0.027) (0.022) (0.034)             (0.029) (0.039)       (0.043) (0.042)
Head completes secondary          0.399*** 0.428***     1.231*** 0.879***    0.570*** 0.715*** 0.423*** 0.444***         0.403*** 0.520***     0.688*** 0.472***
school                             (0.025) (0.022)       (0.052) (0.042)      (0.023) (0.028) (0.025) (0.039)             (0.022) (0.030)       (0.027) (0.028)
Head completes college            0.977*** 0.896***     2.068*** 1.742***    1.414*** 1.448*** 0.753*** 0.909***         0.897*** 1.179***     1.585*** 1.421***
                                   (0.035) (0.044)       (0.078) (0.064)      (0.050) (0.046) (0.031) (0.053)             (0.042) (0.055)       (0.031) (0.030)
Urban                             0.375*** 0.451***     0.408*** 0.366***    0.514*** 0.707*** 0.561*** 0.482***         0.760*** 0.617***     0.729*** 0.655***
                                   (0.018) (0.018)       (0.022) (0.020)      (0.020) (0.023) (0.015) (0.023)             (0.019) (0.024)       (0.015) (0.015)
Constant                          7.344*** 7.161***     5.749*** 5.811***    6.209*** 5.478*** 6.906*** 6.573***         6.386*** 5.932***     6.116*** 5.991***
                                   (0.044) (0.048)       (0.047) (0.056)      (0.035) (0.047) (0.037) (0.062)             (0.044) (0.063)       (0.039) (0.042)

σ                                    0.77       0.78      0.75        0.77     0.59       0.67       0.62        0.670    0.61       0.69         0.78        0.77
Adjusted R2                          0.20       0.18      0.29        0.24     0.28       0.35       0.28        0.26     0.43       0.34         0.47        0.46
ρ                                         0.87                  0.75                0.66                   0.78                0.82                    0.69
N                                    7976       8417      6171        6735    7627        6870      8811         4076     5431       3845        14360       13837
Estimates for chronic poverty             17.3                  51.1                54.1                   29.5                41.1                    45.1
using synthetic panels                    (0.1)                 (0.2)               (0.3)                  (0.3)               (0.4)                   (0.2)
Note : *p<0 .1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Standard errors are in parentheses. Household heads' ages are restricted to between 25 and 55 for the first survey round and
adjusted accordingly for the second survey round.




                                                                                           37
Appendix 2: Additional Tables and Figures
Table 2.1: Typology of Welfare Transition Dynamics over Two Periods
                                                       Welfare Category
                                           1st group      2nd group        3rd group
Scenario Pro-poor Growth                                                                                             Notes
                                            Lowest          Middle
                                                                          Top income
                                            income         income
     1       Strongest/ Most positive           -              -               +       first and second group reduce, and third group expands
     2             More positive                -              +               +       first group reduces, and second and third group expands
     3                Positive                  -              +                -      first and third group reduce, and second group expands
     4               Negative                   +              -               +       first and third group expand, and second group reduces
     5            More negative                 +              -                -      first group expands, and second and third group reduce
     6       Weakest/ Most negative             +              +                -      first and second group expand, and third group reduces
Note: The signs (-) and (+) respectively stand for decrease and increase. Pro-poor growth is defined as the dynamics that are most beneficial to
the different categories in this order: Lowest Income, Middle Income, and Top Income. This typology is modified based on Dang and Lanjouw (2016).




                                                                         38
Table 2.2: Change in Shared Prosperity for Each Country (percentage)
  (1)           (2)                     (3)                (4)               (5)                 (6)
                                  Growth in the population share of each welfare        Growth in mean
  No           Country                                 category                         consumption for
                                      Poor            Vulnerable       Middle class         all groups
   1 Congo, DRC                       -13.5              149.7             249.4                69.7
   2 Chad                             -36.1               42.6             192.1                53.5
   3 Mozambique                       -12.6               70.0              30.9                21.3
   4 Uganda                           -19.1               26.3              24.9                20.7
   5 Rwanda                            -8.7               19.3              24.4                20.5
   6 Ghana                            -20.7               4.4               21.7                20.3
   7 Mauritania                       -27.7              -18.8              34.7                12.4
   8 Malawi                            -1.0               -3.8              28.4                 5.9
   9 Tanzania                          -6.7               10.5              3.6                 5.6
   10 Togo                             -1.4               -4.5              14.9                 3.8
   11 Ethiopia                         -3.9               -1.2              26.7                 2.5
   12 Sierra Leone                     -6.5               16.6              -6.7                0.5
   13 Nigeria                           5.5                1.4              -6.4                -0.5
   14 Botswana                        -28.7               6.6               12.5                -0.5
   15 Senegal                           0.9                3.3              -7.9                -2.5
   16 Swaziland                        -1.3               -1.3               4.0                -3.8
   17 Zambia                            7.8              -12.0             -12.1                -4.4
   18 Burkina Faso                      6.3               -4.4             -18.0                -5.6
   19 Cote d'Ivoire                   15.1                -5.3              -5.6                -6.9
   20 Cameroon                        34.5               -12.3              -8.9               -10.5
   21 Madagascar                       9.5               -32.5             -23.6               -16.3
         Regional average              -5.2               12.1              27.6                 8.8
Note: Authors' calculation based on household survey data. Household heads' age is between 25 and 55
in the first survey round and adjusted accordingly for the second survey round. The poverty line and
vulnerability line are respectively set at $1.9/day and $4.3/day in 2011 PPP dollars for both periods.
Pro-poor growth scenarios are based on the classification provided in Table 1.3 in Appendix 1.
Countries are ranked first in a decreasing order of mean consumption for all the three groups, and then
the Poor, the Vulnerable and the Middle Class.




                                                     39
Table 2.3: Transition Dynamics among the Three Welfare Groups for Each Country
(percentage)
 (1)           (2)                (3)             (4)           (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)
                                  Proportion of the        Proportion of the middle
                                                                                             Overall        Overall
                                      vulnerable                       class
  No         Country                                                                       downward         upward
                              remained in     moved to        fell to      remained in
                                                                                            mobility        mobility
                             vunerability middle class vulnerability middle class
   1    Botswana                 37.1            53.1           9.8            89.3            10.4           53.9
   2    Chad                     41.5            29.3          36.8            46.7            36.2           44.5
   3    Swaziland                34.6            30.8          29.8            51.1            41.6           41.5
   4    Mauritania               59.2            34.6          10.9            89.0             8.9           38.9
   5    Ghana                    55.4            30.8          15.1            84.5            14.6           31.8
   6    Nigeria                  60.0            22.7          28.9            69.5            23.1           28.9
   7    Uganda                   56.3            25.0          22.6            76.0            20.5           28.1
   8    Sierra Leone             64.5            17.0          36.8            61.7            22.7           25.8
   9    Burkina Faso             72.4            22.6           8.1            91.9             5.7           24.5
  10 Senegal                     60.4            20.7          23.9            75.3            20.8           23.5
  11 Cameroon                    62.9            18.9          22.8            76.4            20.9           22.6
  12 Cote d'Ivoire               63.7            19.3          17.7            81.9            17.6           20.9
  13 Congo, DRC                  61.0            33.7          10.1            89.9             5.8           19.8
  14 Rwanda                      66.3            17.0          20.7            78.9            18.1           19.0
  15 Ethiopia                    73.7            15.7          18.4            81.6            12.7           18.9
  16 Tanzania                    60.4            12.4          37.4            60.1            32.2           17.6
  17 Mozambique                  52.4            14.0          35.3            59.9            35.5           16.1
  18 Zambia                      47.3            15.9          29.5            64.9            36.1           15.6
  19 Malawi                      47.7            13.0          33.0            61.7            39.1           14.4
  20 Togo                        60.5            12.6          28.7            70.1            27.9           13.2
  21 Madagascar                  50.6             5.2          48.0            47.7            45.6            6.4
        Regional average         56.6            22.1          25.0            71.8            23.6           25.0
Note: Authors' calculation based on household survey data. Household heads' age is between 25 and 55 in the first
survey round and adjusted accordingly for the second survey round. The poverty line and vulnerability line are
respectively set at $1.9/day and $4.3/day in 2011 PPP dollars for both periods. Countries are ranked in a decreasing
order of overall upward mobility. Overall downward mobility (column 7) represents the proportion of the population
that moved up one or two income categories from the Poor and Vulnerable groups. Overall upward mobility (column 8)
represents the proportion of the population that moved down one or two income categories from the Vulnerable and
Middle Class groups. The regional average is a simple average (unweighted).




                                                          40
Table 2.4: Country Classifications
                                      Country          Fragile                                   Income
  No         Country Name                                                Landlocked                              Resource-poor
                                       code           Situations                                grouping

  1      Botswana                       BWA               No                  Yes           Middle Income              No
  2      Burkina Faso                   BFA               No                  Yes            Low Income                Yes
  3      Cameroon                       CMR               No                  No            Middle Income              Yes
  4      Chad                           TCD               Yes                 Yes            Low Income                No
  5      Congo, Dem. Rep.               ZAR               Yes                 No             Low Income                No
  6      Cote d'Ivoire                  CIV               Yes                 No            Middle Income              Yes
  7      Ethiopia                       ETH               No                  Yes            Low Income                Yes
  8      Ghana                          GHA               No                  No            Middle Income              Yes
  9      Madagascar                     MDG               Yes                 No             Low Income                Yes
  10     Malawi                         MWI               No                  Yes            Low Income                Yes
  11     Mauritania                     MRT               No                  No            Middle Income              No
  12     Mozambique                     MOZ               No                  No             Low Income                Yes
  13     Nigeria                        NGA               No                  No            Middle Income              No
  14     Rwanda                         RWA               No                  Yes            Low Income                Yes
  15     Senegal                        SEN               No                  No            Middle Income              Yes
  16     Sierra Leone                   SLE               Yes                 No             Low Income                No
  17     Swaziland                      SWZ               No                  Yes           Middle Income              Yes
  18     Tanzania                       TZA               No                  No             Low Income                Yes
  19     Togo                           TGO               Yes                 No             Low Income                Yes
  20     Uganda                         UGA               No                  Yes            Low Income                Yes
  21     Zambia                         ZMB               No                  Yes           Middle Income              No
 Note: Resource-rich countries include countries that had average rents from natural resources (excluding forests) that exceeded 10
 percent of GDP in 2006–11 and countries with diamonds (Botswana). Fragile countries are countries that appear on the World
 Bank’s 2015 harmonized list of fragile situations, which classifies countries as fragile if they (a) had an average Country Policy
 and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) rating of 3.2 or less or (b) hosted a UN or regional peace-keeping or peace-building mission
 in the previous three years. Country income categories are from World Development Indicators. These classifications are based
 on Beegle et al. (2016).




                                                           41
Figure 2.1: Proportions of the Poor, the Vulnerable, and the Middle Class in Most Recent
Year

    Mauritania
     Botswana
        Nigeria
         Ghana
   Cote d'Ivoire
    Cameroon
       Senegal
       Ethiopia
          Chad
     Swaziland
       Uganda
      Tanzania
          Togo
  Sierra Leone
  Burkina Faso
       Rwanda
        Zambia
  Mozambique
        Malawi
  Congo, DRC
   Madagascar
   All countries

                   0   10   20   30          40        50          60    70            80   90   100
                                                  percentage (%)

                                      poor            vulnerable        middle class




                                                             42
Figure 2.2: Upward Mobility, Downward Mobility and Pro-poor Growth
           60

                                     BWA


                                                                                            TCD
  upward mobility (%)




                                                                                                        SWZ
                 40




                                 MRT

                                             GHA
                                                         UGA NGA
                          BFA                          SEN SLE
                                                          CMR
   20




                          COD                       CIV
                                         ETH         RWA                                   MOZ
                                                                                     TZA
                                                                                            ZMB MWI
                                                                          TGO

                                                                                                                MDG
           0




                                10                    20              30                          40                   50
                                                           downward mobility (%)
                        Note: pro-poor growth scenarios are represented by circles (most positive), diamonds (more positive),
                        squares (positive), triangles (more negative), and crosses (most negative). Positive and negative growth
                        scenarios are depicted in orange and blue respectively.




                                                                                43
