                                                 WPS8015


Policy Research Working Paper                   8015




An Employment Guarantee as Risk Insurance?
     Assessing the Effects of the NREGS on Agricultural
                    Production Decisions

                                Esther Gehrke




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8015


  Abstract
 Uninsured risk constrains households in their production                           supply response to agricultural shocks more efficient, house-
 decisions in many developing countries. Similarly to crop                          holds with access to the NREGS can shift their production
 insurance, employment guarantees can support farmers in                            towards riskier but also more profitable crops. The observed
 managing agricultural production risks. Evidence from rep-                         shifts in agricultural production do considerably raise the
 resentative panel data of Andhra Pradesh, India, suggests                          profitability of agricultural production and hence the
 that the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme                                incomes of smallholder farmers. The findings are not driven
 (NREGS) reduces households’ uncertainty about future                               by changes in the labor or cost intensity of those crops,
 income streams because it provides employment opportu-                             which supports the idea that the causal mechanism under-
 nities in rural areas independently of weather shocks and                          lying the observed changes is indeed an insurance effect.
 crop failure. Because the NREGS makes an ex-post labor




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author
  may be contacted at esther.gehrke@unigoettingen.de..




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
      An employment guarantee as risk insurance?
   Assessing the eﬀects of the NREGS on agricultural
                  production decisions
                                           Esther Gehrke∗




       Keywords: Uncertainty; Employment Guarantee; Crop choice
       JEL: I38; O12; Q16




   ∗
    Esther Gehrke is post-doctoral researcher at the University of G¨ ottingen, e-mail: esther.gehrke@uni-
goettingen.de. The author is grateful to the editor, Andrew Foster, as well as three anonymous referees for
their valuable comments and suggestions. Moreover, she would like to thank Michael Grimm for continu-
ous guidance and advice and Denis Cogneau, Clement Imbert, Markus Loewe, Abhiroop Mukhopadhyay,
Dominique Van de Walle and the participants of the German Economic Association AEL Conference
(Munich), the AEL PhD seminar (Z¨     urich), the ECINEQ Conference (Bari), the IZA/World Bank Con-
ference on Employment and Development (Bonn), the PEGNet Conference (Copenhagen) and the Brown
University Applied Microeconomics lunch for many helpful comments. This work was written while the
author was aﬃliated with German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut f¨        ur Entwicklungspolitik
(DIE) and the University of Passau, and supported by the German Federal Ministry for Economic Co-
operation and Development [grant number 2011 95 809]. The data used in this publication comes from
Young Lives, a 15-year study of the changing nature of childhood poverty in Ethiopia, India (Andhra
Pradesh), Peru and Vietnam (www.younglives.org.uk). The views expressed here are those of the author.
They are not necessarily those of Young Lives, the University of Oxford, DFID or other funders.
1     Introduction

Previous research suggests that farmers in developing countries are constrained in their
production and investment decisions. Evidence of delayed technology adoption, low in-
vestment in ﬁxed capital, a preference for conservative crop choices and, more generally,
a lack of innovative capacity is by now well established (Duﬂo, Kremer, and Robinson,
2008; Foster and Rosenzweig, 2010b; Suri, 2011). This has potentially severe and long-
lasting eﬀects on income and well-being in developing countries as a large share of their
populations still rely on agricultural production as a major source of income.
    Empirical evidence suggests that uninsured risk prevents farmers from adopting new
technologies. A number of studies have used randomized variation in the availability
of index-based agricultural insurance to estimate the importance of uninsured risk in
production decisions. These studies show that crop insurance is critical in stimulating
fertilizer application (Karlan et al., 2014), risky crop choice (Cole, Gine, and Vickery,
2013) and risk taking in agriculture more generally (Mobarak and Rosenzweig, 2013).
However, trust-related considerations and basis risk continue to limit the uptake of agri-
cultural micro-insurance in many developing countries (Cole et al., 2013; Carter et al.,
2014). Given these limitations, it seems worthwhile to explore other policy options that
could help farmers to cope with shocks and manage risks.
    This paper aims at contributing to the empirical evidence on the importance of risk
management in households’ production decisions. But instead of exploring variance in
the availability of insurance, as do the studies cited above, it examines variation in the
access to an alternative mechanism that could improve a household’s risk management: an
employment guarantee. The main argument is that public works programs or employment
guarantees could help households to cope with income shocks by providing additional
employment opportunities. This idea is not new; the potential of public works schemes
in helping households to smooth income in the case of shocks has been highlighted inter
alia by Barrett, Holden, and Clay (2005) and Binswanger-Mkhize (2012). However, to
the best of my knowledge, no empirical evidence on the insurance eﬀect of an employment
guarantee on households’ production decisions has been provided so far.

                                            1
   This article presents evidence that the introduction of the National Rural Employ-
ment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) reduces households’ uncertainty about future income
streams and enables them to produce a higher share of high-risk, high-proﬁt crops. The
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) was passed in India in September
2005; the implementation thereof began in 2006. The NREGA entitles every rural house-
hold to up to a 100 days of work per year at the state minimum wage. In the ﬁnancial
year 2010/11 the NREGS provided work to close to 55 million rural households, gener-
ating a total of 2.5 billion person-days of employment (Ministry of Rural Development,
Government of India, 2012).
   The empirical analysis builds on the Young Lives data; a household panel that is
representative of the state of Andhra Pradesh in southern India. The quality of imple-
mentation of the NREGS has been shown to vary immensely across India (Dutta et al.,
2012). In most states the provision of work under NREGS is far too unpredictable to
completely oﬀset the eﬀects of a shock. Under such circumstances, the NREGS would
not aﬀect households’ risk expectations. Andhra Pradesh, however, is one of the states
with the highest number of days of employment generated per rural household. I ﬁnd
that the provision of work in Andhra Pradesh does eﬀectively respond to weather shocks
and thus supports households in managing agricultural production risks.
   The estimation strategy builds on the sequenced introduction of the NREGS at the
district level, and explores the fact that the scheme was introduced in four out of the six
survey districts in 2006 and in the remaining two districts in 2008 and 2009. Because this
approach relies heavily on the parallel trends assumption, a number of robustness checks
are warranted. The use of alternative treatment variables (e.g. block-level spending and
employment days generated under the NREGS, as well as households’ registration with
NREGS) does not change the results. Several additional robustness checks rule out the
possibility that the observed eﬀect is due to alternative mechanisms.
   The results of this article suggest that employment guarantees can trigger important
gains in agricultural productivity in the medium term. These gains go far beyond the
direct income eﬀect that the provision of employment in agricultural lean seasons has on


                                            2
the wellbeing of rural households. By providing households with the right to work, such
programs can have an insurance eﬀect, which could then trigger additional increases in
productivity and, in turn, in households’ incomes. This is a very important lesson for
other countries with planned or ongoing public works programs.
        The remainder of this article proceeds as follows: Section 2 introduces a theoretical
framework for analyzing the eﬀects of an employment guarantee on crop choice. Section
3 presents the data and summary statistics. Section 4 outlines the estimation strategy.
Section 5 presents the empirical results, and Section 6 concludes.



2         Risk management and households’ crop choices: A

          theoretical framework

Providing additional employment opportunities to a total of 55 million households has
brought about considerable changes in the social and economic realities in India. The
NREGS aﬀects households in rural areas through various channels.1 The most obvious
and so far most intensely researched eﬀect is the increase in available income and wealth
of those households participating in the program. This wealth eﬀect is most pronounced
for households with surplus labor - namely households whose labor supply exceeds the
labor demand of their farm ﬁrm - and in regions where regular labor markets fail to absorb
this excess. The increase in income resulting from NREGS participation has been shown
to increase consumption levels (Jha, Gaiha, and Pandey, 2012) and to reduce poverty
(Klonner and Oldiges, 2014).2
        Another eﬀect, which is much less well understood, is the insurance eﬀect. It is
particularly relevant for households that are highly exposed to covariate shocks such as
droughts, ﬂoods or large-scale crop diseases. In rural areas of India, casual agricultural
    1
     I outline here only the three mechanisms that seem to matter in the context of this study, namely in
Andhra Pradesh and within the ﬁrst two years of program implementation. Other mechanisms though
which the NREGS could aﬀect crop choice could be irrigation infrastructure created within the program
(Deininger and Liu, 2013), education (Shah and Steinberg, 2015) and reduced conﬂict (Fetzer, 2014).
   2
     Increases in disposable income and wealth might also positively inﬂuence the capacity to take risks
and investment behavior. This eﬀect is diﬀerent from the insurance eﬀect, which is the main focus of
this article. I discuss how I attempt to isolate the insurance eﬀect in Section 4.



                                                   3
employment is the dominant source of employment, and, as shown by Jayachandran
(2006), wages severely ﬂuctuate with covariate shocks. In the case of major weather
shocks, farmers have to expect to not ﬁnd any employment at all (Kaur, 2014). Such wage
ﬂuctuations severely limit households’ possibilities to cope with shocks through the labor
market. By giving households the right to work and making employment opportunities
available independently of shocks, the NREGS greatly inﬂuences households’ ability to
smooth income in the case of a shock. In expectation of having access to the NREGS,
households could take more risk in their production decisions, and reach higher expected
incomes. If a shock then occurs, households can cope with it by working for the NREGS.3
       Finally, the NREGS was shown to raise wage levels in the private sector through
general equilibrium eﬀects in the village economy. Because NREGS wages are higher
than the wages paid for casual work, households shift their labor supply from the private
sector towards the public works program (Berg et al., 2012; Imbert and Papp, 2015).
Increases in wages could also aﬀect production levels or crop choice in agriculture because
they raise production costs, particularly for large-scale farmers.4
       This article focuses speciﬁcally on the insurance eﬀect, and how it aﬀects the alloca-
tion of inputs to risky crops in a household’s farm.5 The following theoretical model of
household decision-making under uncertainty shows more systematically how the intro-
duction of NREGS can aﬀect crop choice via the insurance eﬀect. The model primarily
builds on Dercon and Christiaensen (2011). The possibility to smooth consumption over
time is therein constrained by two main factors: the lack of adequate risk management
strategies and limited access to credit. Crop choice is ﬁrst modeled in a world without
risk but with imperfect credit markets and then extended to a world with uncertainty.
This allows for the isolation of the eﬀects of uncertainty and risk aversion on production
decisions. Finally, the eﬀects of the NREGS on input allocation decisions are discussed
   3
     Without the shock, it is unlikely that all of these households would participate in the NREGS,
because their shadow wages probably exceed the wage rate paid in the scheme.
   4
     Bhargava (2014) for example shows, that the NREGS induces farmers to shift their production
technology towards labor-saving equipment. I show in Section 5 that the results of this article are not
driven by diﬀerences in the labor intensity of crops.
   5
     The focus lies on input allocation because of data constraints: information on land allocation was
not consistently collected.



                                                  4
in both scenarios.


2.1       General setup

Assume that a household engaging in agricultural production has the choice between
two agricultural products Qd and Qs . Given that both products are well known to the
household and have been produced in the region for some time, we can abstract from
learning and other sunk costs. These products are produced with two diﬀerent types of
production functions: one is deterministic and the other stochastic.6 It is also assumed
that the risky crop is more productive on average. Both products can be sold at local
markets at the same price p.
       Agricultural production takes place over two periods, the planting and the harvesting
seasons. The total yield of both products Q depends on land a, labor l1 and input k
allocation in period one:7


                         d
         Qd = f d (ad , l1 , kd)                                                                         (1)
                         s
         Qs = f s (as , l1 , ks)   E [ ] = 1.                                                            (2)


Inputs k are deﬁned as a bundle of variable inputs such as seeds, fertilizer and pesticides.
The total yield of the risky product additionally depends on the realization of a multi-
plicative, random, serially uncorrelated shock             at the end of the ﬁrst period, thus after
input allocation has been decided upon (Fafchamps, 1993; Van Den Berg, 2002). The
expected value of this shock is 1; thus in expectation, the yield of the risky crop is just
           s
f s (as , l1 , k s ). Total yield has to be harvested in the second period, and labor required for
harvesting l2 is a linear function of realized yields, e.g. l2 = α(Qd + Qs ), where α is a
parameter indicating how much labor is needed for harvesting given any realized yield.8
   6
     The assumption, that one production function is deterministic and the other stochastic is rather
extreme. Instead, one would expect both production functions to depend on the realization of random
shocks, although to a diﬀerent extent. However, this simpliﬁcation is without major impact on the results
obtained here.
   7
     This model abstracts from ﬁxed capital because the marginal eﬀect of productive capital was found
to be close to zero in the data used here.
   8
     Because labor allocation is linear in realized yields, it is proﬁtable to harvest either the entire crop
or nothing at all (depending on wage levels and output prices).


                                                     5
       The household maximizes utility from consumption C in both the planting and the
harvesting periods. The utility function is additive over both periods and future utility is
discounted by the factor δ . The utility function satisﬁes the usual properties: it is twice
diﬀerentiable and increases in C but at decreasing rates, ∂U/∂C > 0 and ∂ 2 U/∂C 2 < 0.
This also implies that the household is risk averse. Tis model abstracts from leisure
because it does not change the choice under uncertainty.9 The household generates income
from wage employment on local labor markets and from agricultural production. Building
on the full-income approach, the household maximization problem can be described as
follows:


         max     V =U1 (C1 ) + δU2 (C2 )

                   s.t.
                                     d    s
                      C1 ≤ w1 (T1 − l1 − l1 ) − g (k d + k s ) + B

                      C2 ≤ p(Qd + Qs ) + w2 (T2 − l2 ) − (1 + r)B

                      B ≤ Bm

                      ad + as ≤ 1.                                                                    (3)


Total time endowment is represented by T1 and T2 . In both periods total time can be
allocated between working in the labor market and working in own ﬁelds. In the ﬁrst
period, the household obtains income from wage work at level w1 and from borrowing B .
Inputs for agricultural production can be purchased at price g . In the second period, the
household obtains income from the sale of its own agricultural production p(Qd + Qs ) and
wage work at level w2 . Note here that the household has to allocate labor to harvesting
in order to generate income from agricultural production. It seems plausible that the
household always prioritizes its own harvest over wage employment; therefore the cost of
harvesting is valued at reservation wages rather than market wages. The wage cost of
                                                                      r
harvesting w2 l2 in the budget constraint can then be replaced with αw2 (Qd + Qs ), where
   9
    By dropping leisure, I ignore possible income eﬀects of increases in wage levels on a household’s
time allocation between labor and leisure. But since my main interest lies in crop choice rather than in
production levels, ignoring leisure is not of major concern. Similar approaches can be found in Rosenzweig
and Binswanger (1993), Fafchamps and Pender (1997) and Dercon and Christiansen (2011).


                                                    6
 r
w2 is the reservation wage and α(Qd + Qs ) is the eﬀort necessary for harvesting expressed
in units of realized yield.
       Incurred debts have to be repaid in the second period at an interest rate of r, and
B m describes the maximum amount a household can borrow for productive purposes.10
In contrast to input credit, consumption credit is much more diﬃcult to obtain and
highly expensive. Because households are expected to opt for that source of credit only
under extreme circumstances, this model does not allow for any borrowing beyond the
harvesting period.
       In this setting local labor markets are assumed to function with the option to hire
labor in as well as out. In fact, most households in the sample report a range of income
sources - of which casual labor features prominently. However, harvest stage wages are
assumed to be stochastic and to covary with covariant shocks, such as rainfall shortages.
This means that households can only form expectations about harvest stage wages and
face a double risk from rainfall ﬂuctuations: First, their own harvest is likely to fail if
there is a rain shortage. Second, they cannot ﬁnd work at adequate wage levels in local
labor markets.
       Finally, ad + as = 1 describes the restrictions on allocable land. The assumption is that
there are no functioning land markets and that owned land is used for own agricultural
production or left fallow.11
       The model described so far deviates from standard neoclassical models in that credit
and land markets are assumed to be dysfunctional. Given these constraints, households’
production and consumption decisions are not separable even in the absence of risk.


2.2       Deterministic case

First, consider a scenario without uncertainty. In such a world each household maxi-
mizes utility by maximizing proﬁts from agricultural production plus income from wage
  10
     Input credits are relatively common in rural Andhra Pradesh, although it seems that the amount of
credit conceded is limited by a household’s wealth. In the sample around 18% of the households that
applied for credit reported not receiving the total amount of credit they applied for.
  11
     This is obviously a simplifying assumption that does not hold everywhere in India. Nonetheless,
observed levels of land renting are relatively low in rural Andhra Pradesh and land sales are virtually
absent.


                                                  7
employment.12 Because both production functions are deterministic in this scenario, op-
timal land, input and labor allocations are achieved when their marginal products equal
respective prices.13 The decision rule for the allocation of variable inputs to each of the
crops is

                               ∂U
       ∂f d,s       g       ∂C1
                               1

              =        r     ∂U2
                                 .                                                                      (4)
       ∂k d,s   (p − αw2 ) δ ∂C
                                    2



In the absence of risk, the decision rule is equal for both crops, and optimal allocation
implies that the marginal product of inputs in d is equal to the marginal product of inputs
in s. Because realized yield is harvested in the second period, input allocation does not
only depend on input and output prices but also on reservation wages in the harvest
season and on the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution in consumption. If credit
constraints bind, input allocation to both crops is lower, and the household allocates
more time to the labor market.14


2.3     Introducing uncertainty

When introducing uncertainty, the household has to form expectations about the realized
yield of the risky crop Qs , the wage levels in the harvest period w2 , and the level of
consumption that can be achieved in the second period C2 . The decision rules for input
allocation under uncertainty change to

                              ∂U
       ∂f d       g        ∂C1
                              1

            =        r
                                                                                                        (5)
       ∂k d   (p − αw2 ) δ ∂EU
                            ∂C
                                2
                                   2



for the deterministic crop, and to

                          ∂U1              ∂U2
       ∂f s       g       ∂C1
                                     cov ( ∂C   , )
            =        r    ∂EU
                                −             2
                                                                                                        (6)
       ∂k s   (p − αw2 ) δ ∂C 2
                             2
                                  (p − αw2  r
                                              )δ ∂EU
                                                  ∂C2
                                                     2



  12
     Identical results would be obtained if the household were risk neutral
  13
     As mentioned earlier, the main focus of this article is on input allocation, but similar results can be
obtained for the allocation of labor and land to each of the crops. A detailed derivation of all decision
rules can be found in appendix A.
  14
     C.f. appendix A for a derivation of this result.




                                                     8
for the stochastic crop. Equation (5) looks similar to equation (4), except that the
household now maximizes expected utility of consumption in the harvest period. For
any expected consumption level C2 , expected utility EU2 (C2 ) is lower than the utility of
the expected value U2 (E (C2 )), and marginal expected utility is higher than the marginal
utility of the expected value. Thus, under uncertainty, the right-hand side term is lower
than in the deterministic case, implying that the household allocates more inputs to the
safe crop than it would in the absence of risk. This reﬂects the greater weight households
put on future consumption relative to current consumption when facing uncertainty.
Equation (6) shows the eﬀect of uncertainty on input allocation to the risky crop. Here
the decision rule changes considerably and the overall eﬀect is less clear. Again, marginal
expected utility is higher than marginal utility, thus implying higher input allocation to
the risky crop also. However, the covariance between marginal utility of consumption and
the random shock is strictly negative.15 This term increases the value of the right-hand
side of equation (6), which means that input allocation to the risky crop is lower under
uncertainty. Which of the two eﬀects is stronger depends on the degree of risk aversion
of the household, expected consumption levels C2 and the amount of covariance between
marginal utility and the random shock. Since the covariance is greater with lower wages
in period two and with a higher interest rate r, the net eﬀect of uncertainty on input
allocation can be expected to be negative in this context. Irrespective of total levels of
input allocation, it can be clearly seen that under uncertainty, input allocation shifts
towards the safe crop d relative to the risky crop s. Thus under uncertainty, the share of
risky crops in a household’s portfolio is always lower than in the deterministic scenario.


2.4     The insurance eﬀect of an Employment Guarantee

The insurance eﬀect of an employment guarantee, such as the NREGS, stems from an
improvement in the possibilities to oﬀset income losses associated with a failed harvest
ex-post. Because employment opportunities are now available also in bad agricultural
  15
    In a bad state of the world ( = 0) consumption in the second period is lower and marginal utility
higher than in a good state of the world. Conversely, a high leads to higher consumption in period 2
and to lower marginal utility of consumption.



                                                 9
years, I model the insurance eﬀect of the NREGS as an increase in harvest stage wages
in periods with agricultural shocks. This increases expected harvest stage wages and
reduces the covariance between harvest stage wage levels and covariant shocks.16 The
comparative statics in this section show that the introduction of NREGS aﬀects optimal
input allocation under certainty diﬀerently than under uncertainty.
    Without uncertainty, an increase in average harvest period wages w2 aﬀects optimal
input allocation by increasing consumption levels that can be realized in the second period
(c.f. eq. 4). Households that hire labor out (i.e. those whose land is too small to produce
at higher levels) increase consumption. One can thus see a decrease in input allocation
for net lenders of labor because of increases in C2 , which reduces ∂U2 /∂C2 and increases
the second part of the right-hand side of equation (4). The eﬀect of increased wages on
agricultural production levels (through consumption) can be understood as a substitution
eﬀect. Because working outside the farm becomes more proﬁtable for households with
little cultivated land, the allocation of inputs to those lands should decrease from very
high levels to more eﬃcient ones.
    An entirely diﬀerent eﬀect can be observed if uncertainty reduces input allocation to
risky crops as given by equation (6). If harvest stage wages increase, we can observe
the same eﬀects on marginal utility of consumption as in the deterministic case. Under
uncertainty, however, the negative covariance term reduces input allocation to the risky
crop, and this eﬀect is now partially oﬀset by the introduction of an employment guaran-
tee. As possibilities to generate market income improve, the eﬀect of shocks on harvest
period consumption decreases. Because the household knows that it can earn additional
income in instances of negative production shocks by spending more time working for
the NREGS, it can aﬀord to take a greater amount of risk in his agricultural production.
The more the covariance term on the right-hand side of equation (6) approaches zero, the
more the ratio of inputs allocated to the risky crop (versus the safe crop) approaches the
deterministic scenario. This means that even if total input (or similarly labor) allocation
  16
     I subsume wages in the agricultural lean season in harvest wages, since the important criterion is the
timing of the shock, and both harvest and the lean season follow the realization of weather outcomes.
In a scenario without uncertainty, expected wage levels need to be replaced by average wage levels.



                                                    10
is reduced due to the employment guarantee, the share of total inputs allocated to each
of the crops approaches the ratio of the deterministic scenario. Interestingly, this eﬀect
holds independently of whether credit constraints reduce total input allocation or not.17



3        Data

When estimating the insurance eﬀect of the NREGS, one must take into account con-
siderable variation in the quality of implementation of the program across states (Dutta
et al., 2012). The section above highlighted the importance of households’ expectations
about future income streams. Therefore it seems plausible to observe insurance eﬀects
only in states in which the demand for employment has been suﬃciently met, already in
the early years of program implementation.
       Given these considerations, the model speciﬁed above is tested using the Young Lives
Survey (YLS) data for Andhra Pradesh. Andhra Pradesh is particularly suited to study-
ing the question of interest because it is one of the best performing states in India in
terms of the number of workdays generated per household and meeting the demand for
work (Dutta et al., 2012). Regarding outreach, only Chhattisgarh, West Bengal, Madya
Pradesh and Rajasthan reached higher proportions of rural households in the ﬁnancial
year 2009/10.18
       The YLS data set covers 3,019 households living in six diﬀerent districts, 17 sub-
districts (blocks) and 87 villages. The selection process of districts for the YLS ensured
that all three geographical regions were surveyed, as too were the poor and non-poor
districts of each region, such that the YLS is broadly representative of the population of
Andhra Pradesh (Galab et al., 2011).19 Three rounds of interviews have been conducted
  17
     C.f. appendix A for a detailed derivation of this result.
  18
     At the same time, Andhra Pradesh has been a forerunner in terms of innovative approaches to the
implementation of the NREGS. First, it has a lot of experience with performing social audits to increase
accountability within the scheme. Second, it was one of the ﬁrst states to cooperate with IT enterprises
to strengthen the eﬃciency of administrative processes. To increase transparency, entries on muster rolls
and the number of workdays generated per job card holder etc. are publicly accessible. Nonetheless,
the program continues to be implemented in a top-down manner in Andhra Pradesh. Usually, work is
not generated upon demand, rather work applications are only accepted if there is work available (c.f.
(Desai and Joshi, 2015; Muralidharan, Niehaus, and Sukhtankar, forthcoming).
  19
     This is in reference to the State of Andhra Pradesh in 2013, prior to its division into the states of



                                                   11
so far (2002, 2007 and 2009/10). But for reasons of comparability, only the second
(2007) and third (2009/10) rounds are considered in the current analysis. Furthermore,
the analysis is restricted to households with non-zero agricultural production in 2007
and 2009/10. This data is complemented by secondary data for the calculation of the
dependent variable as well as for a number of controls.
    For the empirical analysis, the sample is split in treatment and control group. Treat-
ment indicates that a household has access to the NREGS at the district level at the
beginning of the agricultural cycle of the 2009/10 round of interviews. The period of
reference for the 2007 round of interviews is the agricultural year 2005/06 (June 2005
to May 2006). NREGS activities started around April and May 2006 in the treatment
districts, and assuming that learning about the program took a little bit of time, it seems
reasonable to code all households as not having access to the NREGS in the baseline re-
porting period. The period of reference for the 2009/10 interviews is the agricultural year
2008/09. By that time, NREGS works had started in the districts Anantapur, Cuddapah,
Karimnagar and Mahaboobnagar, the treatment districts. In Srikakulam and West Go-
davari, the control districts, the introduction of the NREGS was in August 2007 and in
March 2008 respectively. Since activities started only very slowly in most sub-districts of
Srikakulam, this district is used as control district despite the introduction of the NREGS
in mid 2007.20
    Summary statistics suggest that the treatment and control groups are not perfectly
comparable (c.f. Table 1). Agricultural production levels as well as the amount spent
on variable inputs (such as seeds, fertilizer and pesticides) are not statistically diﬀerent
between treatment group households and control group households. In contrast, the area
cultivated, irrigation levels, the probability to apply fertilizer and to use high yielding
variety (HYV) seeds are all higher in the treatment group than in the control group.
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.
  20
     Figure D.1 in the appendix shows monthly employment creation at the sub-district level in Srikaku-
lam and West Godavari, as well as the average for all ‘treatment’ sub-districts. As can be seen, two
sub-districts in Srikakulam had substantial NREGS employment creation in the two months before the
relevant agricultural year. In order to gauge the robustness of my results to treatment timing, I exclude
these two districts from my analysis in Table E.1 in the appendix. As expected the estimated eﬀect of
the NREGS increases when excluding one or both of these sub-districts. For a detailed discussion of
data sources, treatment timing and the construction of variables refer to appendix B.


                                                   12
Households in the treatment group also experienced a rainfall shock in the agricultural
year previous to the baseline period. This shock was less pronounced in the control
group. Finally, Table 1 reports the participation status with the NREGS at the time
of the baseline data collection. As can be seen, 66% of the households in the treatment
districts report having registered with the NREGS in 2007.
       For the calculation of the dependent variable - a risk index of each households’ crop
portfolio - survey data on input allocation to each crop is combined with District-level crop
production statistics. The time series of crop production statistics are used to calculate
the coeﬃcient of variation of each crop’s yield. With this information, a risk index Ri of
each household’s crop portfolio is constructed given the reported allocation of inputs to
each of the crops.21 The risk index for household i given input allocation k to crop m
is deﬁned as Ri =          rm km /      kn , where rm is the coeﬃcient of variation of the yield of
crop m.22 Note here, that rm is only available for a subset of all crops n (26 out of 42),
such that m ⊆ n. Still,              km represents roughly 90% of the total allocation of inputs
in the sample. To reduce potential bias, I drop all observations from the sample which
have no crop in their portfolio for which risk information is available, e.g.                     km = 0 or
Ri = 0, in one or both of the survey rounds.23 As can be seen in Table 1, the risk index
at baseline is higher in the treatment group (0.36) than in the control group (0.26). The
diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level.
       There are two main caveats associated with the choice of the dependent variable. First,
risk in crop returns not only stems from yield ﬂuctuations but also from the variability
in prices. Also, for domestically traded crops it is quite likely that yield and prices are
negatively correlated, such that prices are high in years with a bad harvest and low in years
with a good harvest. This would reduce the variability in returns. If these crops are also
the crops that display the highest variability in yields, I would be grossly misinterpreting
  21
     Allocation of inputs refers to the share in total variable inputs such as seeds, fertilizer and pesticides
that is allocated to each crop in a household’s portfolio. This is the only information collected in the
survey that gives information about the relative importance of each crop in a household’s production.
  22
     The distribution of the risk index as well as of the change in this variable between survey rounds is
plotted in Figures D.2 and D.3 respectively in the appendix.
  23
     Appendix B provides more information on how the variable is constructed. The robustness of my
ﬁndings to diﬀerent methods of aggregating the risk index is shown in Table E.2 in the appendix.



                                                      13
the results of this article. Second, as yields of diﬀerent crops are not perfectly correlated,
households might chose to increase the number of crops in their portfolio as strategy to
diversify risk. As the risk index presented above ignores the correlation between crops’
yields, it does not adequately predict the amount of risk a household is willing to take
in his production decisions. In order to address these concerns, I test if my results are
robust to alternative speciﬁcations of the dependent variable. I ﬁnd that the NREGS
also increases the price risk in the crop portfolio, as well as the standard deviation of
portfolio returns, a variable that accounts for risk in crop returns, as well as the amount
of correlation between the returns to diﬀerent crops. The NREGS also seems to have
a positive (albeit not statistically signiﬁcant) eﬀect on crop concentration, measured by
the Herﬁndahl index, which suggests that farmers are not trading increased yield risk for
higher diversiﬁcation in the presence of the NREGS.24



4        Estimation strategy

The key prediction of the model described in Section 2 is that the introduction of the
NREGS, ceteris paribus, increases the share of inputs allocated to risky crops if house-
holds were previously constrained in their crop choice by high levels of uncertainty re-
garding output levels and dysfunctional insurance and labor markets.
       It is important to notice here that the NREGS does not only aﬀect households’ crop
choices through the insurance eﬀect - which is the main focus of this article. Because
increases in available income and wealth due to the NREGS might also inﬂuence a house-
hold’s ability to cope with shocks, their access to credit and their willingness to take
risks, it is essential to control for these changes in order to isolate the insurance eﬀect.
The outcome equation can be written as follows:


         Rijt = β0 + β1 Dijt + β2 Xit + β3 Zjt + ui + γj + δt + υijt .                                (7)
  24
     Results are reported in the appendix, Table E.2. Price risk is measured by the coeﬃcient of variation
of trend-corrected farm harvest prices. For more information on how the variables are constructed please
refer to appendix B.




                                                   14
The dependent variable is the risk index of household i’s crop portfolio at time t. Dijt
represents a household’s access to the NREGS. Let Xit be a set of time-varying house-
hold characteristics that aﬀect preferences and crop choice (such as education, wealth,
income and past experience with shocks) and ui be time-constant unobserved household
characteristics (such as risk aversion, farming ability and land quality). Zjt is a set of
time-varying village-level characteristics (e.g. weather trends, extension services, prices,
etc.), γj are time-constant village characteristics (such as the land’s suitability for certain
crops), δt is a time ﬁxed-eﬀect and υijt is the error term.
       Taking the ﬁrst diﬀerence removes unobserved household and village level character-
istics that are constant over time:25


           Rij = Rij,t+1 − Rij,t = β1 Dij + β2 Xi + β3 Zj +             δ+     υij .               (8)


For β1 to have a causal interpretation, the diﬀerences in the change of the risk index
between the treatment and control groups must be entirely due to the NREGS. This
assumption could be violated for a number of reasons. First, since the access to the
NREGS is non-random, treatment could be correlated with potential outcomes of Rijt .
Second, households in the treatment and control group may not be following parallel
trends in their crop choices. The remainder of this section discusses how I address these
points.
       This article uses four diﬀerent treatment variables. First, as discussed above, I explore
the universal nature of the NREGS by coding as ‘treated’ those households based in
districts where the NREGS was introduced in 2006. Second, I use lagged block-level
disbursements under the program as an indicator of the intensity of treatment, arguing
that households living in blocks with higher past disbursements expect employment to
be more readily available in situations of need. The average lagged disbursement in
treatment districts is INR 14.27 Mio. with a standard deviation of 9.64 in 2009/10.
Third, following the same logic, I use the lagged annual total of employment person-
  25
   With two time periods, taking the ﬁrst diﬀerences is essentially the same as estimating the model in
ﬁxed eﬀects.



                                                  15
days generated per job card at the block-level. In 2009/10, the number of person-days
generated was 11.15 on average with a standard deviation of 5.58. Fourth, I explore the
self-selection of households into the program by comparing the changes in the risk index
of households who were registered with the NREGS by 2007 with the rest of the sample.
       At the district level, the NREGS should have been introduced in the poorest districts
ﬁrst. This could potentially bias the estimates downwards because poorer districts are
less likely to have extension services and marketing structures in place that would enable
households to seize the opportunity to plant more proﬁtable cash crops. However, in most
states - and in Andhra Pradesh in particular - the prioritization of the poorest districts
was not systematically implemented. In this sample, the general economic characteristics
of treatment and control districts do not diﬀer greatly.26 The treatment intensity at the
block level should also be exogenous to potential outcomes. Estimates could be biased
if funds allocated to blocks responded to rainfall shocks and if these rainfall shocks also
aﬀected a household’s input allocation decision. However, the amount of funds to be
sanctioned per block is deﬁned between December and March for the following ﬁnancial
year (April to March). Since I am using lagged values of disbursed funds, these amounts
are ﬁxed 14 to 18 months before household’s decide on their input allocation.27 Lastly, I
explore diﬀerences in crop choices across households who registered with the NREGS or
not. Here, the possibility that unobserved shocks or other time-varying variables aﬀect
both the decision to register and a household’s crop choice cannot be ruled out. I employ
matching techniques to reduce selection bias, but this is admittedly not suﬃcient to rule
out non-random assignment.
       The parallel trends assumption could be violated due to diﬀerences in crop produc-
tivity which cause the share of certain crops in total input allocation to increase inde-
pendently of the NREGS. Given the small number of districts in the sample, this could
signiﬁcantly bias the results. District-wise time trends in the risk index of crop produc-
tion are displayed in Figure 1. One of the treatment districts (Mahaboobnagar) displays
  26
    See appendix B and Table E.3 for more information.
  27
    It is also ﬁxed between 6 and 8 months before the start of the monsoon, which could aﬀect next
years input allocation through time-lags in the eﬀect of shocks. For more information on the time line,
see appendix B.


                                                  16
a decreasing trend in the risk index, while all other districts seem to be following the
same trend.
      Another - more subtle - violation of the parallel trends assumption could emerge
from mean reversion in the dependent variable. Why might households with riskier
crop portfolios display a negative change in the risk index? The reason could be eﬀects
of lagged shocks on current input choices which are rooted in the non-separability of
production and consumption decision of agricultural households (Sadoulet and De Janvry,
1995). In a world with imperfect credit markets and risk, past shocks aﬀect current wealth
and therefore also current input allocation decisions. If household wealth is perfectly
captured by the data, controlling for changes in wealth should eliminate any bias. If
wealth is, however, also reﬂected in soil nutrition, which is aﬀected by weather shocks
and not captured in the data, then controlling for wealth is not suﬃcient (Foster and
Rosenzweig, 2010a).
      Assume that the risk index of each household’s crop portfolio follows a modiﬁed AR(1)
process, where - in the absence of a shock - the risk index at time t + 1, Rt+1 , is equal to
a linear transformation of the risk index of the previous period plus some random noise,
                      28
e.g ρRt +     t+1 .        In contrast, if a shock occurs, households with higher risk in their crop
portfolio also face higher losses in agricultural production. This forces them to choose a
more conservative crop portfolio in the following period. Formally, this process can be
described as follows:


        Rt+1 = ρRt + δut + g (Rt )ut +         t+1 .                                            (9)


The shock ut has expected value zero and g (Rt ) is a ﬂexible function of input allocation,
which allows shocks to have a diﬀerential eﬀect on next seasons crop choice, depending
on the level of Rt . In the absence of any program eﬀect, the observed change in crop
 28
      For expositional purposes, I drop all subscripts except the time subscript.




                                                       17
choice would be the following:


           R = Rt+1 − Rt

             = (ρ − 1)Rt + δut + g (Rt )ut +   t+1 .                                           (10)


       In expectation this change would be E ( R) = (ρ − 1)Rt . A placebo treatment eﬀect
is zero in expectation only if the process approaches a random walk (e.g. ρ = 1) or if
the distribution of Rt is equal in treatment and control groups. The placebo treatment
eﬀect is also diﬀerent from zero if the occurrence of lagged shocks ut is diﬀerent in both
groups. The low number of districts used in this analysis warrants special attention to
this phenomenon. As discussed earlier, baseline levels of risk as well as the occurrence of
shocks are substantially diﬀerent between treatment and control groups. I estimate the
importance of mean reversion in the control group only and ﬁnd estimates of ρ − 1, δ and
g (Rt )ut equal to −0.70, 0.08 and −0.44 respectively.29
       I account for shock induced mean reversion by adjusting equation (8) in a way that
eliminates sources of correlation between        Dij and (υij,t+1 − υij,t ). Using equation (10)
to rewrite eq. (8) yields:


           Rij = β1 Dij + β2 Xi + β3 Zj +              δ

                         + (ρ − 1)Rijt + δujt + g (Rijt )ujt +        υij .                    (11)


Following Chay, McEwan, and Urquiola (2005), I estimate a simpliﬁed version, such as:


           Rij = β1 Dij + β2 Xi + β3 Zj +              δ

                         + β4 Rijt + β5 ujt + β6 Rijt ujt +   υij .                            (12)


       Before proceeding, one last empirical challenge needs to be addressed: within cluster
correlation in      υij . Throughout the article, I assume that the ﬁrst-diﬀerenced errors
  29
   The standard errors are 0.03, 0.08 and 0.19 respectively. I use the level and the square of Rt as
approximation for g (Rt ). Detailed results can be found in Table E.4. in the appendix.




                                                18
are equicorrelated at the block level and estimate all equations in feasible GLS (FGLS)
to improve eﬃciency (Cameron and Miller, 2015).30 To guard against misspeciﬁcation
of the error structure, I additionally calculate Eicker-White standard errors clustered at
the sub-district (block) level or district level depending on the level of aggregation of the
regressors.
       Since the number of clusters is fairly small, these standard errors are likely to be
downward biased. Inference on the main hypothesis is therefore based on p-values ob-
tained from performing a wild cluster-bootstrap with Rademacher weights as suggested
by Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008).31 In a more recent paper, Cameron and Miller
(2015) suggest the use of Webb’s (2014) weights if the number of clusters is smaller than
ten, which seems reasonable when using a district level treatment variable. P-values of the
respective treatment variable using both versions of the bootstrap with 4,999 replications
are reported in the results section.32



5        Results

This section starts by presenting estimates for an agricultural production function. It
proceeds by assessing the extent to which the NREGS can actually support households
in this sample in coping with shocks, which is the precondition for expecting any insurance
eﬀect. This section then analyzes the eﬀects of the NREGS on households’ crop choices
and presents a number of robustness checks.


5.1       Identifying proﬁtable production strategies

To understand inhowfar households’ crop choice can improve their income from agricul-
tural production, I estimate an agricultural production function, linking the total value of
  30
      Estimation if FGLS is more eﬃcient than OLS as it speciﬁes a model for the error variances.
  31
      This approach was applied, inter alia, by Adrianzen (2014) to data clustered in 26 villages and by
Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013) to 28 quarter-year groups.
   32
      The wild cluster-bootstrap calculates t-statistics for each bootstrap sample and estimates rejec-
tion rates based on the resulting distribution of t-statistics. Because this method does not calculate
standard errors, I report clustered standard errors throughout the text. Implementation of the boot-
strap in Stata is done based on the do-ﬁle written by Douglas Miller, which can be accessed online:
http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/dlmiller/stataﬁles/.


                                                  19
agricultural output Qijt to input allocation Kijt , labor Lijt , plot size Aijt and risky crop
choice Rijt . The agricultural production function is assumed to be translog, in which the
choice of crops aﬀects output multiplicatively,


                  β1 β2 β3 g (Rijt )
         Qijt = (Kijt Lijt Aijt )e   .                                                            (13)


Because it seems very likely that increasing the average risk in a crop portfolio is only
beneﬁcial to a certain extent, beyond which risk is simply too high to increase output,
g (Rijt ) is a non-linear function. The production function described in equation (13) can
be estimated by log-transforming the data and controlling for shocks Zijt , unobserved
characteristics γij and time eﬀects δt . Again, g (Rijt ) is approximated by the level and
the square of Rijt :


                                                                                     2
         ln(Qijt ) = β0 + β1 ln(Kijt ) + β2 ln(Lijt ) + β3 ln(Aijt ) + β4 Rijt + β5 Rijt

                  + β6 Zijt + γij + δt + υijt .                                                   (14)


The production function is estimated in FGLS. The estimates suggest that households
could signiﬁcantly raise the value of their agricultural production if they were to increase
the share of inputs allocated to riskier crops (c.f. Table 2). However, this is only true up
to a certain level. The square of the risk index is statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level
in all speciﬁcations. Based on the estimates in col. (4), predicted agricultural output
reaches its maximum at a risk index of 0.41.33 Beyond this point, a further increase
in risk would reduce total agricultural output. Average risk levels in households’ crop
portfolios are well below this value; in the survey round of 2007 the average risk index
was 0.36 in the treatment group and 0.26 in the control group (c.f. Table 1).
       As can be seen from columns (1) and (2) of Table 2, the estimates are not aﬀected
by the exclusion of labor from the agricultural production function. The analysis here is
restricted to the survey round of 2007.34 Columns (3) and (4) show estimates from the
  33
    C.f. Figure D.4 in the appendix.
  34
    I cannot control for labor in the panel data models, because time information was only collected in
2007 and not in 2009/10.


                                                   20
ﬁrst-diﬀerenced sample. In column (4), the eﬀect of rainfall is allowed to vary with the
amount of risk in a household’s crop portfolio. The interaction term of rainfall and the
risk index is positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level. At the optimal risk level
of 0.41, the marginal eﬀect of rainfall is as high as 0.22 with a standard error of 0.15.
Other variables, such as the amount of inputs allocated, total cultivated area and labor
have the expected sign and are all statistically signiﬁcant.35
       The robustness of these results can be gauged by comparing returns per hectare of
diﬀerent crops to the variability of these returns.36 Plotting average returns against the
standard deviation of these returns in Andhra Pradesh, reveals a clear positive relation-
ship between average returns and their volatility, indicating again that the riskiness of
crops is strongly correlated with returns to producing these crops (c.f. Figure 2).37


5.2       Does the NREGS support households in coping with shocks?

Next, I estimate to which extent the NREGS helps households in coping with shocks.
The theoretical argument presented in Section 2 is based on the premise that work pro-
vision within the NREGS suﬃciently reacts to increasing demand in the case of a shock.
This can be tested by analyzing whether deviations from mean rainfall levels, as well as
households’ self-reported shocks, drive changes in the number of days households report
to have worked for the NREGS. The analysis is restricted to phase one districts; thus
only households who had access to the NREGS in both survey rounds are considered.
       The results suggest that the number of days worked for the NREGS changes consider-
ably with variation in rainfall levels (c.f. Table 3).38 The greatest change is observed for
  35
     The share of area under irrigation seems to increase output levels. In contrast, the dummies in-
dicating whether or not a household applied fertilizer or high yielding variety (HYV) seeds are not
statistically signiﬁcant. This might seem somewhat surprising, but since expenditure on fertilizer and
seeds is included in variable inputs, one should not attribute too much weight to this ﬁnding.
  36
     These statistics are available at the state-level for major crops and for the years 1996 to 2006 from
the Cost of Cultivation Statistics.
  37
     Many of these commodities are traded internationally, such that risk-aversion of farmers alone can
probably not explain the observed correlation between the riskiness of crops and their returns. Other
reasons could be diﬀerences in the concentration of supply or demand between crops. Analyzing the
reasons for the apparent relationship between risk and returns in crop portfolios is beyond the scope of
this article.
  38
     In the ﬁrst two columns, the total number of days worked in the past 12 months is the dependent
variable; in the last two columns it is the log of this variable.



                                                   21
lagged rainfall levels - that is, cumulative rainfall in the agricultural year preceding the
period of reference. The coeﬃcient of the lagged rainfall variable is negative 66.2, which
implies that households worked 6.6 more days for the NREGS if lagged rainfall levels were
10% below average. This supports the assumption that the NREGS helps households in
coping with shocks, because households use the program to smooth income ex post - for
instance, after harvest and after agricultural products have been sold.39 Self-reported
shocks also seem to increase the number of days worked for the NREGS, although the
eﬀect is not statistically signiﬁcant.40
       To quantify the contribution of the NREGS to households’ risk coping, agricultural
losses due to rainfall shortages can be compared with income gains through the NREGS.
The agricultural production function estimated in Table 2 (col. 6) suggests that a de-
viation from average annual rainfall by negative 25%, would reduce agricultural output
by 5.6% at the optimal level of the risk index. For the average household, this implies a
nominal loss of about INR 1,654 (or US$ 35.7 in constant July 2006 values). The same
deviation in lagged rainfall would lead households to work about 16.5 more days for the
NREGS, which would generate an additional income of INR 1,067 (US$ 23) at mean
wages observed in the sample. The NREGS thus allows households to compensate about
64% of agricultural production losses caused by rainfall shortages. Since rainfall ﬂuctu-
ations are among the most important sources of risk for rural households, these results
suggest that the NREGS could indeed have an insurance eﬀect in Andhra Pradesh.


5.3       The eﬀects of the NREGS on households’ crop choices

Table 4 reports estimates of the eﬀect of the NREGS on households’ input allocation
decisions. As described in Section 4, all equations are estimated in the ﬁrst-diﬀerenced
sample, and controls for initial conditions are included in columns (2), (4) and (6). To iso-
late the insurance eﬀect, controls include variables that might be aﬀected by the NREGS
and might inﬂuence a household’s crop choice through eﬀects other than the insurance
  39
     Similar evidence is provided by Johnson (2009), who ﬁnds that the number of days households work
for NREGS increases if rainfall levels are lower than average.
  40
     The variable is coded as one of a household reported any of 12 self-reported shocks related to
agricultural production.


                                                 22
eﬀect. These variables are household oﬀ-farm income and wealth, as well as key farming
characteristics, such as the size of cultivated land, irrigation and total value of variable
inputs allocated.41 All speciﬁcations also control for self reported shocks, access to other
government programs and rainfall levels (current and lagged). The constant captures
state-wide changes in input and output prices, weather trends that are not captured by
rainfall data and other changes at the state level that could inﬂuence a household’s crop
choice.
       The results show a positive eﬀect of the NREGS on the risk index of a household’s
crop portfolio. Consistent with the higher prevalence of shocks in the treatment districts
and higher initial values of the risk index, controlling for mean reversion increases the
estimated eﬀect of the NREGS. Given the low number of clusters, inference should be
based on the p-values obtained from the wild-cluster bootstrap. The eﬀect of the in-
troduction of the NREGS at district level is statistically signiﬁcant at the 10% and 5%
level in columns (1) and (2), respectively (using Webb weights). In columns (3) to (6),
alternative explanatory variables such as cumulative expenditure and total employment
generated per job card under the NREGS are considered. The coeﬃcient on cumulative
spending in the sub-district is statistically signiﬁcant at the 10% and 5% level, depend-
ing on the speciﬁcation considered. Only the amount of employment generated in the
sub-district does not yield statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects when inference is based on the
wild-cluster bootstrap.
       Results presented in column (2) suggest that the risk index in households’ crop port-
folios increased by 7.2 percentage points due to the introduction of the NREGS at the
district level. Given that the risk index in the treatment group was 0.36 at baseline, the
introduction of the NREGS raised the average risk index to 0.43 (absent any shock in-
duced mean reversion), which is remarkably close the optimal risk index of 0.41 identiﬁed
in Table 2.
  41
    Household oﬀ-farm income consists, inter alia, of income generated through the NREGS in the past
12 months. Optimally, this should be a lagged value because input allocation decisions are taken at
the beginning of the season, while the income variable refers to the time period shortly after these
allocative decisions were taken. Unfortunately, the survey does not include this information. Table E.5
in the appendix shows that the results are not inﬂuenced by changes in income or changes in total input
allocation.


                                                  23
       In terms of economic relevance, the results suggest that per additional day of em-
ployment generated in the block, each household would increase the risk index by 0.24
percentage points (col. 6). One standard deviation increase in the number of person-days
generated per job card (6.9) would increase a household’s risk index by 1.66 percentage
points and raise net income from agricultural production, ceteris paribus, by about INR
640 (or US$ 13.9). This is particularly interesting from a cost-beneﬁt perspective, since
these net income gains per household are higher than the wage cost (evaluated at the
sample average of observed NREGS wages) of creating 6.9 days of employment under
the NREGS, e.g. INR 467 (US$ 10). Of course, wage costs make up for only a part of
overall program costs and not all of the NREGS participants own their own land, but
nevertheless the magnitude of this eﬀect is striking.


5.4       Robustness checks

This section presents a number of robustness checks. The ﬁrst robustness check is in-
tended to rule out the possibility that the observed eﬀects is not due to the NREGS. The
second set of robustness checks is intended to rule out potential alternative mechanisms
through which the NREGS could aﬀect crop choices.
       As a ﬁrst robustness check, I test whether households that registered with the NREGS
change their input allocation more strongly than households who are not registered with
the NREGS. To account for potential self-selection bias, I match households on their
probability to register with the NREGS by using entropy balancing, a method developed
by Hainmueller (2012).42 Table 5 reports the eﬀects of registering with the NREGS
on the risk index of households’ crop portfolios. I ﬁnd that households that already
registered with the NREGS in 2007 are more likely to grow a higher share of risky crops
in the follow-up period. Five diﬀerent speciﬁcations are presented: Columns (1) and
(2) show estimates without matching, where column (2) additionally controls for initial
conditions. Column (3) excludes all households that did not register with the NREGS
  42
    More details on the matching strategy can be found in appendix C. The distribution of the propensity
scores is displayed in Figure D.5, and the resulting covariate balance is shown in Table E.6.




                                                  24
by 2009/10.43 Column (4) shows estimates for the matched sample. As we can see, the
eﬀects are only slightly smaller when matching households on their probability to register
with the NREGS. Overall, the eﬀects are of a similar size in most speciﬁcations though
somewhat lower than the estimates presented in Table 4, column (2). Column (5) shows
the estimation results for the full sample without matching. Here, being registered by
2009/10 is the main explanatory variable. As we would expect, households that registered
with the NREGS only shortly before or even after deciding on their crop portfolio, did
not alter their input allocation in a meaningful way.
    As mentioned before, the NREGS can aﬀect household decisions via diﬀerent mech-
anisms. This set of robustness checks seeks to understand if the observed eﬀect of the
NREGS is indeed an insurance eﬀect and not due to alternative mechanisms such as the
increase in income of participating households or the change in agricultural wages. If, for
example, risky crops are also more capital intensive, then observed outcomes could also
be driven by increases in income and wealth or better access to credit of participating
households. Likewise, if risky crops are also less labor intensive, then observed outcomes
could be driven by wage changes due to the NREGS instead of its insurance eﬀect. I
therefore test if the NREGS aﬀects on the labor intensity or cost intensity of households’
crop portfolios (c.f. Table 6). Labor intensity per crop is calculated as the share of
expenditures on labor in total production costs. Cost intensity is deﬁned as the total
production cost that has to be incurred per hectare for each crop.44 The coeﬃcient on
labor intensity is positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 10% level in one of the two
speciﬁcations. This indicates that the NREGS, if anything, increases the labor intensity
of crop portfolios (c.f. cols. (1) and (2)). The coeﬃcient on cost intensity is also posi-
tive, suggesting that households are able to spend more on their agricultural production.
Again, only one out of two speciﬁcations is statistically signiﬁcant at conventional levels
(c.f. cols (3) and (4)). I can therefore not rule out the possibility that the observed
  43
     This is to exclude all households from the sample that - either because they consider it socially
undesirable or because they have other means of risk coping - would probably never register with the
NREGS.
  44
     Both measures are based on the crop-wise Cost of Cultivation Statistics, published by the Ministry
of Agriculture. See appendix B for more details.



                                                  25
change in the risk index is driven by the fact that the cultivation of riskier crops is also
more costly, and households are becoming wealthier due to the NREGS.
       As a ﬁnal set of robustness checks, I explore the extent to which heterogeneity in
treatment eﬀects is in line with the predictions of the theoretical model.45 I ﬁnd evidence
that households who registered with the program in 2007 while experiencing a shock to
agricultural production (i.e. a rainfall shock), adjusted their production portfolio towards
riskier crops, while households who registered with the NREGS despite experiencing
favorable rainfall levels did not alter their production decisions.46 This suggests that
households might register with the NREGS for diﬀerent reasons. For some households,
consumption needs are a much more important reason for registering with the program
than the insurance eﬀect. These households would need to work for the NREGS as
much as possible to satisfy their consumption needs - even in good years, and are not
likely to cultivate higher-risk crops despite working for the NREGS. Other households
might rely on the NREGS only to cope with shocks; these would also be the households
that are enabled to adjust their input allocation towards more proﬁtable crops through
the insurance eﬀect. I also ﬁnd suggestive evidence that treatment eﬀects are smaller
in villages with existing watershed development projects, crop insurance programs and
public works schemes, which would be in line with the NREGS having an insurance
eﬀect. If households already have access to other insurance or risk mitigation mechanisms,
they do not need the NREGS to cope with shocks. However, none of these village-level
diﬀerences are statistically signiﬁcant at the 10% level.



6        Conclusions

This article presents theoretical and empirical evidence that an employment guarantee,
such as the NREGS in India, improves households’ ability to cope with shocks in agricul-
ture by guaranteeing income opportunities in areas where and time periods when they
previously did not exist. By improving the risk management of households, the NREGS
  45
    Results are reported in the appendix, Table E.7.
  46
    For better visualization, the marginal eﬀect of registering with the NREGS conditional on lagged
rainfall is plotted in Figure D.6 in the appendix.


                                                26
enables households to switch their production towards riskier but also higher proﬁtability
products and to generate higher incomes from agricultural production.
   The results of this article show that public works programs can have welfare eﬀects
that go beyond immediate income eﬀects. The insurance eﬀect of the NREGS on agri-
cultural productivity is similar to the eﬀects of rainfall insurance analyzed by Cole, Gine,
and Vickery (2013), Mobarak and Rosenzweig (2013), and Karlan et al. (2014). But in
contrast to purchasing insurance, registration with the NREGS provides little ex ante cost
to these households. Since trust-related considerations continue to limit the uptake of in-
surance products in many countries, providing public works schemes - combined with an
employment guarantee - could be an alternative option with which to protect households
against agricultural production risks and to enable productivity gains in agriculture.
   Current discussions regarding the eﬀects of the NREGS on agricultural productivity
focus mainly on the trade-oﬀ between providing minimum income to poor households, on
one hand, and ensuring that production costs in the agricultural sector do not rise too
drastically due to increased agricultural wages, on the other hand. As this article shows,
these discussions have failed to consider the following key aspect: because the number of
workdays each household is entitled to additionally aﬀects its risk management capacity,
the amount of risk each household is willing to take in his own agricultural production
- and therewith potential productivity gains - crucially depends on the number of days
each household can expect to be able to work in the case of production shocks. Thus,
increasing the number of days each household is entitled to work with the NREGS could
increase agricultural productivity - an argument that has been largely ignored so far.
The assumption that only large-scale farmers can raise agricultural productivity is still a
mainstream one. Including in the discussion the eﬀects of the NREGS on households’ risk
management and the resulting changes in production decisions might change the overall
picture.
   The ﬁndings here contain some lessons for the ongoing debates on the eﬀectiveness
of the NREGS and for other countries considering the implementation of such schemes.
First, for the insurance eﬀect to unfold, the design of a public works program is crucial.


                                            27
An employment guarantee that is entitled by law and entails adequate grievance re-
dress mechanisms provides households with the necessary protection against agricultural
production risks to enable them to take more risks in their production and investment de-
cisions. Additionally, it is crucial not to severely limit the number of workdays, otherwise
such a scheme’s potential as a risk-coping instrument cannot be realized. Second, im-
plementation matters. The data analyzed in this article cover only the state of Andhra
Pradesh. This is, inter alia, because the performance of the NREGS in terms of the
number of workdays generated per eligible household varies immensely across states and
even across districts in India. Andhra Pradesh is one of the best performing states in
the implementation of the NREGS, so it goes without saying that many of the eﬀects
captured in this article might not be found in all Indian states. Third, working for a
public works scheme is always associated with opportunity costs. In countries or regions
with well functioning oﬀ-farm labor markets, providing public works schemes might not
be necessary. A food-for-work program or cash-for-work program is only eﬀective in areas
and time periods where labor is in surplus.



References

Adrianzen, M.A. 2014. “Social Capital and Improved Stoves Usage Decisions in the North-
  ern Peruvian Andes.” World Development 54:1 – 17.

Akosa Antwi, Y., A.S. Moriya, and K. Simon. 2013. “Eﬀects of Federal Policy to Insure
  Young Adults: Evidence from the 2010 Aﬀordable Care Act’s Dependent-Coverage
  Mandate.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5:1–28.

Barrett, C., S. Holden, and D.C. Clay. 2005. “Can food-for-work programmes reduce vul-
  nerability?” In S. Dercon, ed. Insurance against poverty . New York: Oxford University
  Press, pp. 361–386.

Berg, E., S. Bhattacharyya, R. Durgam, and M. Ramachandra. 2012. Can rural public




                                              28
  works aﬀect agricultural wages? Evidence from India . CSAE Working Paper 2012-05,
  Oxford: Center for the Study of African Economies.

Bhargava, A.K. 2014. The impact of India’s rural employment guarantee on demand for
  agricultural technology . IFPRI Discussion Paper 1381, Washington, DC: International
  Food Policy Research Institute.

Binswanger-Mkhize, H.P. 2012. “Is there too much hype about index-based agricultural
  insurance?” The Journal of Development Studies 48:187–200.

Cameron, A.C., J.B. Gelbach, and D.L. Miller. 2008. “Bootstrap-Based Improvements
  for Inference with Clustered Errors.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90:414– 427.

Cameron, A.C., and D.L. Miller. 2015. “A Practitioner’s Guide to Cluster-Robust Infer-
  ence.” Journal of Human Resources 50:317–372.

Carter, M.R., A. de Janvry, E. Sadoulet, and A. Sarris. 2014. Index-based weather insur-
  ance for developing countries: A review of evidence and a set of propositions for up-
  scaling . FERDI Working Paper P111, Clermont-Ferrand: Fondation pour les Etudes
  et Recherches sur le Developpement International.

Chay, K.Y., P.J. McEwan, and M. Urquiola. 2005. “The Central Role of Noise in Evaluat-
  ing Interventions That Use Test Scores to Rank Schools.” American Economic Review
  95:1237–1258.

Cole, S., X. Gine, J. Tobacman, R. Townsend, P. Topalova, and J. Vickery. 2013. “Barriers
  to household risk management: Evidence from India.” American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics 5:104–135.

Cole, S., X. Gine, and J. Vickery. 2013. How does risk management inﬂuence production
  decisions? Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment . World Bank Policy Research Working
  Paper 6546, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Deininger, K., and Y. Liu. 2013. Welfare and Poverty Impacts of India’s National Rural



                                           29
  Employment Guarantee Scheme: Evidence from Andhra Pradesh . World Bank Policy
  Research Paper 6543, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Dercon, S., and L. Christiaensen. 2011. “Consumption risk, technology adoption and
  poverty traps: Evidence from Ethiopia.” Journal of Development Economics 96:159–
  173.

Desai, P., Sonalde amd Vashishtha, and O. Joshi. 2015. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
  Employment Guarantee Act: A Catalyst for Rural Transformation . New Delhi: Na-
  tional Council of Applied Economic Research.

Duﬂo, E., M. Kremer, and J. Robinson. 2008. “How high are rates of return to fertilizer?
  Evidence from ﬁeld experiments in Kenya.” The American Economic Review 98:482–
  488.

Dutta, P., R. Murgai, M. Ravallion, and D. Van de Walle. 2012. Does India’s Employment
  Guarantee Scheme Guarantee Employment? . World Bank Policy Research Working
  Paper 6003, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Fafchamps, M. 1993. “Sequential labor decisions under uncertainty: An estimable house-
  hold model of West-African farmers.” Econometrica 61:1173–1197.

Fetzer, T. 2014. Can Workfare Programs Moderate Violence? Evidence from India . Sun-
  tory and Toyota International Centres for Economics and Related Disciplines, LSE,
  Working Paper 53, London: London School of Economics.

Foster, A.D., and M.R. Rosenzweig. 2010a. Is There Surplus Labor in Rural India? .
  Department of Economics Working Paper 85, New Haven, CT: Yale University.

—. 2010b. “Microeconomics of technology adoption.” Annual Review of Economics 2:395–
  424.

Galab, S., S. Vijay Kumar, P. Prudvikhar Reddy, R. Singh, and U. Vennam. 2011. The
  Impact of Growth on Childhood Poverty in Andhra Pradesh: Initial Findings from
  India . Young Lives Round 3 Survey Report: India, Oxford: University of Oxford.

                                          30
Hainmueller, J. 2012. “Entropy balancing for causal eﬀects: A multivariate reweight-
  ing method to produce balanced samples in observational studies.” Political Analysis
  20:25–46.

Imbert, C., and J. Papp. 2015. “Labor Market Eﬀects of Social Programs: Evidence from
  India’s Employment Guarantee.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
  7:233–63.

Jayachandran, S. 2006. “Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks in
  Developing Countries.” Journal of Political Economy 114:538 – 575.

Jha, R., R. Gaiha, and M.K. Pandey. 2012. “Net transfer beneﬁts under India’s Rural
  Employment Guarantee Scheme.” Journal of Policy Modeling 34:296–311.

Johnson, D. 2009. Can Workfare Serve as a Substitute for Weather Insurance? The Case
  of NREGA in Andhra Pradesh . Centre for Micro Finance Working Paper Series No 32,
  Chennai: Institute for Financial Management and Research.

Karlan, D., R. Osei, I. Osei-Akoto, and C. Udry. 2014. “Agricultural Decisions after
  Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129:597–652.

Kaur, S. 2014. Nominal Wage Rigidity in Village Labor Markets . Working Paper, New
  York: Columbia University.

Klonner, S., and C. Oldiges. 2014. Safety Net for India’s Poor or Waste of Public Funds?
  Poverty and Welfare in the Wake of the World’s Largest Job Guarantee Program .
  Department of Economics Working Papers 0564, Heidelberg: University of Heidelberg.

Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India. 2012. MGNREGA Sameeksha: An
  Anthology of Research Studies on the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
  Guarantee Act, 2005. 2006-2012, edited and compiled by Mihir Shah, Neelakshi Mann
  and Varad Pande . New Delhi: Orient BlackSwan.

Mobarak, A.M., and M.R. Rosenzweig. 2013. “Informal Risk Sharing, Index Insurance,
  and Risk Taking in Developing Countries.” American Economic Review 103:375–80.

                                          31
Muralidharan, K., P. Niehaus, and S. Sukhtankar. forthcoming. “Building state capacity:
  Evidence from biometric smartcards in India.” American Economic Review , pp. .

Sadoulet, E., and A. De Janvry. 1995. Quantitative development policy analysis . Balti-
  more, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Shah, M., and B.M. Steinberg. 2015. Workfare and Human Capital Investment: Evi-
  dence from India . NBER Working Paper 21543, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Suri, T. 2011. “Selection and Comparative Advantage in Technology Adoption.” Econo-
  metrica 79:159–209.

Van Den Berg, M. 2002. “Do public works decrease farmers’ soil degradation? Labour
  income and the use of fertilisers in India’s semi-arid tropics.” Environment and Devel-
  opment Economics 7:487–506.

Webb, M.D. 2014. Reworking Wild Bootstrap Based Inference for Clustered Errors .
  Queen’s Economics Department Working Paper 1315, Ontario: Queen’s University.




                                           32
Figures

                                 Figure 1: District-wise risk-index of land use



                        .5
                        .45 .4
                   Risk Index
                   .35  .3
                        .25




                                 1998   2000   2002      2004   2006    2008      2010

                                                Anantapur         Cuddapah
                                                Karimnagar        Mahaboobnagar
                                                Srikakulam        West Godavari


 Source: Author’s estimation based on the Land Use Statistics and District-wise Crop Production
                             Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture, GoI.




                                                        33
                                 Figure 2: Returns per hectare of major crops
                           20000




                                                                                                      Tobaco
                           15000
                    Std. Deviation




                                                                                                        Sugarcane
                        10000
                           5000




                                                                                             Urad       Onion
                                                                                   Cotton
                                     Ragi                      Arhar
                                                                           Paddy               Gram
                                                   Jowar           Moong
                                      Groundnut              Sunflower
                                                  Maize
                                                     Bajra
                           0




                                     −5000                         0                        5000          10000
                                                                            Mean


Source: Author’s estimation based on the Cost of Cultivation Statistics for Andhra Pradesh, Ministry
                                        of Agriculture, GoI.




                                                                           34
Tables




         35
                            Table 1: Baseline characteristics
                                                    Treatment         Control
                                                   Mean   SD        Mean   SD            p-value
          Household characteristics
Male household head                       0.96  0.20                 0.97     0.18         0.41
Age of household head                    41.93 12.13                 41.02    11.85        0.25
Household head is literate                0.32  0.47                  0.24     0.43        0.01
Household size                            6.10 2.62                   5.61     2.08        0.00
Wealth index                              0.39  0.13                 0.39     0.20         0.79
Annual income, oﬀ-farm activities        24.70 24.82                 19.82    26.17        0.00
Hh beneﬁts from credit/training program   0.62  0.49                 0.58      0.49        0.17
Any serious debts                         0.63  0.48                  0.47     0.50        0.00
Able to raise 1000 rupees in one week     0.61  0.49                 0.33     0.47         0.00
            Farm characteristics
Value of agr. production                 28.49 45.76                24.43 125.14           0.56
Value of variable inputs                 14.51 21.34                14.46 69.62            0.99
Area cultivated (acres)                   4.15  4.57                 2.74  5.47            0.00
Time in crop production (hours per year)  2085 2280                 1369   1310            0.00
Irrigated area (% of total)               0.18  0.32                 0.14  0.31            0.07
Fertilizer (dummy)                        0.98  0.15                 0.87  0.33            0.00
HYV seeds (dummy)                         0.77 0.42                  0.63  0.48            0.00
Participated in labor sharing (dummy)     0.75  0.43                 0.78  0.41            0.23
Risk index of crop portfolio              0.36  0.12                 0.26  0.08            0.00
SD of crop returns                       2472 1110                  3111   2129            0.00
Risk index (CV of trend corrected yield)  0.22  0.10                 0.16  0.07            0.00
Risk index (alt. aggregation)             0.37  0.12                 0.27  0.08            0.00
Price risk of crop portfolio              0.15 0.04                  0.18  0.08            0.00
SD of portfolio return                    2239 1093                 2889   2125            0.00
Labor intensity of crop portfolio         0.27  0.07                 0.28  0.07            0.00
Cost intensity of crop portfolio         21166 7374                 26207 10097            0.00
Herﬁndahl index of crop portfolio         0.76  0.25                 0.80  0.23            0.00
Number of crops                           2.04  1.03                 2.08  1.33            0.65
                   Shocks
Rainfall (deviation)                      0.33  0.28                 -0.06     0.16        0.00
Rainfall (deviation, lag)                -0.39 0.10                  -0.12     0.10        0.00
Self-reported shock                       0.81  0.39                  0.52     0.50        0.00
            NREGS participation
Household registered with NREGS           0.66  0.47                 0.00      0.00        0.00
Household generated income from NREGS 0.54      0.50                 0.00      0.00        0.00
Income, NREGS                             1.24 2.39                  0.00      0.00        0.00
Observations                              750                        337
Notes: All values in constant INR 1,000 (July 2006). One US$ is equivalent to 46.38 INR (July 2006).
Variable deﬁnitions and sources are described in appendix B.
Source: Author’s estimation based on the Young Lives data.




                                                36
                       Table 2: Agricultural Production Function
                                       2007 cross-section                 First Diﬀerences
                                          (1)       (2)                     (3)       (4)
                                              ∗∗
Risk index of crop portfolio            5.981    6.236∗∗                  6.948 ∗
                                                                                    6.546∗
                                       (2.039) (2.013)                   (3.182)   (3.015)
Risk index of crop portfolio (squared) -7.526∗∗ -7.275∗∗                 -8.339 ∗
                                                                                    -8.619∗
                                       (2.363) (2.249)                   (4.054)   (3.827)
Variable inputs (log)                  0.887∗∗∗ 0.818∗∗∗                 0.746 ∗∗∗
                                                                                   0.753∗∗∗
                                       (0.112) (0.106)                   (0.124)   (0.123)
Area cultivated (acres, log)           0.790∗∗∗ 0.622∗∗                  0.667 ∗∗∗
                                                                                   0.681∗∗∗
                                       (0.232) (0.202)                   (0.194)   (0.191)
Labour (hours, log)                              0.230∗∗∗
                                                 (0.056)
Rainfall (deviation)                    -0.349    -0.401                   -0.010      -1.164+
                                       (0.436) (0.422)                    (0.155)      (0.627)
Rainfall (deviation) × Risk index                                                       3.386∗
                                                                                       (1.580)
Observations                                        1087       1087        1087          1087
R2                                                  0.299      0.323       0.127        0.130
Notes: Estimation in FGLS. Dep. var.: Income from agricultural production (log). Additional
controls are share of area under irrigation, fertilizer application, HYV seeds application, labor
sharing, rainfall (deviation), rainfall (deviation, lag), self-reported shocks, and time trend.
Cols. (1) & (2) additionally control for household characteristics: age, sex, and education
of household head, and household size. Standard errors (clustered at the the sub-district) in
parentheses. ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                               37
            Table 3: Number of days worked with NREGS
                              (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)
                               NREGS days          NREGS days (log)
                                  ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
Rainfall (deviation, lag) -67.245     -66.185     -3.128∗∗∗ -3.102∗∗∗
                           (16.498)    (16.803)    (0.881)   (0.841)

Rainfall (deviation)           -30.766∗∗∗     -33.383∗∗∗    -1.006+       -1.096∗
                                 (6.795)        (6.883)     (0.576)       (0.523)

Self-reported shock              1.918          1.774        0.144         0.141
                                (4.148)        (4.500)      (0.093)       (0.102)

Additional controls               No             Yes          No            Yes
Observations                      740            740          740           740
R2                               0.055          0.070        0.087         0.100
Notes: Estimation in FGLS. Dep. var.: No. of days a household worked for the
NREGS in the past 12 months. Time trend and region-time trends included, but
not reported. Cols. (2) and (4) additionally control for area cultivated (acres,
log), wealth index of the household, and if household beneﬁts from credit/training
program. Standard errors (clustered at the sub-district) in parentheses. + p < 0.10,
∗
  p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                         38
                  Table 4: Eﬀect of the NREGS on risk index of crop portfolio
                                                          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)
NREGS introduced in district                            0.038∗      0.072∗∗
                                                        (0.011)     (0.017)
Cumulative expend., NREGS (log, lag)                                            0.007∗∗    0.015∗∗∗
                                                                                (0.002)    (0.003)
Employment per JC generated, NREGS (lag)                                                                0.002+         0.002
                                                                                                        (0.001)       (0.002)

Rainfall (deviation) at baseline                                    0.120∗                   0.102                    0.130+
                                                                    (0.051)                 (0.073)                   (0.075)

Risk index at baseline                                              -0.602∗∗∗              -0.659∗∗∗                 -0.659∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.061)                (0.038)                   (0.038)

Risk index × Rainfall (deviation)                                    -0.110                  -0.055                    -0.069
                                                                    (0.142)                 (0.097)                   (0.099)
Bootstrap p-value of main treatment variable
Rademacher weights:                                      0.107       0.047       0.072       0.015       0.326         0.388
Webb weights:                                            0.099       0.045       0.062       0.013       0.315         0.391

Observations                                             1087        1087        1087        1087        1087          1087
R2                                                       0.068       0.443       0.066       0.431       0.058         0.389
Notes: Estimation in FGLS. Dep. var.: Risk index of a household’s crop portfolio. Additional controls are variable inputs (log),
area cultivated (log), share of area under irrigation, fertilizer application, HYV seeds application, labor sharing, annual income
from oﬀ-farm activities (log), if household beneﬁts from credit/training program, rainfall (deviation), rainfall (deviation, lag),
self-reported shocks, and time trend. Standard errors (clustered at the district in cols. (1) and (2) and at the sub-district in
cols. (3) to (6)) in parentheses. P-values are obtained by performing a wild cluster-t bootstrap with 4,999 replications and two
alternative weights. + p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                               39
  Table 5: Eﬀect of registration with the NREGS on risk index of crop portfolio
                                    (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)        (5)
                                        +        ∗∗∗       ∗∗       ∗
NREGS registered (2007)           0.019    0.022     0.034    0.026
                                 (0.010) (0.006)     (0.010)  (0.010)
NREGS registered (2009/10)                                                                       0.007
                                                                                                (0.006)
Rainfall (deviation) at baseline                         0.175∗∗    0.194∗∗∗      0.205∗∗       0.227∗∗∗
                                                         (0.054)    (0.055)       (0.061)       (0.056)
Risk index at baseline                                -0.635∗∗∗     -0.572∗∗∗    -0.477∗∗∗     -0.500∗∗∗
                                                       (0.040)       (0.058)      (0.073)       (0.061)
Risk index × Rainfall (deviation)                         -0.134     -0.276∗      -0.373∗       -0.342∗
                                                         (0.096)     (0.128)      (0.146)       (0.136)
Observations                                1087           1087        838         1087          1087
R2                                          0.058         0.402       0.459        0.387         0.395
Notes: Estimation in FGLS (col. (4) in OLS). Dep. var.: Risk index of a household’s crop portfolio.
Cols. (1), (2) & (5) present results for the full sample without matching. Col. (3) restricts the sample
to households who have registered with the NREGS by 2009/10. Col. (4) matches households based
on baseline characteristics. Additional controls are variable inputs (log), area cultivated (log), share of
area under irrigation, fertilizer application, HYV seeds application, labor sharing, annual income from
oﬀ-farm activities (log), if household beneﬁts from credit/training program, rainfall (deviation), rainfall
(deviation, lag), self-reported shocks, and time trend. Standard errors (clustered at the sub-district) in
parentheses. + p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                                    40
         Table 6: Eﬀect of NREGS on labor and cost intensity
                              Labor intensity                       Cost intensity
                               (1)      (2)                        (3)          (4)
                                   ∗                                   ∗∗∗
NREGS introduced in district 0.011                             1727.235
                             (0.004)                            (382.798)

NREGS registered (2007)                             0.003                        743.686
                                                   (0.005)                      (498.628)
Observations                             1010       1010           1010           1010
R2                                       0.03       0.03           0.03           0.02
Notes: Estimation in FGLS. Dependent variable in cols. (1) & (2) is labor intensity of
crop portfolio, in cols. (3) & (4) cost intensity of crop portfolio. Additional controls
are area cultivated (log), share of area under irrigation, fertilizer application, HYV seeds
application, labor sharing, if household beneﬁts from credit/training program, rainfall
(deviation), rainfall (deviation, lag), self-reported shocks, and time trend. Variable deﬁ-
nitions and sources are described in appendix B. Standard errors (clustered at the district
in cols. (1) and (3), and clustered at the sub-district in cols. (2) and (4)) in parentheses.
+
   p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.




                                            41
      APPENDIX


A         Mathematical Appendix

Deterministic Case

In the deterministic case, the Lagrange can be summarized as follows:


        L =U1 (C1 ) + δU2 (C2 )
                             d    s
               + λ(w1 (T1 − l1 − l1 ) − g (id + is ) + B − C1 )
                          r
               + µ[(p − αw2 )(Qd + Qs ) + w2 T2 − (1 + r)B − C2 ]

               + ϕ(B m − B )

               + ρ(1 − ad − as )


Diﬀerentiating the Lagrange with respect to the choice variables, leads to the following
ﬁrst order conditions:47

         ∂L      ∂U1
              =         −λ=0                                                      (A.1)
         ∂C1     ∂C1
         ∂L        ∂U2
              =δ        −µ=0                                                      (A.2)
         ∂C2       ∂C2
         ∂L                                 ∂f d
           d
             = −  λw  1 +  µ ( p − αw   2 )    d
                                                  =0                              (A.3)
         ∂l1                                ∂l1
         ∂L                                 ∂f s
           s
             = − λw   1 + µ  ( p − αw  2  )    s
                                                 =0                               (A.4)
         ∂l1                                ∂l1
                                             d
         ∂L                          r ∂f
             = −  λg  +  µ ( p −  αw 2 )         =0                               (A.5)
         ∂id                              ∂id
                                             s
         ∂L                          r ∂f
             = −  λg  +  µ (p  −  αw 2 )        =0                                (A.6)
         ∂is                              ∂is
                                   d
         ∂L                  r ∂f
             =  µ ( p − αw   2 )     −γ =0                                        (A.7)
         ∂ad                     ∂ad
                                   s
         ∂L                  r ∂f
             =  µ (p  − αw   2 )     −γ =0                                        (A.8)
         ∂as                     ∂as
         ∂L
             = λ − µ(1 + r) − ϕ = 0                                               (A.9)
         ∂B
 47                                 d d
      Remember that Qd = f d (ad , l1                           s s
                                      , i ) and Qs = f s (as , l1 , i ).




                                                           1
Rearranging the ﬁrst order conditions (S.1.1) and (S.1.2) gives:

       ∂U1
     λ=                                                                              (A.10)
       ∂C1
         ∂U2
     µ=δ                                                                             (A.11)
         ∂C2

And including (S.1.10) and (S.1.11) into (S.1.3)-(S.1.9) gives our decision rules:

                                                               ∂U
        ∂U1          r    ∂U2 ∂f d       ∂f d       w1      ∂C1
                                                               1

     w1     − (p − αw2 )δ       d
                                   = 0 ⇔   d
                                              =        r     ∂U2
                                                                                     (A.12)
        ∂C1               ∂C2 ∂l1        ∂l1    (p − αw2 ) δ ∂C
                                                                2
                                                               ∂U
        ∂U1          r    ∂U2 ∂f s    ∂f s     w1      ∂C1
                                                          1

     w1     − (p − αw2 )δ       s
                                   =0⇔ s =        r     ∂U2
                                                                                     (A.13)
        ∂C1               ∂C2 ∂l1     ∂l1  (p − αw2 ) δ ∂C
                                                                       2
                                                              ∂U
         ∂U1          r    ∂U2 ∂f d       ∂f d       g       ∂C1
                                                                1

     g       − (p − αw2 )δ          = 0 ⇔      =        r     ∂U2
                                                                                     (A.14)
         ∂C1               ∂C2 ∂id        ∂id    (p − αw2 ) δ ∂C
                                                                   2
                                  s           s              ∂U1
         ∂U1          r    ∂U2 ∂f      ∂f            g       ∂C1
     g       − (p − αw2 )δ        s
                                    =0⇔ s =             r     ∂U2
                                                                                     (A.15)
         ∂C1               ∂C2 ∂i      ∂i   (p      − αw2 ) δ ∂C
                                                                 2

     ∂f d   ∂f s
          =                                                                          (A.16)
     ∂ad    ∂as
          ∂U1             ∂U2
     ϕ=       − δ (1 + r)                                                            (A.17)
          ∂C1             ∂C2

   Equation (S.1.17) can be rewritten to describe the optimal consumption rule over
both periods given credit constraints:

      ∂U1             ∂U2
          = δ (1 + r)     +ϕ                                                         (A.18)
      ∂C1             ∂C2

If the credit constraint is binding, ϕ is greater than zero and the marginal utility from
consumption in the planting period greater than the discounted marginal utility from
consumption in the harvesting period. This means that consumption in the planting
stage is lower than what could be achieved if the credit constraints were not binding.
Including equation (S.1.18) into equation (S.1.14) also reveals the eﬀect of the credit
constraint on input allocation:

      ∂f d    g (1 + r)       gϕ
         d
           =          r
                        +            ∂U2
                                                                                     (A.19)
      ∂k     (p − αw2 ) (p − αw2r
                                  )δ ∂C 2




                                             2
If the credit constraint is not binding, ϕ = 0, the marginal product of input allocation
is lower and input allocation higher. The same eﬀect holds for input allocation to the
stochastic crop Qs , as well as for labor allocation to each of the crops.


Stochastic Case

When introducing uncertainty, the Lagrange becomes the following:


                                  d    s
        L =U1 (C1 ) + λ(w1 (T1 − l1 − l1 ) − g (id + is ) + B − C1 ))
                                        r
              + E [δU2 (C2 ) + µ[(p − αw2 )(Qd + Qs ) + w2 T2 − (1 + r)B − C2 ]]

              + ϕ(B m − B )

              + ρ(1 − ad − as )


      Note here that the household forms expectations not only about the utility he derives
from consumption in period 2, but also about the level of consumption that can be
achieved. Diﬀerentiating the Lagrange with respect to the choice variables, leads to the
following ﬁrst order conditions:48

         ∂L     ∂U1
              =          −λ=0                                                       (A.20)
         ∂C1    ∂C1
         ∂L            ∂U2
              = E [δ         − µ] = 0                                               (A.21)
         ∂C2           ∂C2
                                                        d
         ∂L                                      r ∂f
           d
             = − λw    1 + E   [ µ ]( p −  αw    2 )    d
                                                           =0                       (A.22)
         ∂l1                                         ∂l1
                                                         s
         ∂L                                     r ∂f
           s
             = − λw    1 + E   [ µ ( p −  αw   2 )      s
                                                           ]=0                      (A.23)
         ∂l1                                         ∂l1
                                                      d
         ∂L                                   r ∂f
             = − λg    +  E [ µ  ](p   − αw   2 )        =0                         (A.24)
         ∂id                                       ∂id
                                                      s
         ∂L                                  r ∂f
             = − λg    +  E [ µ  (p  −   αw  2 )        ]=0                         (A.25)
         ∂is                                       ∂is
                                           d
         ∂L                         r ∂f
             = E [µ](p − αw2 ) d − γ = 0                                            (A.26)
         ∂ad                            ∂a
                                           s
         ∂L                        r ∂f
             =  E [ µ (p −  αw     2 )       ]−γ =0                                 (A.27)
         ∂as                            ∂as
         ∂L
             = λ − E [µ](1 + r) − ϕ = 0                                             (A.28)
         ∂B
 48                                 d d
      Remember that Qd = f d (ad , l1                           s s
                                      , i ) and Qs = f s (as , l1 , i ).


                                                             3
Rearranging (S.1.20) and (S.1.21) gives:

               ∂U1
       λ=                                                                              (A.29)
               ∂C1
                     ∂EU2
       E [µ] = δ                                                                       (A.30)
                      ∂C2

And the optimal consumption rule becomes:

           ∂U1            ∂EU2
               = (1 + r)δ      + ϕ.                                                    (A.31)
           ∂C1             ∂C2

The consumption rule - equation (S.1.31) - changes slightly when introducing uncertainty
because for any expected consumption level C2 , expected utility EU2 (C2 ) is lower than
the utility of the expected value U2 (E (C2 )), and marginal expected utility is higher than
the marginal utility of the expected value. Since all other variables remain constant,
C2 has to be higher relative to C1 under uncertainty for the identity to hold. This is
equivalent with the well-known argument that risk decreases current consumption levels
and enhances savings.
                                                                                         d
    Including (S.1.29) and (S.1.30) into (S.1.22)-(S.1.27) gives our decision rules for l1 ,

             ∂U1          r    ∂EU2 ∂f d
       w1        − (p − αw2 )δ        d
                                         =0
             ∂C1                ∂C2 ∂l1
                                    ∂U
               ∂f d       w1       ∂C1
                                      1

           ⇔     d
                    =        r
                                                                                       (A.32)
               ∂l1    (p − αw2 ) δ ∂EU
                                    ∂C2
                                        2




     s
for l1 ,

                                  s
            ∂U1              r ∂f         ∂U2
       w1         − (p − αw2  ) s δE [         ]=0
            ∂C1                 ∂l1       ∂C2
                           s
                      r ∂f     ∂EU2                  ∂U2             ∂U1
           ⇔ (p − αw2  ) s δ[          E [ ] + cov (       , )] = w1
                        ∂l1 ∂C2                      ∂C2             ∂C1
                                   ∂U                 ∂U
             ∂f s        w1        ∂C1
                                      1
                                                cov ( ∂C2  , )
           ⇔ s =              r    ∂EU
                                          −              2
                                                                                       (A.33)
              ∂l1    (p − αw2 ) δ ∂C
                                       2
                                        2
                                             (p − αw2 )δ ∂EU
                                                       r
                                                             ∂C2
                                                                2




                                                     4
for id ,

           ∂U1           r    ∂EU2 ∂f d
       g       − (p − αw2  )δ            =0
           ∂C1                 ∂C2 ∂id
                                   ∂U1
             ∂f d       g          ∂C1
           ⇔ d =             r
                                                                                 (A.34)
             ∂i     (p − αw2   ) δ ∂EU
                                    ∂C
                                       2
                                        2



for is ,

                                 s
           ∂U1             r ∂Q         ∂U2
       g        − (p − αw2   ) s δE [        ]=0
           ∂C1                ∂i        ∂C2
                           s
                      r ∂f     ∂EU2                 ∂U2            ∂U1
           ⇔ (p − αw2  ) s δ[         E [ ] + cov (       , )] = g
                        ∂i      ∂C2                 ∂C2            ∂C1
                                   ∂U1               ∂U2
             ∂f  s
                         g         ∂C1
                                               cov ( ∂C2 , )
           ⇔ s =              r    ∂EU
                                         −                                       (A.35)
              ∂i     (p − αw2 ) δ ∂C
                                      2
                                       2
                                            (p − αw2  r
                                                        )δ ∂EU
                                                            ∂C2
                                                               2




for ad ,

                              d
            ∂EU2        r ∂f
       δ         (p − αw2 ) d =γ
             ∂C2           ∂a

and as ,


              r    ∂f s      ∂U2
       (p − αw2 )     s
                        δE [     ]=γ
                   ∂a        ∂C2
                          s
                    r ∂f      ∂EU2               ∂U2
           ⇔ (p − αw2 ) sδ         E [ ] + cov (     , )=γ
                        ∂a ∂C2                   ∂C2

resulting in:



                                  ∂U2
           ∂f s   ∂f d      cov ( ∂C   , )
                =      −             2
                                              .                                  (A.36)
           ∂as    ∂ad    (p − αw2  r
                                     )δ ∂EU
                                         ∂C2
                                            2




    The decision rules can be reformulated to include the credit constraint. Then, input
allocation to the risky crop is determined as follows:

                                                         ∂U2
           ∂f s    g (1 + r)       gϕ              cov ( ∂C   , )
                =          r
                             +          ∂EU
                                              −             2
                                                                                 (A.37)
           ∂k s   (p − αw2 ) (p − αw2
                                    r
                                      )δ ∂C22   (p − αw2  r
                                                            )δ ∂EU
                                                                ∂C2
                                                                   2




                                                     5
We can see from equation (S.1.37) that both risk and credit constraints go in the same di-
rection and reduce the input allocation to the risky crop. More importantly, it also shows
that uncertainty reduces input allocation to the risky crop relative to the deterministic
crop even if credit constraints are not binding.




                                            6
B      Data Description

Young Lives Survey

    • Reference periods: In most questions the references period of the YLS are the 12
      months prior to the date of interview. However, for all questions on agricultural
      production, the period of reference is a particular agricultural year. In 2007, the
      reference period for agricultural production was June 2005 to May 2006. In 2009/10,
      the reference period was June 2008 to May 2009. In order to be consistent with the
      survey data, I use this deﬁnition of the agricultural year throughout the paper.

    • Wealth index: The wealth index is calculated as a simple average of housing quality,
      consumer durables and services. Housing quality is the simple average of rooms per
      person and indicator variables for the quality of roof, walls and ﬂoor. Consumer
      durables are the scaled sum of 12 variables indicating the ownership of items such
      as radios, fridges, televisions, phones or vehicles. Services are calculated as the
      simple average of dummy variables indicating households’ access to drinking water,
      electricity, toilets and fuels. For more information on the wealth index refer to the
      Young Lives data justiﬁcation documents at http://www.younglives.org.uk.


Crop production

In this paper, the agricultural year refers to the period June to May in order to be
consistent with the YLS. Agricultural production in India generally takes place over
two seasons: the rainy (Kharif) and the dry (Rabi) season. Most agricultural output is
produced during the rainy season, which, in Andhra Pradesh, lasts roughly from June to
September. Planting of major crops such a rice and cotton starts in May and needs to be
completed before end of July. The most important input allocation decision thus takes
place around May and June of every year, which is before the monsoon’s rainfall is fully
observed.


    • Risk index of major crops: The riskiness of crops is calculated from crop- and


                                            7
district-wise yield data in the six survey districts over the period 1998/99 to 2011/12.
I calculate the coeﬃcient of variation of each crop’s yield in each of the survey dis-
tricts. In the calculation of the risk index, I use the average of the district level
coeﬃcient of variation. The data were obtained from the District-wise crop pro-
duction statistics, Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture,
GoI, and are available online: http : //apy.dacnet.nic.in.

This data is available for 26 crops, which represents about 90% of the crop produc-
tion in the YLS sample. The risk index for household i given input allocation k to
crop m is deﬁned as Ri =      rm km /    kn , where rm is the coeﬃcient of variation of
the yield of crop m. Note here, that rm is only available for a subset of all crops n,
such that m ⊆ n. The way in which I treat these missing crops could potentially
aﬀect my results. In all results, I implicitly treat crops with missing risk data as
having a risk measure of zero, which obviously biases my results. To reduce this
bias, I drop all observations from the sample which have no crop in their portfolio
for which risk information is available, e.g.       km = 0 or Ri = 0, in one or both of
the survey rounds.

In order to gauge the robustness of my results, I recalculate the main results using a
range of alternative risk measures, see Table E.2. In column (1), I use the coeﬃcient
of variation of the trend-corrected yield as risk measure for each crop. In column
(2), I compute a risk measure that takes into account only those crops for which
                                alt
information is available, e.g. Ri   =   rm km /         km . Here rm is again the coeﬃcient
of variation of the yield of crop m. And ﬁnally, column (3) uses the CV of trend-
corrected prices as dependent variable, col. (4) the SD of portfolio returns and in
col. (5) the Herﬁndahl index of the crop portfolio. A description of how price risk
and the SD of portfolio returns is calculated can be found below.

To calculate the risk-index in district-level land use (Figure 1), I merge this in-
formation with the district wise land use statistics, which are also available from
the Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture, GoI. The risk
index is calculated as follows: Rjt =       rm amjt /     amjt , where amjt is the land allo-

                                        8
  cated to crop m in district j at time t and rm is the coeﬃcient of variation of crop
  m.

• Cost and Labor intensity: The cost and labor intensity of crops is calculated from
  the cost of cultivation statistics for Andhra Pradesh from 1995/96 to 2009/10.The
  data were obtained from the Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of
  Agriculture, GoI, and are available online: http : //eands.dacnet.nic.in.

  This data is available for 11 crops, which represents about 80% of the crop pro-
  duction in the YLS sample. I calculate the cost intensity for each crop cm as the
  average production cost per hectare indicated by the data. The cost intensity index
  per household is the Ci =       cm km /       kn , where km are the inputs allocated to
  crop m. The labor intensity is calculated as the share of labor cost in total produc-
  tion cost as indicated by the same data. The aggregation method is also the same:
  Li =    lm km /   kn . Again, I drop all observations with           km = 0 in one or both
  of the survey rounds.

• Portfolio risk: Portfolio risk is calculated as the square root of the variance in
  portfolio returns. Consistent with modern portfolio theory, the variance of portfolio
  return is deﬁned as σ 2 =     wi σ 2 =    i    i=j   wi wj σi σj ρij , where wi is the share of
  crop i in the portfolio, σi is the standard deviation of the return of crop i and ρij
  is the correlation coeﬃcient of returns of crop i and j . The variance of portfolio
  returns is calculated using the crop-wise returns per hectare in the cost of cultivation
  statistics for Andhra Pradesh from 1995/96 to 2009/10. The data were obtained
  from the Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture, GoI, and
  are available online: http : //eands.dacnet.nic.in.

• Price risk: Price risk is calculated as the weighted average of the coeﬃcient of
  variation of trend-corrected Farm Harvest Prices in Andhra Prasdesh. District-level
  Farm Harvest Prices are available for 13 crops and the years 1998/99 to 2009/10.
  The data were obtained from the Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry
  of Agriculture, GoI, and are available online: http : //eands.dacnet.nic.in.

                                            9
Rainfall data

The rainfall data used in this paper were compiled by the Directorate of Economics
and Statistics, Government of Andhra Pradesh. Rainfall data are available at the sub-
district (i.e. block) level for the years 2002/03 to 2011/12. Rainfall deviation and rainfall
deviation (lag) describe the relative deviation of cumulative rainfall over the agricultural
year (June - May) from the long-term average, e.g. devrain05/06 = (rf 05/06 − rf )/rf .
For the 2007 round of interviews, current rainfall uses the 2005/06 rainfall, and lagged
rainfall uses rainfall in the agricultural year 2004/05. For the 2009/10 round of interviews,
current rainfall uses the rainfall in the agricultural year 2008/09, and lagged rainfall uses
data from the agricultural year 2007/08.


NREGS data

The implementation of the NREGS was intended prioritize India’s 200 poorest districts,
subsequently extending to the remaining districts. India has a total of 655 districts, of
which 625 had introduced the NREGS as of 2008. The 30 remaining district were urban
districts. In 2003 the Planning Commission of India elaborated clear rules stating which
districts should be included in which round of implementation of the NREGS. However,
the process of district selection was inﬂuenced by political considerations due to the huge
size and ﬁnancial relevance of this program and the rules elaborated by the Planning
Commission were not strictly followed.


   • NREGS introduced in District: This variable is an indicator which equals 1 if a
      household has access to the NREGS at the district level at the beginning of the
      agricultural cycle (i.e. when most input allocation decisions have to be taken). The
      YLS was collected in six districts, four of which are treatment districts: Anan-
      tapur, Cuddapah, Karimnagar and Mahaboobnagar, and two are control districts
      Srikakulam and West Godavari.

      The period of reference for the 2007 round of interviews is the agricultural year
      2005/06 (June 2005 to May 2006). According to the Employment Generation Re-


                                             10
      port of the Government of Andhra Pradesh, NREGS activities started in April
      2006 in half of the ‘treatment’ sub-districts and in May 2006 in the other half of
      the ‘treatment’ sub-districts. I therefore set, Dijt equal to 0 for all households at
      baseline.49

      The period of reference for the 2009/10 interviews is the agricultural year 2008/09.
      By that time, NREGS works had started in the districts Anantapur, Cuddapah,
      Karimnagar and Mahaboobnagar. In Srikakulam and West Godavari the introduc-
      tion of the NREGS was in August 2007 and in March 2008 respectively. Since
      activities started only slowly in most sub-districts of Srikakulam, I treat this dis-
      trict as control district despite the introduction of the NREGS mid 2007. Figure
      D.1 in the appendix shows monthly employment creation at the sub-district level
      in Srikakulam and West Godavari, as well as the average for all ‘treatment’ sub-
      districts. As can be seen, two sub-districts in Srikakulam had substantial NREGS
      employment creation in the two months before the relevant agricultural year. In
      order to gauge the robustness of my results to treatment timing, I exclude these two
      districts from my analysis in Table E.1 in the appendix. As expected the estimated
      eﬀect of the NREGS increases when excluding one or both of these sub-districts.

   • Treatment intensity, NREGS: Cumulative expenditure and number of person-days
      of employment generated at the block level are used to capture the treatment in-
      tensity of the NREGS. Data are retrieved from Government of Andhra Pradesh,
      Department for Rural Development, http : //www.nrega.ap.gov.in, and cover the
      respective ﬁnancial year (April to May).

      The amount sanctioned per village depends on a village’s list of projects, which has
      to be approved by the block (i.e. sub-district) program oﬃcer. The block program
      oﬃcer has to estimate employment demand for the following ﬁnancial year and
      consolidate all village lists before submitting the Block Employment Guarantee
      Plan to the district program coordinator. The district council (zilla parishad) has
 49
    Data were retrieved from the Department of Rural Development, Government of Andhra Pradesh,
and are available online: http : //www.nrega.ap.gov.in.



                                              11
to approve all plans before transferring them to the state government.




                                     12
C      Matching strategy

In this paper, I use entropy balancing as matching strategy. Entropy balancing seems
to outperform most existing matching algorithms in terms of the balance reached on
the entire set of relevant covariates (Hainmueller 2012). The matching algorithm assigns
weights to all observations in the control group such that the distribution of selected
variables matches the observed distribution in the treatment group. These weights can
then be used as sampling weights in the estimation. Since I estimate the model on a
balanced sample, the same weights can be applied to the 2009/10 round of interviews.
    I match households on the mean and the variance of variables that determine a house-
hold’s registration with the NREGS and potentially inﬂuence post-treatment outcomes,
such as cost incurred in agricultural production, total cultivated area, percentage of area
irrigated, a dummy indicating whether a household participates in labor sharing in agri-
culture, wealth levels and oﬀ-farm income, and household characteristics, e.g. education,
age and sex of the household head, indebtedness, and the ability to raise INR 1,000 (US$
21.6) in one week. The resulting covariate balance is shown in Table E.6. This method
focusses on the covariate balance and less on the common support among the treatment
and control group. In order to understand how comparable both groups are in terms of
the selected variables, I estimate the propensity score for each household based on the
selection variables described above, and plot its distribution in Figure D.5. As can be
seen, there is substantial overlap in the estimated propensity scores.




                                            13
D      Supplementary Figures

           Figure D.1: Block-wise NREGS employment per Jobcard (monthly)


                                                                    15.00
                          Employment (per jobcard) generated, NREGS
                       0.00           5.00            10.00




                                                         April 2007                   July 2007         October 2007   January 2008         April 2008

                                                                                               Average treatment             Buttayagudem
                                                                                               Srikakulam                    Seethampeta
                                                                                               Regidi Amadalavalasa          Kotabommali
                                                                                               Mandasa                       Eluru



     Source: Author’s estimation based on Employment Generation Report, Department of Rural
                           Development, Government of Andhra Pradesh.



                                                                                Figure D.2: Distribution of risk-index
                                                       15
                      Kernel density
                                                       10
                                                       5
                                                       0




                                                                            0             .2                  .4            .6                  .8

                                                                                                  Treatment, 2007          Control, 2007
                                                                                                  Treatment, 2009          Control, 2009



Source: Author’s estimation based on District-wise Crop Production Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture,
                                    GoI, and Young Lives data.




                                                                                                            14
                                                 Figure D.3: Distribution of change in risk index


                                                     15
                                                     10
                         Kernel density
                                                     5
                                                     0




                                                             -.5                       0                                     .5

                                                                                Treatment             Control



Source: Author’s estimation based on District-wise Crop Production Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture,
                                    GoI, and Young Lives data.




           Figure D.4: Agricultural output as function of the riskiness of crops
                                                     40000
                     Predicted agricultural output
                                                     30000
                                                     20000
                                                     10000
                                                     0




                                                             0             .2                        .4                           .6
                                                                           Risk index of crop portfolio

                                                                   95% Confidence interval                Predicted output


                    Source: Author’s estimation based on the Young Lives data.




                                                                                   15
                                             Figure D.5: Distribution of the propensity score


                                                   2.5
             Kernel density of Propensity Score
                                                   2
                                                   1.5
                                                   1
                                                   .5
                                                   0




                                                         0                    .2                  .4                 .6                 .8
                                                                                            Propensity Score

                                                                                         Treatment                   Control


                                Source: Author’s estimation based on Young Lives data.




Figure D.6: Eﬀect of the NREGS on risk index conditional on lagged rainfall
                                                   .1
             Marginal effect of NREGS registered
                                                   .08
                                                   .06
                                                   .04
                                                   .02
                                                   0




                                                         -.5   -.4      -.3        -.2      -.1        0    .1        .2       .3      .4         .5
                                                                                         Rainfall (deviation, lag)

                                                                     90% Confidence Interval                Marginal Effect of NREGS registered



            Source: Author’s estimation based on the Young Lives data.




                                                                                                  16
E   Supplementary Tables

             Table E.1: Sensitivity of results to treatment timing
                                       (1)                   (2)        (3)          (4)
       NREGS introduced in district 0.038∗∗∗               0.041∗∗    0.040∗∗      0.045∗∗
                                    (0.011)                (0.014)    (0.013)      (0.015)
       Observations                   1087                  1003       1003          941
       R2                            0.068                  0.070      0.070        0.072
       Notes: Estimation in FGLS. Column (1) reports main results, col. (2) excludes
       Seethampeta sub-district, col. (3) excludes Mandasa sub-district, and col. (4) ex-
       cludes both sub-districts. Dep. var.: Risk index of a household’s crop portfolio.
       Additional controls are variable inputs (log), area cultivated (log), share of area un-
       der irrigation, fertilizer application, HYV seeds application, labor sharing, annual
       income from oﬀ-farm activities (log), if household beneﬁts from credit/training pro-
       gram, rainfall (deviation), rainfall (deviation, lag), self-reported shocks, and time
       trend. Standard errors (clustered at the district) in parentheses. + p < 0.10, ∗
       p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
       Source: Author’s estimation based on the Young Lives data.




                                                17
                                     Table E.2: Sensitivity of results to alternative dependent variables
                                                 CV detrended yield Riskindexalt CV detrended prices SD of portfolio returns                 Concentration
                                                           (1)               (2)                 (3)                      (4)                       (5)
     NREGS introduced in district                        0.023∗           0.024+              0.014+                  338.413∗                     0.024
                                                        (0.010)           (0.013)             (0.008)                (155.036)                   (0.027)
     Area cultivated (acres, log)                        0.006             0.010∗             -0.007∗                 -187.479                  -0.133∗∗∗
                                                        (0.004)           (0.005)             (0.003)                (133.418)                   (0.023)
     Hh beneﬁts from credit/training program             -0.006            -0.005               0.000                  -42.957                     0.004
                                                        (0.005)           (0.008)             (0.002)                 (81.503)                   (0.008)
     Rainfall (deviation)                               0.010+              0.012              -0.002                   8.942                      0.011
                                                        (0.006)           (0.008)             (0.009)                (112.598)                   (0.028)
     Rainfall (deviation, lag)                          -0.030∗           -0.034∗              -0.018                 -293.702                    -0.032
                                                        (0.012)           (0.015)             (0.015)                (234.946)                   (0.031)
     Self-reported shock                                 0.008∗             0.004              -0.001                  137.167                    -0.008
                                                        (0.004)           (0.005)             (0.004)                (110.967)                   (0.007)
     Irrigated area (% of total)                         -0.025            -0.024               0.001                 -115.958                  -0.108∗∗∗
                                                        (0.017)           (0.017)             (0.007)                (137.550)                   (0.027)
     Fertilizer (dummy)                                  -0.044            -0.046              -0.007                  122.150                     0.013
                                                        (0.030)           (0.034)             (0.012)                (253.983)                   (0.030)
     HYV seeds (dummy)                                    0.007             0.003            -0.005+                  193.225+                   -0.032∗




18
                                                        (0.005)           (0.008)             (0.003)                (114.449)                   (0.013)
     Participated in labor sharing (dummy)             -0.005∗∗            -0.001              -0.002                -134.633∗∗                    0.004
                                                        (0.002)           (0.002)             (0.003)                 (41.143)                   (0.015)
     Observations                                         1087              1087                1050                    1010                       1087
     R2                                                   0.05               0.04               0.02                     0.03                       0.10
     Notes: Estimation in FGLS. The dependent variable in column (1) is the coeﬃcient of variation of the trend-corrected yield, in column (2) the risk
                                                                                                     alt
     index but now taking into account only those crops for which information is available, e.g.Ri       =  rm km / km . The dependent variable in column
     (3) is the CV of trend-corrected prices, in col. (4) the SD of portfolio returns and in col. (5) the Herﬁndahl index of the crop portfolio. For more
     information, refer to appendix B. Standard errors (clustered at the district) in parentheses. + p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
     Source: Author’s estimation based on the Young Lives data.
                            Table E.3: District-level statistics
                                                                   Treatment          Control
GDP per capita (2006/07)                                              783,487         776,179
Rural population (2001 census)                                          80.54           84.64
SC/ST population (2001 census)                                          20.50           18.36
Literacy rate (2001 census)                                              54.6            64.4
Cropping Intensity (2007/08)                                            1.238           1.505
Average wage rate of agric. laborers (2007) Men                         70.26           82.92
                                            Women                       54.91           57.23
Notes: Nominal values in current INR.
Source: Author’s estimation based on the Districts at a Glance statistics, Directorate of Eco-
nomics & Statistics, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh.



                         Table E.4: Evidence on mean reversion
                                                                       (1)             (2)
Risk index of crop portfolio                                        -0.703∗∗∗       -0.476∗∗
                                                                     (0.028)        (0.172)

Rainfall (deviation)                                                  0.083          -0.097
                                                                     (0.082)        (0.279)

Risk index of crop portfolio × Rainfall (deviation)                  -0.439∗         0.818
                                                                     (0.188)        (2.052)

Risk index of crop portfolio (squared)                                               -0.309
                                                                                    (0.211)

Risk index of crop portfolio (squared) × Rainfall (deviation)                        -2.094
                                                                                    (3.639)
Observations                                                           337            337
R2                                                                    0.405          0.420
Notes: Estimation in FGLS. Dependent variable: R = Rt+1 − Rt . Standard errors (clustered at the
sub-district) in parentheses. + p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
Source: Author’s estimation based on the Young Lives data.




                                              19
                                              Table E.5: Robustness to inclusion of controls
                                                             (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)      (6)           (7)          (8)
     NREGS introduced in district                           0.007      0.027∗      0.028∗     0.038∗∗∗     0.059+ 0.069∗∗∗       0.070∗∗∗    0.072∗∗∗
                                                           (0.010)    (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.030) (0.017)       (0.016)      (0.017)
     Rainfall (deviation)                                             0.026∗∗∗    0.027∗∗∗    0.025∗∗∗              0.058         0.061+       0.050∗
                                                                      (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.006)             (0.036)       (0.035)      (0.025)
     Rainfall (deviation, lag)                                        -0.036∗     -0.036∗     -0.044∗∗∗            -0.048+       -0.050+      -0.041∗
                                                                      (0.015)     (0.016)      (0.011)             (0.029)       (0.028)      (0.019)
     Self-reported shock                                               0.007+      0.007+       0.008∗              -0.001        -0.001        0.000
                                                                      (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.003)             (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.004)
     Annual income, oﬀ-farm activities (log)                                        0.001       -0.000                            -0.001      -0.003∗
                                                                                  (0.002)      (0.002)                           (0.001)      (0.001)
     Hh beneﬁts from credit/training program                                       -0.009       -0.011                           -0.010∗∗    -0.013∗∗∗
                                                                                  (0.007)      (0.008)                           (0.004)      (0.004)
     Variable inputs (log)                                                                     -0.016∗                                         -0.005
                                                                                               (0.006)                                        (0.005)




20
     Area cultivated (acres, log)                                                              0.018∗∗∗                                      0.011∗∗∗
                                                                                               (0.002)                                        (0.002)
     Irrigated area (% of total)                                                               -0.033+                                         -0.024
                                                                                               (0.019)                                        (0.015)
     Fertilizer (dummy)                                                                         -0.043                                        -0.028+
                                                                                               (0.032)                                        (0.016)
     HYV seeds (dummy)                                                                          0.013∗                                       0.025∗∗∗
                                                                                               (0.005)                                        (0.006)
     Participated in labor sharing (dummy)                                                      -0.003                                         -0.002
                                                                                               (0.002)                                        (0.002)
     Controls: Rainfall and risk index at baseline           No          No         No            No         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
     Observations                                           1087        1087       1087          1087       1087       1087        1087         1087
     R2                                                     0.001       0.019      0.021         0.068      0.391      0.407       0.416        0.443
                                                                                                                                                     +
     Notes: Estimation in FGLS. Dep. var.: Risk index of a household’s crop portfolio. Standard errors (clustered at the district) in parentheses.
     p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
     Source: Author’s estimation based on the Young Lives data.
                          Table E.6: Weighted summary statistics
                                                Treatment                      Control
                                                                   (not matched)         (matched)
                                              Mean      SD Mean       SD Mean       SD
Value of variable inputs                      12.81 (16.41) 15.91 (55.75) 14.10 (27.61)
Area cultivated (acres)                        3.96 (4.53)   3.50 (5.20)   3.88 (3.85)
Irrigated area (% of total)                    0.14 (0.29)   0.19 (0.33)   0.14 (0.28)
Participated in labor sharing (dummy)          0.79 (0.41)   0.73 (0.44)   0.79 (0.41)
Annual income, oﬀ-farm activities             23.68 (21.48) 22.77 (28.17) 24.45 (26.72)
Male household head                            0.96 (0.19)   0.96 (0.20)   0.96 (0.19)
Age of household head                         41.20 (12.07) 42.02 (12.02) 41.20 (11.79)
Household head is literate                     0.32 (0.47)   0.28 (0.45)   0.32 (0.47)
Wealth index                                   0.37 (0.11)   0.40 (0.19)   0.37 (0.13)
Household size                                 6.02 (2.56)   5.88 (2.40)   6.02 (2.51)
Able to raise 1000 rupees in one week          0.56 (0.50)   0.49 (0.50)   0.56 (0.50)
Any serious debts                              0.67 (0.47)   0.50 (0.50)   0.67 (0.47)
Observations                                    496           591           591
Notes: Data from 2007 round of interviews. All values in constant INR 1,000 (July 2006). One US$ is
equivalent to 46.38 INR (July 2006). Variable deﬁnitions and sources are described in appendix B.
Source: Author’s estimation based on the Young Lives data.




                                                 21
     Table E.7: Interaction with rainfall and previously existing programs
                                             (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)
                                                 ∗∗
NREGS registered (2007)                    0.032
                                           (0.011)

NREGS × Rainfall (deviation, 2005-06)                     -0.070∗∗
                                                          (0.026)

NREGS introduced in district                                          0.080∗∗∗    0.077∗∗∗       0.085∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.015)     (0.017)        (0.019)

NREGS × Crop insurance                                                 -0.019
                                                                      (0.028)

Crop insurance                                                         -0.018
                                                                      (0.023)

NREGS × Watershed dev.                                                              -0.025
                                                                                   (0.019)

Watershed dev.                                                                     0.008+
                                                                                   (0.004)

NREGS × Public works                                                                              -0.021
                                                                                                 (0.014)

Public works                                                                                      0.010
                                                                                                 (0.007)

Controls: Rainfall and risk index at baseline               No          Yes          Yes            Yes

Observations                                               1087        1083         1083          1083
R2                                                         0.043       0.438        0.420         0.417
Notes: Estimation in FGLS. Dep. var.: Risk index of a household’s crop portfolio. Expl. var. in column
(1) is NREGS registered in 2007, and in (2) to (4) is NREGS introduced in district. Additional controls
are variable inputs (log), area cultivated (log), share of area under irrigation, fertilizer application, HYV
seeds application, labor sharing, annual income from oﬀ-farm activities (log), if household beneﬁts from
credit/training program, rainfall (deviation), rainfall (deviation, lag), self-reported shocks, and time
trend. Standard errors (clustered at the sub-district in col. (1) and at the district in cols. (2) to (4)) in
parentheses. + p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
Source: Author’s estimation based on the Young Lives data.




                                                     22
