                                                   WPS8041


Policy Research Working Paper                     8041




Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth
                  A Framework and Case Studies

                             Margaret Mc Millan
                                Dani Rodrik
                             Claudia Sepúlveda




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8041


  Abstract
  Developing countries made considerable gains during the                           countries fared from 1990–2010 in their development quest.
  first decade of the 21st century. Their economies grew at                         The sample includes Brazil, India, Vietnam and four African
  unprecedented rates, resulting in large reduction in extreme                      countries—Botswana, Ghana, Nigeria, and Zambia—all of
  poverty and a significant expansion of the middle class. But                      which experienced rapid growth in recent years, but for dif-
  more recently that progress has slowed with an economic                           ferent reasons. The patterns of growth are analyzed in each
  environment of lackluster global trade, not enough jobs cou-                      of these countries using a unifying framework that draws
  pled with skills mismatches, continued globalization and                          a distinction between the “structural transformation” and
  technological change, greater income inequality, unprec-                         “fundamentals” challenges in growth. Out of the seven coun-
  edented population aging in richer countries, and youth                           tries, the traditional path to rapid growth of export oriented
  bulges in the poorer ones. This essay examines how seven key                      industrialization only played a significant role in Vietnam.




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors
  may be contacted at m.mcmillan@cgiar.org, dani_rodrik@harvard.edu, and csepulveda@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth
                         A Framework and Case Studies




                        Margaret Mc Millan, Dani Rodrik, and Claudia Sepúlveda




Key Words: Structural Change, Productivity Growth, Africa, Asia, Latin America

JEL Codes: F43, J24, O47



________________________________________________________
Margaret Mc Millan (m.mcmillan@cgiar.org), IFPRI and Tufts University; Dani Rodrik
(dani_rodrik@harvard.edu), Harvard Kennedy School; and Claudia Sepúlveda (csepulveda@worldbank.org),
World Bank. Prepared for the book Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth: A Framework and Country
Studies, edited by Margaret Mc Millan, Dani Rodrik, and Claudia Sepúlveda. This project was funded by the
World Bank Knowledge for Change Program. Chapter authors participated in a workshop at the World Bank, co-
hosted by the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) in 2012. We would like to thank all those
who participated as discussants and observers; their comments were extremely helpful in shaping the direction of
this volume. We are also grateful for the assistance of the Publication Review Committee at IFPRI and the
comments received from anonymous reviewers. The authors acknowledge the support of the CGIAR Research
Program on Policies, Institutions, and Markets (PIM) led by IFPRI. Finally, we would like to thank Xinshen Diao
and Ann Harrison for their encouragement and support throughout the process.
 




    Introduction

    The first decade of the 21st century was extraordinarily good for developing countries
    and their mostly poor citizens. Their economies expanded at unprecedented rates,
    resulting in both a large reduction in extreme poverty and a significant expansion of the
    middle class. In fact, their growth rates were an average 4 percentage points faster than
    those of the advanced countries—versus only 1.3 percentage points in the 1990s (Figure
    O.1a). This growth was led by the efforts of China, India, and a small number of other
    Asian countries, and assisted by the weaker economic performance of the rich countries.
    Latin America and Africa resumed growth as well, catching up with—and often
    surpassing—the growth rates they experienced during the 1950s and 1960s. As a result,
    the developing countries moved more quickly to close the income gap with the advanced
    countries (Figure O.1b), a process known as economic convergence. More recently,
    however, that process has slowed down—reflecting a narrowing of the advanced and
    developing country growth rate differentials since 2010—making it unlikely that poorer
    countries will be able to close the development gap with richer countries any time soon.

        What are the growth prospects for developing countries? Two traditions for
    examining and explaining growth exist side by side within economics. The first has its
    roots in development economics and is based on the dual-economy approach (initially
    formalized by Lewis 1954 and expanded upon by Ranis and Fei 1961). It draws a sharp
    distinction between the traditional (agriculture) and modern (industry) sectors of the
    economy, and it assumes that different economic logics are at work within them—and
    therefore the two sectors cannot be lumped together. Accumulation, innovation, and
    productivity growth all take place in the modern sector—often in unexplained ways—
    while the traditional sector remains technologically backward and stagnant. Thus,
    economywide growth depends largely on the rate at which resources— principally
    labor—can migrate from the traditional to the modern sector.




                                                2 
 
 



    FIGURE O.1a With advanced and developing country growth rate differentials narrowing in
    the 2000s . . .

                         10                              Growth rate 1990–2014


                          8

                          6

                          4
               Percent


                          2

                          0
                                 Developing countries growth
                                 Developing countries trend growth
                         –2
                                 High-income countries growth
                                 High-income countries trend growth
                         –4



    Source: World Development Indicators database (World Bank, various years).


    FIGURE O.1b . . . the income gap has been closing more rapidly than in the 1990s

                                             Developing countries GDP per capita as share of
                                          high-income GDP per capita 1990–2014 (in 2011 PPP)
                   25

                                                                                                                     21.9
                   20                                                                                         21.4



                   15
         Percent




                   10


                         5


                         0



    Source: World Development Indicators database (World Bank, various years).
    Note: The gross domestic product (GDP) trend was calculated using a Hodrick-Prescott filter with smoothing parameter equal
    to 6.25; PPP = purchasing power parity.




                                                                         3 
 
 




       The second tradition has its roots in macroeconomics, and derives from
    the neoclassical growth model of Solow (1956). It eschews such distinctions
    and presumes different types of economic activity are structurally similar
    enough to be aggregated into a single representative sector. In neoclassical
    models, growth depends on the incentives to save, accumulate physical and
    human capital, and (in subsequent variants that endogenize technological
    change) innovate by developing new products and processes (Grossman and
    Helpman 1991; Aghion and Howitt 1992).
       These traditions offer complementary perspectives on economic growth.
    One way to combine their insights is to think of the neoclassical model as
    essentially focusing on the growth process within modern sectors, while the
    dual-economy model focuses on relationships and flows among sectors. As
    such, each perspective provides a distinct reason why growth in the lagging
    countries should be not just feasible, but also easy and rapid. In the dual-
    economy world, growth is just a matter of moving traditional farmers into
    modern industries in urban areas where productivity is on a positive trajec-
    tory. In the neoclassical world, physical and human capital levels in devel-
    oping countries are low, and thus returns to accumulation should be high.
    Either way, economic convergence with rich nations should be the norm
    rather than the exception.
       As it turns out, however, those predictions have not been borne out.
    Nevertheless, their failure informs us about the obstacles that need to be over-
    come if economic development is to happen. Using these two sets of models to
    guide us, we can identify two broad development challenges:
     •   The “structural transformation” challenge: How to ensure that resources
         flow rapidly to the modern economic activities that operate at higher levels
         of economic productivity.
     •   The “ fundamentals” challenge: How to accumulate the skills and broad
         institutional capabilities needed to generate sustained productivity
         growth, not just in a few modern industrial sectors but also across the
         entire range of services and other nontradable activities. There is con-
         siderable debate about whether it is primarily the quality of institutions
         (governance, rules of law, and the business environment) or the level of
         human capital (education, skills, and training) that drives long-run levels
         of income (see Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001 versus Glaeser et
         al. 2004). But for our purposes, we can just lump them under the rubric of
         “fundamentals.”



                                             4 
 
 




         The critical question is the relationship between these two challenges,
     especially in Africa, which, until recently, has been largely absent from any
     work on structural change (Box O.1). A major reason for this absence has
     been largely unreliable or nonexistent economic data for most African coun-
     tries. A deeper reason is poverty itself. Until recently, few African countries
     have enjoyed the sustained economic growth needed to trace the patterns of
     structural transformation achieved in earlier decades elsewhere. However,
     since the beginning of this century, African countries have grown at an
     unprecedented pace and in unusual ways, making them especially interesting
     for such research.
         This book speaks directly to our lack of information about structural change
     and growth in developing countries. It includes four African countries—
     Botswana, Ghana, Nigeria, and Zambia—all of which have experienced
     rapid growth in recent years, but for different reasons. They are also inter-
     esting because it does not appear that the process of structural change in
     any of these countries is following the standard patterns that we are familiar
     with from the historical literature or from widely used models of structural
     change. These case studies may thus shed light on both the processes that are
    unfolding at present and some of the barriers that remain. We also include
    two fast-growing Asian countries that appear to be following different paths:
    India and Vietnam. Finally, we include Brazil because of its position as a
    “postindustrial” developing country.
         The authors of these chapters try to answer how much of the growth in
     labor productivity during given time periods can be attributed to the “within-
     sector” versus the “structural change” component, paying particular attention
     to the structural transformation challenge (drawing on the methodology in
     McMillan and Rodrik 2011). While the starting year for each country differs
     depending on data availability, all of the studies cover the period 1990–2010.
     Moreover, the authors painstakingly piece together data to paint a detailed
     account of structural change for subperiods and sectors.
         From these chapters, we learn that the experience with structural change
     has been quite diverse around the world. In particular:
     •   Structural change played only a tiny role in the recent growth performance
         of the middle-income countries of Brazil and Botswana, although it did
         play an important role in launching them into middle-income status.
     •   Structural change contributed significantly to growth in Vietnam and
         Ghana over the past two decades, although their experiences have been
         quite different—with Vietnam undergoing much more industrialization
         than Ghana, where the formal manufacturing sector is still relatively small.

                                            5 
 
 



    Box O.1 An eclectic spin on the two traditions
    From a theoretical perspective, within-sector productivity growth and struc-
    tural change go hand in hand, but there is disagreement as to where the
    process of growth originates. For example, Schultz (1953) argued that in
    a closed-economy setting, advances in agricultural productivity are a pre-
    condition for growth. This view featured prominently in several later pieces,
    including work by Johnston and Mellor (1961), Johnston and Kilby (1975), and
    Timmer (1988). More recently, the role of agriculture has featured promi-
    nently in work by noneconomists, such as Jared Diamond (1997).
        In stark contrast to Schultz (1953), Sir Arthur Lewis (1954) argued that the
    low marginal productivity of farm labor would persist until nonfarm employ-
    ment expanded enough to absorb rural population growth. Moreover, indus-
    trialization could mechanically raise agricultural productivity by reducing the
    size of the labor force in agriculture without affecting output. Subsequent
    work also challenged the link between agricultural productivity growth and
    structural change by using open- rather than closed-economy models (for
    example, Mokyr 1976; Field 1978; Wright 1979; Matsuyama 1992). Rather
    than focusing on international trade, a third strand of the literature began to
    emphasize the “special” properties of industry—such as increasing returns,
    learning by doing, and coordination failures—and called for a “big push”
    type of industrial policy (for example, Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny 1989).
        More recent work on structural change has typically focused on docu-
    menting the stylized facts of structural change, estimating the contribution of
    structural change to economywide productivity growth, and developing multi-
    sector growth models consistent with the stylized facts of structural change.
    This work was recently reviewed in an excellent and extensive piece on
    growth and structural change by Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2013).
        From the perspective of our book, the most important conclusion they
    reach is probably the fact that economists have a substantial amount of data
    regarding the process of structural transformation in today’s advanced econ-
    omies, but we know little about this process in today’s developing econo-
    mies. To what extent are they following different paths from today’s developed
    economies? And if so, what factors give rise to these differences? Specifically,
    Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2013) call for more quantitative studies
    on structural transformation in today’s poor economies—a topic that our book
    tries to shed light on. They also emphasize the importance of two issues that
    they did not examine in their review piece. The first is human capital and its role
    in determining both within- and across-sector productivity growth. The sec-
    ond is market failures and the role for government—notably, the extent to which
    externalities, public goods, market power, or other factors associated with inef-
    ficient equilibrium outcomes—shape the process of structural change.

    Source: Authors.




                                             6 
 
 



     •   Structural change contributed to growth in India, Nigeria, and Zambia,
         but it is not the kind of structural change that China and Vietnam
         enjoyed. Rather, the three countries have seen a less rapid decline in the
         employment share of low-productivity agriculture, exacerbated by the lack
         of a boom in labor-intensive manufacturing for export.
        In short, the policy requirements of rapid structural change do not seem to
    align neatly with conventional recommendations of the “fundamentals” type.
    Despite significant improvements in policy regimes in Africa—macroeconomic
    stabilization, external opening, democratization—the rate and direction of
    structural transformation have been disappointing in this region. And in
    Latin America, although privatization and liberalization may have contrib-
    uted to within-sector productivity growth, they seem to have done so at the
    expense of economywide productivity. In countries with significant unex-
    ploited potential for structural change, there are large payoffs for taking imag-
    inative shortcuts (such as investment zones or competitive currencies) that
    target the development of new industries directly. In other cases, policies must
    remain focused on long-run fundamentals—institutions and human capital.


    A Unifying Framework
     To place these results in perspective, we begin this overview with an overall
    unifying framework for thinking about growth (drawing on Rodrik 2013a).
    We drew above a distinction between the “structural transformation” and
    “fundamentals” challenges in growth—the first focusing on moving resources
    into modern industries, and the second on developing broad capabilities. At
    first sight, these two challenges may seem one and the same, too closely linked
    to be separable. Much of the development literature operates on the assump-
    tion that policy that is good on one front is also good on the other. For exam-
    ple, investing in human capital and improving the legal regime should be good
    for boosting overall productivity, as well as promoting industrial expansion.
    Deregulating industrial restrictions and international trade should be good
    for developing the economy as a whole, as well as fostering entry into new eco-
    nomic activities. What is desirable policy for growth need not differ based
     on whether we look at growth from the perspective of facilitating structural
     transformation or building fundamentals.
         While there is substantial overlap between the two sets of policies, it is also
     clear that the two challenges have somewhat different strategic implications.
     In practice, it may be far easier to promote industrialization directly, by sub-
     sidizing industry in diverse ways or removing specific obstacles to it, than to


                                             7 
 
 




    promote it indirectly by making broad investments in human capital and insti-
    tutions and hoping that these will trickle down to investment incentives in
    industry. It is possible to have rapid structural transformation (in other words,
    industrialization) without significant improvements in fundamentals. East
    Asia is the premier example of this strategy. In China, governance and human
    capital have lagged significantly behind the country’s manufacturing prowess.
    Vietnam is a similar case, following on China’s footsteps with some lag.
         It is also possible to invest significantly in fundamentals without reaping
    much reward in terms of structural transformation. Since the early 1990s, Latin
    America has considerably improved its governance and macroeconomic funda-
    mentals, yet structural change in the region has been, if anything, growth reduc-
    ing. Manufacturing and some other modern sectors have lost employment to
    lower-productivity services and informal activities (McMillan and Rodrik 2011).
        We can visualize these possibilities in Figure O.2, which depicts a typology
     of growth patterns and outcomes. It shows that structural transformation
     can fuel rapid growth on its own, but if it is not backed up by fundamentals,
     growth peters out and remains episodic (quadrant 2). On the other hand, the
     accumulation of fundamentals, which requires costly, time-consuming, and
     complementary investments across the entire economy, only produces steady
     but slow growth if it is not backed up by structural change (quadrant 3). The
     bottom line is that, ultimately, sustained growth and convergence require
     both processes (quadrant 4). Even in the best of all worlds, structural transfor-
     mation will eventually run its course and industrialization will reach its limits.

    FIGURE O.2 A typology of growth patterns and outcomes




    Source: Authors.

                                              8 
 
 




    From that point on, growth must depend on the steady accumulation of fun-
    damentals emphasized by neoclassical growth theory. Long-term successes,
    such as Britain, Germany, and the United States, have all gone through these
    phases, as have more recent examples, such as Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan,
    China. If doubts remain about China’s economic future, it is because so much
    of the country’s institutional transformation, particularly with respect to
    political institutions, still remains ahead of it.
        This typology helps clarify one of the puzzling aspects of cross-national data:
    institutional quality and human capital are both highly correlated with income
    levels, yet improvements in institutions and human capital are not a reliable
    predictor of economic growth. It suggests that this empirical finding is not a
    contradiction. Only countries that steadily enhance their fundamental capabil-
    ities eventually become rich. But investment in fundamentals is not the quick-
    est or easiest way of getting there, at least during the early stages of development.
    Early on, it is rapid industrialization that fuels growth, and this requires policies
    that may differ considerably from conventional fundamentals. Countries that
    rely exclusively on building up broad-based capabilities are rewarded with
    modest growth, and may in fact be diverted from those policies as a result
    (Rodrik 2013a).
        We will use this typology to interpret the experiences of our country
    examples. None of them can be said to have made it definitively to the nir-
    vana of quadrant (4). Botswana has high fundamentals but limited structural
    change, while Vietnam has relatively rapid structural change but relatively low
    fundamentals. Our other African examples (Ghana, Nigeria, and Zambia)
    typically have had episodic growth-promoting structural change at best,
    moving back and forth between quadrants (1) and (2), although Ghana has
    recently moved into quadrant (3). Brazil has moved from quadrant (2) to
    quadrant (3), with greatly improved fundamentals but much weaker growth
    underpinned by slow structural change. India meanwhile has not experi-
    enced the kind of structural change that import-substituting countries (such
    as Brazil in the 1950s–1970s) or the East Asian exporters (such as Vietnam)
    have gone through, so its growth prospects remain brittle.


    Country Studies: Methodology
    In an effort to retain consistency across country studies, all of the country
    chapters use the same methodology as McMillan and Rodrik (2011). This
    approach is not intended to resolve questions about causality; rather, it is
    intended to lay out a set of facts that we hope will help policy makers better


                                             9 
 
 




    understand their economies and allow future researchers to develop better
    theories of growth and structural change.
        The decomposition used in our paper follows Haltiwanger (1997) and
    Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001), who used this decomposition to
    explore the contributions of the reallocation of activity across plants and plant
    productivity growth to overall productivity growth in the US manufacturing
    sector. Instead, we use this decomposition to establish the contributions of the
    reallocation of activity across broad sectors of the economy and sectoral pro-
    ductivity growth to economywide productivity growth.
        There is no doubt that studying productivity at the sector level necessarily
    masks the underlying heterogeneity of productivity within sectors. However,
    focusing solely on heterogeneity within one particular sector ignores the econ-
    omywide implications of sector-specific changes in productivity. For example,
    numerous studies have shown that intensified import competition has forced
    manufacturing industries across the globe to become more efficient by ratio-
    nalizing their operations. Typically, the least productive firms have exited
    manufacturing, while the remaining firms have shed “excess labor.” It is evi-
    dent that the top tier of firms has closed the gap with the technology frontier
    in Latin America and Africa, no less than in East Asia.
        However, the question left unanswered by these studies concerns what
    happens to the workers who are thereby displaced. In economies that do not
    exhibit large intersectoral productivity gaps or high and persistent unemploy-
    ment, labor displacement would not have important implications for
    economywide productivity. In developing economies, on the other hand, the
    prospect that the displaced workers would end up in even lower-productivity
    activities (services, informality) cannot be ruled out. That is, indeed, what
    seems to have typically happened in Latin America. An important advantage
    of the broad, economywide approach taken in this volume is that the authors
    are able to capture changes in intersectoral allocative efficiency, as well as
    improvements in within-industry productivity.
        In this framework, total labor productivity is given by:
                                            n
                                      Pt = ∑θi,t pi,t                           (1)
                                           i=1

    where Pt is total labor productivity in year t, θi,t denotes the proportion of
    total labor employed in sector i at time t, and pi,t denotes labor productivity in
    sector i at time t; where i = 1, …, n. Then, the change in total labor productiv-
    ity between t and t– k (ΔPt) can be written as:


                                            10 
 
 


                           n                 n               n
                   ΔPt = ∑θi,t–kΔ pi,t + ∑Δθi,t pi,t–k + ∑Δθi,tΔ pi,t          (2)
                          i=1               i=1             i=1

        Whereas the first term on the right-hand side (RHS) captures within-sector
    productivity changes, the second term on the RHS captures between-sector pro-
    ductivity changes, and the third term on the RHS captures cross-sector produc-
    tivity changes. In essence, the cross term is a covariance term that captures the
    effects on overall productivity of simultaneous changes in sectoral employment
    and productivity. For the purposes of this book, we combine the second and
    third terms into what we call the “structural change” term. Some authors, such
    as de Vries, Timmer, and de Vries (2015), estimate these terms separately, call-
    ing them the static and dynamic components of structural change. We find this
    confusing for two reasons. First, structural change by definition is a dynamic
    concept. And second, the third term alone is difficult to interpret when, for
    example, reductions in the employment share are accompanied by increases in
    productivity. This is because the term becomes negative, seemingly acting as a
    drag on productivity, when in fact it could be viewed as a positive development
    in such sectors as agriculture.
        By combining the second and third terms in equation (2), we arrive at
    the equation used by McMillan and Rodrik (2011) and by all of the country
    authors of this book:
                                      n               n
                               ΔPt = ∑θi,t–kΔ pi,t + ∑ pi,tΔθi,t               (3)
                                     i=1             i=1

    where Pt and pi,t refer to economywide and sectoral labor productivity lev-
    els, respectively, and θi,t is the share of employment in sector i at time t. The
    Δ operator denotes the change in productivity or employment shares between
    t – k and t. The implication of this decomposition is that economywide labor
    productivity growth can be achieved in one of two ways.
        The first term—the “within-sector” component—captures how much of
    overall labor productivity growth can be attributed to changes within sec-
    tors. It is the weighted sum of productivity growth within individual sectors,
    where the weights are the employment share of each sector at the beginning
    of the time period. The second term—the “structural change” component—
    captures how much of overall labor productivity growth can be attributed
    to movements of workers across sectors. It is essentially the inner product of
    productivity levels (at the end of the time period) with the change in employ-
    ment shares across sectors. When changes in employment shares are positively
    correlated with productivity levels, this term will be positive, and structural
    change will increase economywide productivity growth.


                                             11 
 
 




         This decomposition clarifies how partial analyses of productivity perfor-
    mance within individual sectors (such as manufacturing or agriculture) can be
    misleading when there are large differences in labor productivities (pi,t) across
    economic activities. In particular, a high rate of productivity growth within
    an industry can have quite ambiguous implications for overall economic per-
    formance if the industry’s share of employment shrinks rather than expands.
    For example, if the displaced labor ends up in activities with lower productiv-
    ity, economywide growth will suffer and may even turn negative.
         Armed with the results of the decomposition, the authors of each of the
    chapters then use a variety of strategies to gain a deeper understanding of
    the country-specific factors that played a role in facilitating (or impeding)
    structural change. For example, in Chapter 1 of this book, Mitra and Ahsan
    use state-level data on employment shares by industry, tariffs, education, and
    labor regulations to explore the correlates of structural change across states
    in India.


    Country Studies: Data and Measurement Issues
    Here, too, in an effort to maintain consistency, all of the country studies use
    national accounts data and labor force statistics to compute measures of sec-
    toral employment and value-added for nine broad sectors of the economy.
    The authors also draw on several complementary datasets to conduct more
    detailed analyses of the underlying correlates of structural change and within-
    sector productivity growth. Country-specific data appendixes appear at the
    end of each of the country chapters. These appendixes document the sources
    of data, as well as any inconsistencies in the data and how these were handled.
    Nevertheless, several measurement issues common to all of the studies war-
    rant clarification.
        Informality. A big question with national output and employment data
    in developing countries is how well they account for the informal sector.
    The coverage of the informal sector in national accounts data varies from
    country to country (Timmer and de Vries 2009). While all countries make
    an effort to track the informal sector, obviously the quality of the data can
    vary greatly. In contrast, employment shares are more likely to include the
    informal sector, because they are typically obtained from nationally repre-
    sentative household surveys (labor force surveys or population censuses). A
    failure to account for activity in the informal sector will lead to an underes-
    timate of value-added in activities that are heavily dominated by informality,
    such as agriculture.


                                           12 
 
 




         Multiple jobs. In labor force surveys, workers are typically classified by
    their primary sector of employment. A potential concern with this classifica-
    tion is for individuals classified as “agricultural” but who work a substantial
    fraction of their hours in nonagricultural activities (Haggblade, Hazell, and
    Reardon 2007), as this would lead to an underestimate of labor productivity
    in agriculture. Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014) use Living Standards
    Measurement Study data for several developing countries to estimate labor
    productivity using hours worked; Adeyinka, Salau, and Vollrath do the same
    in Chapter 6 of this book on Nigeria. They find that the overwhelming
    majority of individuals classified as working in agriculture
    do in fact allocate almost all of their time to agriculture. Gollin, Lagakos,
    and Waugh (2014) also find that a significant portion of individuals in rural
    households is classified as working in nonagricultural activities.
         Accounting for human capital. If human capital differs significantly across
    sectors, using the number of workers unadjusted for differences in human
    capital can be misleading. For example, if most of the labor in agriculture is
    unskilled and most of the labor in services is skilled, simple measures of pro-
    ductivity will understate labor productivity in agriculture and overstate labor
    productivity in services. One way to account for this is to adjust employ-
    ment numbers for educational attainment, which is what Gollin, Lagakos,
    and Waugh (2014) do for their sample of countries (in the poorest countries,
    human capital is on average 1.4 times higher in the nonagriculture sector than
    in the agriculture sector). However, even after making this adjustment, they
    still arrive at the conclusion that average labor productivity in agriculture is
    significantly lower than average labor productivity in other economic sectors.
         Average versus marginal productivity. The country authors of this book
    compare gaps in sectoral productivities using measures of average labor pro-
    ductivity, as is done in McMillan and Rodrik (2011) and Gollin, Lagakos, and
    Waugh (2014). It is well known that efficiency in well-functioning markets
    is characterized by an equalization of productivities at the margin. Under a
    Cobb-Douglas production function specification, the marginal productivity
    of labor is the average productivity of labor multiplied by the labor share.
    Thus, if labor shares differ greatly across sectors, comparing average labor pro-
    ductivities can be misleading. However, the existing evidence suggests that
    labor shares do not vary widely across sectors, except in a few activities (like
    public utilities) that typically do not absorb lots of labor (Mundlak, Butzer,
    and Larson 2012; Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh 2014).
         Quality of African statistics. Recently, concerns about the quality of Africa’s
    national accounts data have been raised by a number of researchers, including


                                            13 
 
 




    Devarajan (2013) and Jerven and Johnston (2015). Like them, we think that
    the quality of national accounts data is intimately linked to Africa’s growth
    and prosperity. Over the past decade or so, as growth in gross domestic product
    (GDP) has picked up in Africa, there has been a renewed focus on the quality
    of data—even leading to a rebasing of national accounts data for some coun-
    tries. This is important, because of the rapid growth in small business activity
    that had previously been unrecorded. As a result, economies that did rebase saw
    significant gains in GDP per capita. In view of these issues, the authors of this
    book’s African chapters have tried to collect data from a wide range of sources
    and to account for inconsistencies. For example, in the case of Botswana, the
    authors consider two scenarios for structural change in recent years, depending
    on assumptions about the share of the labor force in agriculture.
        Failure to distinguish location. Most agriculture takes place in rural areas,
    and most manufacturing and services take place in urban areas. Given the
    higher costs of living in urban areas (particularly high cash rents), urban
    wages must typically exceed rural wages simply because of higher living costs.
    Thus, comparing nominal urban service and industrial wages with nomi-
    nal rural farm wage rates inevitably leads to higher urban prices and wages. A
    more appropriate and purely sectoral comparison would involve comparing
    farm with rural nonfarm earnings or urban agriculture with urban unskilled
    manufacturing and service sector wage rates. We would guess that rental costs
    alone would require a 20 percent higher wage in urban areas, simply to main-
    tain a standard of living comparable with rural areas.
        In summary, while all of the measurement issues discussed above are
    important, we think that there is adequate evidence to support the approach
    taken by the authors of the country studies in this book. Adjusting aver-
    age productivities for measurement error may diminish the labor produc-
    tivity gaps uncovered, but it is highly unlikely that it would overturn any of
    the results.


    Country Studies: Findings

    Significant Structural Changes, Different Outcomes: Vietnam
    and Ghana
    On the surface, Ghana and Vietnam appear to have much in common: big
    pools of labor in agriculture that over time move primarily into services, rather
    than manufacturing. But a closer look reveals how different their paths have
    been and, thus, why Vietnam is further along in its economic convergence.


                                           14 
 
 




        In the late 1990s, Vietnam still had 70 percent of its workforce in agri-
    culture, producing a third of the country’s GDP. This discrepancy between
    agriculture’s claim on the economy’s resources and its contribution to out-
    put reflected the large differential in labor productivity across activities.
    The typical worker in manufacturing produced four times more output
    than the typical worker in agriculture. The typical worker in services such
    as construction or wholesale and retail trade produced even a bigger mul-
    tiple than this. But over the next two decades, workers moved from lower-
    to higher-productivity activities (Figure O.3). In Chapter 2 of this book,
    McCaig and Pavcnik tell us that agriculture’s employment share declined
    to 54 percent, while services’ share rose from 18 percent to 32 percent, and
    manufacturing’s share rose from 8 percent to 14 percent. During the 2000s,
    jobs in manufacturing grew at an annual rate greater than 10 percent,
    with the rate exceeding 15 percent in garments and reaching 30 percent in
    office and computing machines. The growth was particularly rapid in the

    FIGURE O.3 Vietnam’s workers move to higher-productivity sectors


                                                                    1.4       Relationship between initial productivity and changes in employment share, 1990–2008
     Log of sectoral productivity/aggregate productivity in 1990




                                                                    1.2
                                                                                                                                            fire
                                                                    1.0

                                                                    0.8                                                                     pu

                                                                    0.6                                                                   min
                                                                                                                                                            wrt
                                                                    0.4                                                                            con
                                                                                                                                   tsc                    man
                                                                    0.2

                                                                    0.0                                                                  cspsgs

                                                                   –0.2

                                                                   –0.4                        agr
                                                                                                                                                 y = 3.0091x + 0.4296
                                                                   –0.6                                                                               R 2 = 0.343
                                                                   –0.8
                                                                      –0.30     –0.25      –0.20     –0.15      –0.10     –0.05      0.00          0.05    0.10      0.15
                                                                                                          Change in employment share

    Source: McCaig and Pavcnik, Chapter 2 in this book.
    Note: The size of the circle indicates employment in 1990. agr = agriculture; cspsgs = community, social, personal services,
    and government services; con = construction; fire = finance, insurance, real estate, and business services; man = manu-
    facturing; min = mining and quarrying; pu = public utilities (electricity, gas, and water supply); tsc = transport, storage, and
    communications; wrt = wholesale and retail trade.



                                                                                                                  15 
 
 




    Southeast and Red River Delta, which entered the world economy on the
    back of export-oriented industrialization.
        Vietnam’s structural transformation came alongside two other import-
    ant shifts that were closely linked: (1) a transition from state-owned firms
    to private employment; and (2) a transition from family farms and busi-
    nesses to formal, registered firms (particularly in manufacturing). These
    shifts contributed directly to productivity growth within sectors, but also
    enabled reallocation of factors of production across sectors. As a result, GDP
    per capita tripled in real terms over two decades, and poverty fell sharply,
    although McCaig and Pavcnik caution that large productivity gaps still
    exist both among and within sectors. Between 1990 and 2008, the growth
    in aggregate labor productivity was 5.1 percent per year, with structural
    change accounting for 38 percent of this increase and within-sector growth
    accounting for the rest.
        In examining a case like Vietnam’s—a clear-cut development success
    enabled greatly by structural transformation—ex post explanations are easy to
    come by. The country started with a large pool of “excess” labor in the country-
    side. The unexploited productivity gains from moving people from the farm to
    urban employment were huge. Relaxing the grip of state regulations and state-
    owned enterprises could unleash these hidden sources of productivity. In
    Vietnam this meant abolishing collective farms and replacing them with house-
    hold farms, titling land, liberalizing internal and external trade, and introducing
    competition and private businesses. Opening the country up to the world econ-
    omy—through special economic zones and liberalization of investment rules—
    brought in foreign investment and technology, rendering modern sectors even
    more competitive. Encouraging exports enabled the expansion of manufactur-
    ing enterprises without running into market-size constraints.
        Now consider Ghana, a country that has also done reasonably well in the
    1990s and 2000s, certainly by African standards. In Chapter 4 of this book,
    Osei and Jedwab tell us that following a sharp decline in the 1970s, Ghana’s
    real GDP per capita picked up from the mid-1980s on, with labor productivity
    registering annual growth of 3 percent between 1992 and 2010. Keep in mind
    this is only 60 percent of Vietnam’s growth rate over the same period. While
    structural change appears to have contributed roughly half of the increase over
    this period—after contributing close to zero before then—a closer look indi-
    cates that the impact was highly uneven across subperiods (in fact, it was nega-
    tive during 2000–2006).
        While agricultural employment did decrease—dropping from 60 percent
    in 1980 to about 40 percent in 2010—the labor that was released was


                                            16 
 
 




    absorbed mostly by low-productivity services, with limited impact on econo-
    mywide productivity (Figure O.4). Moreover, the bulk of manufacturing took
    place in the informal sector, where productivity is more than 20 times lower
    than in the formal sector. Despite the apparent potential, industrialization
    has so far played a much more modest role in Ghana than in Vietnam. But to
    the extent it has played a role, Osei and Jedwab contend that “it has occurred
    without a green revolution, industrial revolution, or service revolution of
    the types seen, for example, in Asia.” In our eyes, this assessment is rather
    troubling, in that a lack of these types of revolutions would inhibit the poten-
    tial for progress on the structural change front. Keep in mind, as the authors
    point out, “there are still enormous hurdles on the socioeconomic front, with
    troubling levels of poverty, unemployment, and underemployment—especially
    for youths, and income inequality.”
        Why the difference between the two countries? It is tempting to ascribe
    Vietnam’s superior performance to its government’s liberalization policies


     FIGURE O.4 Bypassing industry and into services in Ghana


                                     Sectoral composition of GDP and employment, 1960–2010
                                     (a) GDP                                     (b) Employment
                70

                60

                50
    Share (%)




                40

                30

                20

                10

                0
                     1960   1970   1980      1990    2000      2010 1960          1970      1980      1990      2000      2010
                                          Industry                Services                   Agriculture

     Source: Osei and Jedwab, Chapter 4 in this book.
     Note: Panel (a) plots the sectoral composition of GDP,using three aggregate sectors: agriculture, industry, and services.
     Panel (b) plots the sectoral composition of employment, using the same three sectors. Employment data are available for
     the following years: 1960, 1970, 1984, 1992, 2000, 2006, and 2010. The vertical dashed line is for 1992, the year when the
     nature of structural change was modified in Ghana.



                                                                17 
 
 




     and other efforts to remove obstacles facing private business. For example,
    in Chapter 2 McCaig and Pavcnik note that Vietnam was ranked 99th out
    of 185 countries in 2013 in the World Bank’s “Doing Business” indi-
    cators, “slightly behind China, ranked 91st, and ahead of such countries
     as Indonesia and Bangladesh.” Yet Ghana ranks 27 countries ahead of
    Vietnam, in 64th place. According to the indicators, it was considerably
    easier to get credit in Ghana than in Vietnam, paying taxes was less of a
    hassle, insolvency was much more quickly resolved, and access to electricity
    was less problematic. In terms of how well investors are protected, there is a
    whop- ping 40-point difference between the two countries, in favor of
    Ghana.
         Other cross-national indexes tell a similar story. The Cato Institute’s
    Index of Economic Freedom, which attempts to quantify the extent to
    which economies are free of government encumbrance, ranks Vietnam in
    96th place, compared with 71st place for Ghana (Gwartney, Lawson, and
    Hall 2012). (This is for 2010, which is the latest year for which data are
    available.) A reasonable objection to these comparisons would be that
    what matters is more the change than the level of an index. Economic prog-
    ress may be more a function of how much policies have “improved” than
    where they stand at the end of the relevant period. But here too, it is hard to
    make the case that Vietnam looks better than Ghana. Both countries have
    undertaken significant reforms since the 1980s, opening up their economies
    to trade, reducing the role of the government, and deregulating. Ghana’s
    summary rating on the Cato Index steadily rose (on a scale from 0 to 10)
    from 3.05 in 1980, to 5.53 in 1995, to 7.09 in 2010. Unfortunately, Cato
    does not provide a comparable series for Vietnam over the full period, so a
    direct comparison is not possible. But in light of the scale of improvement
    in Ghana’s rating, it is difficult to imagine that Vietnam could have done
    much better. (To get a relative sense of these ratings, note that the United
    States had a rating of 7.70 in 2010.)
         None of this is to deny the possibility that Vietnam’s government does
    indeed provide a more hospitable environment than Ghana for private busi-
    ness, both by nurturing new economic activities and by removing obstacles
    that existing ones face. The point is that the way such an environment is con-
    structed is subtler than what is captured by standard indexes and conventional
    types of policy advice. Although economic liberalization and removal of red
    tape may foster private investment, the comparison with Ghana suggests it
    would be a mistake to describe Vietnam’s strategy in those terms—or those
    terms alone. Of course, a similar argument could be made for many other East
    Asian success stories as well.
                                          18 
 
 




        Vietnam’s spectacular growth is also likely to be partly driven by a strong
    commitment to improving the fundamentals. Vietnam outshines Ghana on
    all standard measures of education and infrastructure. Its investment rate is
    35 percent, while Ghana’s is only 25 percent. Industrial policy in Vietnam
    appears to be focused on increasing exports in all sectors. At the start of the
    reforms in the late 1980s, Vietnam was a net importer of rice, and agricultural
    exports were paltry. Today, it is the second-largest exporter of rice, and the coun-
    try has become a major player in the international coffee market. In fact,
    Vietnam runs a sizable trade deficit in manufactured goods, which is covered by
    agricultural and oil exports. Thus, while it is true that productivity growth has
    been the highest in export-oriented manufacturing, it would be incorrect to
    attribute all or even most of Vietnam’s success to its success in manufacturing.
    Rather, the deeper reason for Vietnam’s success in manufacturing is likely to be
    the same reason for its success in other export- oriented sectors.


       Typology placement: Vietnam seems to have reaped the growth bene-
       fits of rapid structural change, even though its institutional indicators
       are comparatively poor and have not improved as much. In other words,
       Vietnam has been in quadrant (2) of Figure O.2 since the early 1990s.
       Ghana, on the other hand, has seen significant improvements in gov-
       ernance, and yet its comparatively poor record with structural change
       has kept it in quadrant (3) with lower growth. By the same token, Viet-
       nam’s continued growth and migration into quadrant (4) are by no
       means ensured, given the weakness of many of its fundamentals.



    Limited Structural Change, Enormous Potential: India, Nigeria,
    and Zambia
    India, Nigeria, and Zambia provide an interesting contrast. On paper, these
    countries have the makings of industrial success stories, with their large
    endowments of relatively unskilled labor still in rural areas and their enor-
    mous domestic markets. Yet all three have underperformed remarkably on
    this dimension, and it is clear that all of them would benefit greatly from
    greater attention to the fundamentals.
        Over the past 50 years, as we learn from Ahsan and Mitra in Chapter 1,
    agriculture’s share of employment in India has fallen by roughly 20 percentage
    points—from about 70 percent in 1960, to 60 percent in 2004, to 50 percent
    in 2011—with the sector now contributing about 15 percent of GDP, sharply


                                            19 
 
 




     down from around 40 percent in 1960. However, manufacturing’s labor
     share has barely changed over this time period, from 10 percent in 1960 to
     12 percent today, with the GDP share unchanged at 13 percent. To put these
     numbers in perspective, Vietnam was able to achieve more than double this
     rate of industrialization in less than half the time. For India, the biggest labor
     movement has been into services (up from 18 percent in 1960 to 28 percent
     in 2011), with the GDP share rising to nearly 60 percent (up sharply from just
     below 40 percent in 1960).
         Structural change did make a positive contribution to growth in India
     after the 1990s, especially during the first decade after the 1991 reforms. But
     the biggest part of that came from the expansion of finance, insurance, and
     other business services, with manufacturing actually shrinking and making
     a negative contribution during 2000–2004 (Figure O.5a). Information tech-
     nology and business process outsourcing services, on which India’s recent
     growth has relied, are no doubt high-productivity activities with convergence
     dynamics that may be even stronger than in manufacturing. But they are also
     highly skill-intensive sectors, unable to absorb the vast majority of the Indian
     workforce that remains poorly educated. As a consequence, India’s underlying
     growth trend is suppressed by the necessarily slow accumulation of fundamen-
     tal capabilities—education, infrastructure, and governance—in the economy
     as a whole.
         Moreover, Ahsan and Mitra report that while manufacturing was the
    leading contributor to within-sector productivity growth in 2000–2004
    (Figure O.5b), it fell in terms of its employment share during these years
    (even though its labor productivity was higher than the economywide aver-
    age). Thus, they stress the need for overhauling restrictive labor regulations,
    “especially because the future potential of agriculture and services in generat-
    ing overall growth is limited (beyond a point) at India’s stage in the develop-
    ment process.”
         At the state level, the authors find that two of the fastest-growing states
     between 1998 and 2004 followed strikingly different growth paths. For Gujarat,
     all of the growth came from within-sector change; in fact, structural change was
     slightly negative, unlike the rest of the states, which enjoyed some positive struc-
     tural change (Figure O.6). In contrast, in Maharashtra, the within-sector and
     structural change components were about the same. The only state that experi-
     enced negative within-sector change was Assam.
         The story in Nigeria is not that different. In Chapter 5, Adeyinka, Salau,
     and Vollrath show that between 1996 and 2009 (not including petroleum),
     the share of employment in agriculture fell only slightly, from 66 percent


                                             20 
 
 



    FIGURE O.5a   Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services is contributing most to
    India’s structural change . . .

                                                  Each sector’s contribution to overall structural change
                                 Agriculture                               Mining                      Manufacturing
                  1.0
                  0.5
                  0.0
                 –0.5
                                Public utilities                       Construction                  Wholesale and retail
                  1.0
                  0.5
    Percent




                  0.0
                 –0.5
                            Transport and storage                          FIREBS                      Community and
                  1.0                                                                                  social services
                  0.5
                  0.0
                 –0.5
                        0        2          4            6   0         2            4         6 0           2      4        6
                                                                       Time perioda

    FIGURE O.5b . . . and since 2000, manufacturing is helping its “within-sector” change


                                         Each sector’s contribution to overall with-sector structural change
                                 Agriculture                               Mining                      Manufacturing
                   2
                   1
                   0
                  –1

                   2           Public utilities                       Construction                  Wholesale and retail
                   1
       Percent




                   0
                  –1

                            Transport and storage                          FIREBS                     Community and
                   2
                                                                                                      social services
                   1
                   0
                  –1
                        0        2          4           6 0           2             4     6    0        2         4         6
                                                                      Time perioda

    Source: Ahsan and Mitra, Chapter 1 in this book.
    Note: aPeriod values are: 1 = 1960–1969; 2 = 1970–1979; 3 = 1980–1989; 4 = 1990–1999; 5 = 2000–2004.
    FIREBS = finance, insurance, real estate, and business services.



                                                                                21 
 
 



    FIGURE O.6     Gujarat and Maharashtra follow significantly different growth paths

                     Within-sector productivity growth and structural change by state (percentage), 1988–2004

      Andhra Pradesh                                                                             Within-sector
               Assam                                                                             Structural
                 Bihar
               Gujarat
              Haryana
            Karnataka
                Kerala
      Madhya Pradesh
         Maharashtra
                Orissa
               Punjab
            Rajasthan
          Tamil Nadu
        Uttar Pradesh
         West Bengal
                       –2                      0                2                   4                    6
                                                             Percent

    Source: Ahsan and Mitra, Chapter 1 in this book.



    to a little more than 60 percent (still the dominant sector at 40 percent
    of GDP), while the share of employment in manufacturing increased by
    a meager 2.2 percentage points to 4.1 percent (accounting for only about
    10 percent of GDP). Over this same period, average annual productivity
     growth was 4.5 percent for the nonpetroleum economy, but the lion’s share
    of this growth (3.5 percent) was accounted for by within-sector produc-
    tivity improvements. If petroleum (oil and gas)—which employs less than
    1 percent of the labor force but accounts for 20–30 percent of GDP—is
    included, productivity rose less but structural change played a bigger role
    (Table O.1). The authors suggest that productivity gains could have been
    as much as 54 percent greater had structural change been greater. They see
    the key levers for this to occur as (1) stimulating agricultural production,
    (2) liberalizing trade policies, (3) upgrading infrastructure, and (4) improv-
     ing human capital.
        A worrying feature of the Nigerian economy is that productivity growth
     in manufacturing between 1996 and 2009 was actually negative relative
    to agriculture. The reasons for this are unclear. One explanation may be
    that people entering the manufacturing workforce are in the informal sec-
    tor, as in Ghana and several other African countries. Another explanation

                                                         22 
 
 



    Table O.1 Structural change starts to take on a bigger role for Nigeria in the mid-2000s

                                   Components of labor productivity change, 1996–2009
                                                                                  Time periods
           Growth decomposition                   1996–1999              1999–2005          2005–2009       1996–2009
    Panel A: Excluding oil and gas                                                                       
      % annual productivity growth                     0.8                  4.8                  7.0           4.5
    of which:
      % within-sector productivity                   −2.0                   9.4                  2.6           3.5
      % structural change                              2.8                 -4.6                  4.4           1.0

    Panel B: Including oil and gas
      % annual productivity growth                   −0.8                   4.4                  4.1           2.9
    of which:
      % within-sector productivity                   −7.1                   6.2               −1.6             0.7
      % structural change                              6.3                 −1.8                  5.7           2.2
    Source: Adeyinka, Salau, and Vollrath, Chapter 5 in this book.



    may have to do with Nigeria’s low levels of fundamentals (such as infrastruc-
    ture and human capital). However, to explain negative productivity growth,
    these conditions would have had to deteriorate. In addition, large productiv-
    ity gains were made in wholesale and retail trade, transportation and com-
    munications, agriculture, and general services. This is puzzling, because it is
    not obvious why fundamentals would matter more for manufacturing than
    for other sectors. That said, Nigeria’s record on this front is inexcusable.
    In 2010, only half of Nigeria’s population was literate, life expectancy was
    51 years, only 15 percent of the roads were paved, electric power consump-
    tion was only 135 kilowatt-hours per capita, and investment stood at only
    17 percent of GDP.
        As for Zambia—a country that reclaimed its “middle-income” status in
    the 2000s thanks to rapid growth—the story is one of extremely uneven
    structural change. In Chapter 6, Resnick and Thurlow find that structural
    change was an overall drag on economic growth in Zambia between 1991 and
    2010, as labor productivity grew by only 0.31 percent. But if that period is
    divided into two subperiods, a more nuanced picture emerges. Between 1991
    and 2001, there was a mass exodus out of urban areas as copper mines and
    other parastatals shut down during a phase of privatization, with the share of
    employment in agriculture (the sector with the lowest productivity) actually
    increasing (Table O.2).



                                                                23 
 
 



    Table O.2 Agriculture is driving Zambia’s job growth but not GDP

                              Drivers of GDP and formal employment growth, 1991–2010
                                              GDP (millions of 2002 US$)        Employment (1,000s people)
                                          Initial    Change over period (%)   Initial   Change over period (%)
    Sectors                               1991      1991–2002 2002–2010 1991            1991–2002 2002–2010
    Value (US$ millions
    or 1,000s people)                     8,410        1,023         6,108    2,519       1,001        865
    Contribution (%)                      100.0            100.0     100.0    100.0       100.0       100.0
      Agriculture                          15.2             30.5       8.1     65.4        87.6         51.4
      Mining                                20.1           –84.4      13.6       1.9        0.2          1.0
      Manufacturing                         10.7            21.3       6.8       4.3        1.4          1.3
      Utilities                              3.3             2.6       1.6       0.9       –1.2          0.7
      Construction                           8.4            -8.0     21.9        1.9       –0.3          4.2
      Trade                                17.3             49.3       9.8     10.3         4.8         19.6
      Hotels, catering                       1.2            14.0       2.5       0.5        1.9          1.3
      Transport, communications              6.1            12.1      16.5       2.9       –1.5          3.7
      Finance, business services             9.8            48.8       9.0       1.8        0.6          6.1
      Government                             7.1            11.4       8.9       5.6        6.7          6.7
      Other services                         0.7             2.3       1.4       4.5       –0.2          4.1
    Source: Resnick and Thurlow, Chapter 6 in this book.




         But starting in 2002, the share of employment in agriculture began to fall,
    with services absorbing most of the workers who left the farm. Although the
    services sector is dominated by small-scale informal activity, its activities are
    still more productive than subsistence agriculture. Mining staged an impres-
    sive recovery, but only accounted for 1 percent of the new jobs created. And
    manufacturing not only failed to rally, but actually continued its decline. In the
    end, structural change and within-sector growth each accounted for around
    half of the 3.56 percent increase in labor productivity between 2002 and 2010.
    However, Resnick and Thurlow emphasize that the renewed growth and posi-
    tive structural change have not translated into social transformation—a reality
    that has been reflected “in the country’s shifting political landscape,” and one
    that they contend can be seen playing out elsewhere in Africa, even in countries
    without large-scale mineral resources.
        With more than half of the population engaged in low-productivity agri-
    culture, structural change could play a significant role in Zambia’s growth
    going forward. But it may well be that to realize this potential, Zambia must
    first invest more in its fundamentals. Gross fixed capital formation as a share



                                                               24 
 
 




    of GDP was only 22 percent in 2010, and physical and human infrastructures
    are still comparatively low.


         Typology placement: India, Nigeria, and Zambia have not had the full
         benefit of quadrant (2), and India in particular has hovered not too far
         from quadrant (1). For all of them, investing in the fundamentals is
         now critical.


    No Structural Change in Recent Years: Botswana and Brazil
    Unlike the rest of the countries featured in this book, Botswana and Brazil
     have been middle-income countries for some time. Structural change played a
     significant role in catapulting these countries into middle-income status, but
     its role has been more muted in the past two decades. Their stories, though,
     are quite different.
          In Brazil, structural change was rapid from the 1950s through the 1970s
    (especially in the 1950s and early 1960s), accounting for 40 percent of total labor
    productivity growth during this period (Figure O.7). As agricultural employ-
    ment shrank, manufacturing jobs expanded slightly, and modern service activ-
    ities—the most productive sector—absorbed the bulk of the labor. By the late
    1970s, industries as a whole accounted for close to 40 percent of total labor pro-
    ductivity growth. This period of high-growth, rapid structural change was one

    FIGURE O.7      Within-sector changes in Brazil swamping structural changes

                                          Decomposition of productivity growth by period and database

               GGDC 1950–2005
               GGDC 1995–2005
               GGDC 1980–1994
               GGDC 1965–1979
               GGDC 1950–1964
               GGDC 1990–2005                                                                             Within-sector
       PNAD 1993/95–2007/08                                                                               Structural

                               –20       0        20       40       60      80    100          120      140      160      180
                                                                          Percent

    Source: Firpo and Pieri, Chapter 7 in this book.
    Note: The bars correspond to growth rates for the whole period indicated. For example, for the period 1950–2005, using
    Groningen (GGDC) data, labor productivity resulting from the within-sector and structural change effects grew by 132 percent and
    24 percent, respectively. GGDC = Groningen Growth Development Centre; PNAD = Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de
    Domicílios.
                                                                 25 
 
 




    in which policies of import substitution predominated. (It goes without say-
    ing that such policies are anomalous from the perspective of the World Bank’s
    Doing Business database and Cato Institute’s Economic Freedom indicators
    [World Bank, various years; Gwartney, Lawson, and Hall 2012]).
        But in Chapter 7, Firpo and Pieri argue that by the late 1970s, the coun-
    try had run out of room for continuous and long-term structural change, at
    least along broad intersectoral lines, and had to rely on within-sector enhance-
    ments—like investing in human capital and new technologies (in agriculture
    especially) and improving institutions. In fact, they assert that efforts aimed
    at reversing this natural trend (by enlarging manufacturing and contracting
    agriculture) failed “and the early years of the 1980s of slow growth can serve
    as evidence of those efforts.”
         So what path remains open for Brazil today? The authors argue that the
    Brazilian experience suggests a return to the old policies is likely to fail. They
    believe horizontal, across-the-board policies are more likely to spur produc-
    tivity within sectors than selective policies that give priority to some sectors
    over others. Given where Brazil stands in term of its stage of development, it
    is reasonable to expect that future growth will have to rely predominantly on
    investment in fundamentals (institutions and human capital), and that broad
    patterns of structural change will play a comparatively small role. In particu-
    lar, it will be difficult for Brazil to reindustrialize. But there are still strategic
    opportunities that could be exploited by a nimble government. If used well,
    the country’s deep-water oil reserves should boost not only oil exports but also
    a range of associated services and industries at home.
        As for Botswana, its story is similar to Brazil’s, in that the share of employ-
    ment in agriculture fell dramatically between 1970 and 1990. But unlike Brazil,
    the decline in agriculture’s share of employment was almost entirely matched
    by an increase in the share of the labor force in services. Moreover, numerous
    government efforts to industrialize never succeeded (perhaps not surprising for
    a small landlocked country). The authors of Chapter 3—McCaig, McMillan,
    Verduzco-Gallo, and Jefferis—point to two distinct periods in Botswana’s eco-
    nomic evolution. Between 1970 and 1989, they find that labor productivity grew
    at an average of 8 percent per year, with structural change playing a major role in
    this spectacular growth, especially in the 1970s (Figure O.8). But in the decades
    that followed, labor productivity slowed to 1.9 percent per year, driven entirely
    by within-sector productivity growth—with structural change an actual drag on
    growth in the 2000s.
        Historically, diamonds played a significant role in fueling Botswana’s eco-
    nomic growth, although this has changed in recent years. Between 1968 and
    2010, economic activity shifted out of agriculture, first to mining and later to
                                             26 
 
 



    FIGURE O.8 From a big role for structural change in Botswana to a drag on growth


                             Labor productivity growth decomposition, by decade, 1970–2010

                      10                                                                          Within-sector
                                                                                                  Structural
                                                                                                  Total

                      5

            Percent

                      0


                            1970–1980             1980–1990              1990–2000              2000–2010
                      –5
                                                                  Year

    Source: McCaig et al., Chapter 3 in this book.
    Note: Graph shows decomposition of average annual labor productivity growth (value-added in 2005 output per worker)
    during each decade.



    services. In 2010, diamonds made up only 17.7 percent of value-added and a
    mere 1.5 percent of total employment. In contrast, the share of services in val-
    ue-added reached 64.4 percent, while the share of services in employment
    reached 50.6 percent. Although the share of employment in agriculture remains
    high at 38.6 percent, its share in value-added has dropped from 27.4 percent to
    2.7 percent—an indication of agriculture’s abysmal performance in Botswana.
       An interesting feature of both Brazil’s and Botswana’s economies is that
    trade liberalization in the early 1990s did not have a major impact on the struc-
    ture of either economy, although it did give a sharp boost to within-sector pro-
    ductivity. This limited impact on the structural front is especially surprising
    in Brazil, where manufacturing has been central to the economy. Also unlike
    Brazil, Botswana does not have the same potential in agriculture, as most of the
    land inhabited by farmers is semi-arid and prone to drought. For both of these
    countries, growth is more likely to come from improvements in fundamentals
    that facilitate within-sector productivity growth.

        Typology placement: The expectation was that Brazil would move from
        quadrant (1) to quadrant (4); but the country instead ended up in quadrant
        (3), with much-improved fundamentals, but also sharply reduced growth.
        Botswana is similarly stuck in quadrant (3), with slow growth and relatively
        strong fundamentals, although unlike Brazil, it has never industrialized.



                                                                       27 
 
 




    The Verdict on Structural Change versus
    Within-Sector Productivity Growth
    So what do these findings on individual countries add up to in terms of broad
    trends in structural change? We believe this book provides a worthwhile
    insight in that, although we are only examining seven country studies, these
    countries together represent about 22 percent of developing country GDP and
    30 percent of developing country population. Moreover, within their respec-
    tive regions, some of these countries matter greatly—like Nigeria (19 percent
    of Sub-Saharan Africa’s GDP and 19 percent of the region’s population), India
    (82 percent of South Asia’s GDP and 75 percent of the region’s population),
    and Brazil (35 percent of Latin America and the Caribbean’s GDP and 34
    percent of the region’s population).
        Overall, our country sample shows that the past two decades have seen
    extraordinary growth and rapid catch-up convergence in developing countries—
    underpinned by increases in labor productivity—although the patterns of
    within-sector versus structural change increases vary widely (Table O.3).
    Nonetheless, a few themes emerge at the regional level.
        Africa. Labor productivity rose in all four countries during the 2000s,
    with the second half of the period characterized by a resurgence of struc-
    tural change as a driver of productivity growth in Nigeria and Zambia, and
    to a lesser extent in Ghana. Botswana, the only upper-middle-income coun-
    try in the African sample, resembles a Latin America country in the sense that
    most of the productivity stems from within-sector growth rather than from
    structural change. These results are consistent with McMillan and Harttgen
    (2014), who show that structural change was growth enhancing in Africa
    post-2000.
        Asia. In this region, India and Vietnam represent stark contrasts in terms
    of what has driven labor productivity increases. In Vietnam, structural change
    has been a strong driver throughout the period. However, in India, most of
    the productivity growth has come from within-sector productivity. In fact, the
    contribution of structural change decreased in the 2000s from the 1990s,
    down from 1.3 percent to 0.3 percent—a definite worrying sign for a country
    that still has a large portion of the population working in the agriculture
    sector.
        Latin America. Brazil exemplifies an upper-middle-income country that has
    already undergone a deep structural transformation, moving a large share of
    workers from agriculture to manufacturing by the end of the 20th century. Over
    the past two decades, however, the country has strongly relied on within-sector
    productivity change—in fact, gains in structural change are minimal.


                                          28 
 
 



    Table O.3 African and other countries seeing structural change in the 21st century

                                                                Labor productivity growth (percent)
    Country                                           Total                      Within                   Structural
    Botswana
       1990–2000                                        1.1                        1.7                      –0.6
       2000–2010                                        2.7                       4.9                       –2.2
    Ghana
       1992–2000                                       1.0                       –0.9                         2.0
       2000–2006                                       4.5                         6.0                      –1.5
       2006–2010                                        2.7                        0.0                        2.6
    Nigeria
       1996–1999                                      –0.8                       –7.1                         6.3
       1999–2005                                        4.4                        6.2                      –1.8
       2005–2009                                        4.1                      –1.6                         5.7
    Nigeria, excluding oil and gas
       1996–1999                                        0.8                      –2.0                         2.8
       1999–2005                                       4.8                         9.4                      –4.6
       2005–2009                                       7.0                         2.6                        4.4
    Zambia
       1991–2002                                      –2.0                         0.0                      –2.0
       2002–2010                                        3.6                       1.8                        1.8
    India
       1990–1999                                        2.9                        1.7                       1.3
       2000–2004                                        6.5                        6.2                        0.3
    Vietnam
       1990–2008                                        5.1                       1.9                         3.1
       1990–2000                                        5.2                       1.0                         4.2
       2000–2008                                       4.9                         2.7                        2.2
    Brazil
       1995–2005                                        0.8                        0.6                        0.2
       1990–2005                                        0.8                        0.8                      –0.0
       1993/1995–2007/2008                              0.5                        0.3                        0.2
     Source: Botswana —Value-added and employment data are from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre Africa
    Sector Base; Ghana —Economic Survey of Ghana 1961–1982; population and housing censuses 1960, 1970, 1984,
    2000, and 2010; Ghana Living Standard Survey 1991–1992 and 2005–2006; Singal and Nartey (1971); Androe (1981);
    Ewusi (1986); GSS (2010); and World Bank (2010); Nigeria —Output data are from the Nigerian Bureau of Statistics.
     Employment data are from the Nigeria General Household Survey (GHS) [1996–2011]; Zambia—Data are from the
    Central Statistics Office [1993, 2004, 2011, and 2012.]; India—Value-added and employment data are from the Gron-
    ingen Growth and Development Centre; Vietnam—Employment, gross domestic product (in constant 1994 prices), and
    labor productivity (also in constant 1994 prices) data are from the General Statistics Office of Vietnam; Brazil—For the
    period 1950–2005, value-added and employment data are from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre. For
    the period 1993/1995–2007/2008, data are from Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios.
     Note: Botswana—Data are disaggregated at 10 sectors, as in McMillan and Rodrik (2011); Ghana—Data are disaggre-
    gated at 9 and 14 sectors; Nigeria—Data are disaggregated at 9 sectors; Zambia—Data are disaggregated at 9, 10, or 3
    sectors; India—Data are disaggregated at 10 or 9 sectors. Vietnam—Data are disaggregated into 19 economic sectors;
    Brazil—Data are disaggregated at 10 sectors, as in McMillan and Rodrik (2011).




                                                              29 
 
 




    The “Double Whammy” of Manufacturing
    Like India, African countries seem to be bypassing the industrialization stage
    that was so important to Brazil’s and Vietnam’s rapid growth. In fact, the
    share of employment in African manufacturing is still only roughly half the
    share in Asian manufacturing (McMillan 2013). Instead, to the extent that
    structural change is taking place, it is primarily fueled by an expansion in
    services. To understand the ramifications of this pattern, it is important to
    understand the role that manufacturing has played in the past.
        A manufacturing-based growth strategy has two distinct advantages. First,
    a great deal of manufacturing is labor intensive, so it can absorb large amounts
    of relatively unskilled workers from other sectors at a substantial productivity
    premium. It is comparatively easy to turn a rice farmer into a garment factory
    worker, without significant investment in human capital and with manageable
    investment in physical capital. And the industrialization process can go on for
    quite some time—several decades—during which income and productivity
    levels converge with those of rich countries.
        Second, manufacturing—specifically, formal manufacturing—exhibits a
    remarkable property known as “unconditional convergence.” That is, it takes
    place regardless of the quality of domestic policies or institutions and other
    aspects of economic context, such as geography and infrastructure (Rodrik
    2013b). For developing countries, where lagging manufacturing sectors are the
    norm, labor productivity tends to catch up with the productivity of developed
    countries, where technologies are the most advanced as if on an automatic
    escalator, at a rate of 2–3 percent per year. The greater the distance from the
    productivity frontier, the faster the rate of productivity growth. Of course, the
    better the environment, the more rapid the convergence—that is, conditional
    convergence is even more rapid (Rodrik 2013b).
        Unconditional convergence can be visualized in Figure O.9, which maps
    the relationship between initial labor productivity in manufacturing indus-
    tries for 21 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa (including Ghana) and their
    growth rates in the subsequent decade. The negative slope of the scatter plot
    captures the essence of unconditional convergence. The trend is as
    unmistakable in Africa as it is elsewhere. Perhaps this outcome is not surpris-
    ing, given that these industries produce tradable goods and can be rapidly inte-
    grated into global production networks, facilitating technology transfer and
    absorption. Even when they produce just for the home market, these indus-
    tries operate under a competitive threat from efficient suppliers from abroad,
    requiring them to upgrade their operations and remain efficient.



                                           30 
 
 



    FIGURE O.9 Unconditional convergence is alive and well in Africa


                                                               Labor productivity in ISIC two-digit manufacturing industries in Africa
                                                    0.2




         Growth deviation over subsequent decade
                                                    0.1


                                                    0.0


                                                   –0.1


                                                   –0.2

                                                          –2             –1                 0                1                 2         3
                                                                     Log deviation in initial manufacturing labor productivity

    Source: Author’s calculations, based on Rodrik (2013b).
    Note: Data cover the 21 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa (including Ghana) with the requisite data. Each observation
    represents an International Standard Industrial classification (ISIC) two-digit manufacturing industry in an African country,
    for the latest 10-year period for which data are available. Period, industry, and period × industry dummies are included as
    controls, so that values on the axes are purged of these “fixed effects,” but there are no country-level controls.




    Prospects for Economic Convergence
    Against this backdrop, where should developing countries be focusing their
    energies to jumpstart economic convergence? The possible paths include reviv-
    ing industrialization, focusing on natural resources and nontraditional agri-
    cultural products, and raising productivity in services.

    Revive Industrialization?
    The classic path of rapid catch-up through industrialization played out well
    in East Asia, as well as in Latin America and certain other countries, such as
    Turkey, during their earlier, import-substituting phase. But there are a variety
    of reasons to think this path will figure much less prominently in the future:
     •              Many African countries are starting out with a much better endow-
                    ment of natural resources and are not as well positioned for specialization
                    in manufacturing.
     •              The success of East Asian economies—China and its successors, such as
                    Vietnam and Cambodia—poses significant competitive challenges to
                    newcomers in manufacturing, especially in light of globalization and the
                    reduced barriers to trade virtually everywhere.


                                                                                                    31 
 
 




     •   New trade rules—local content requirements, subsidies, import restrictions—
         limit to a much greater extent than previously the room for industrial poli-
         cies, which Asian countries have deployed with some success.
     •   The economic difficulties of the advanced countries make them more resis-
         tant to significant surges of manufactured imports from low-cost sources.
     •   Technological changes in manufacturing itself have made the sector much
         more capital and skill intensive than in the past, reducing both the advan-
         tage of poor economies in manufacturing and the scope for labor absorp-
         tion into the sector.
     •   The prospect of climate change and the greater awareness of the associated
         risks call for green technologies that are more environmentally friendly but
         also are more costly for developing nations.
        Nevertheless, one can deploy counterarguments. First, diversification
    into manufacturing can sometimes be facilitated by the presence of natural
    resources; Ethiopia, for example, can deploy its high-quality livestock to turn
    itself into an exporter of designer shoes. Second, Chinese manufacturers are
    now looking for low-cost suppliers themselves, not the least in Africa. Third,
    even if the world economy stagnates, there are sizable domestic (Nigeria) and
    regional markets in Africa. There are glimmers of hope in all of these direc-
    tions in the data—but they remain glimmers for the time being.
        It is also true, as Baldwin (2011) has emphasized, that the spread of global
    supply chains—what he calls “globalization’s second unbundling”—has facil-
    itated the spread of industry from the advanced countries to the periphery.
    New entrants do not have to build entire supply chains (from intermediate
    inputs to final products) at home; they can simply join existing global supply
    chains by producing a narrow range of components. Even so, industrialization
    remains limited and fleeting, even when a country can succeed in plugging
    into global supply chains.
        Taken together, these trends imply that even the most successful countries
    of the future are likely to fall far short of the industrialization levels that have
    been the norm in economic history. The available data indicate that deindustri-
    alization is now beginning to happen at lower levels of income. Manufacturing’s
    share of employment peaked at above 30 percent in the United Kingdom and
    Germany, and at around 25 percent in Japan and South Korea. But in China,
    manufacturing employment rose to slightly less than 15 percent in the mid-
    1990s before it started to fall gradually. Vietnam, Cambodia, and other smaller
    countries will likely not surpass such levels. The apparent failure of African


                                             32 
 
 




    countries to industrialize to date and the deindustrialization of Latin America
    have to be seen against such a global context. The industrialization-led growth
    model may have run its course. The question is, what will take its place?

    Focus on Natural Resources and Nontraditional Agriculture?
    Natural resource booms can fuel growth, but resource sectors that exhibit
    high labor productivity—such as oil and diamonds—tend to be capital
    intensive and absorb few workers. Continued growth in a resource-based
    economy is dependent on rapid and sustained productivity increases in the
    resource sector, new discoveries, or a steady rise in world market prices. And
    even if one or more of these fortuitous circumstances materialize, the pat-
    tern of growth tends to become skewed. Growth benefits the state or a rent-
    ier class, spawns inequality and distributive politics, and proves generally
    detrimental to institutional development. Resource-based growth tends
    to produce spurts of growth, followed by stagnation or decline. Take the
    case of Ghana, where manufacturing expanded little while investment and
    growth were concentrated in the resource sector—a trend that was exacer-
    bated after the discovery of oil in 2008. Aside from oil, Ghana’s main
    exports are gold, cocoa beans, timber products, and other natural resources.
    Vietnam, meanwhile, is a major exporter of textiles and garments. In 2012,
    manufacturing’s share of merchandise exports stood at 65 percent in
    Vietnam, but only 9 percent in Ghana (having actually come down from a
    peak of 25 percent in 2009).
        As for nontraditional agricultural products—horticulture, aquaculture,
    floriculture, and so on—they could well act as an intermediate stepping
    stone out of traditional farm products, but here, too, the record with labor
    absorption is not encouraging. We do not have any examples of countries
    that have successfully developed through diversification in agriculture.
    Typically, agricultural transformation represents the early stage of a growth
    takeoff. If not followed by rapid industrialization, growth peters out.
    Moreover, given the inexorable trends in urbanization, the bulk of the new
    jobs has to be created in urban rather than rural areas. So it is hard to think
    of an agriculture-led path as anything other than a bridge to a more sustain-
    able urban-based strategy.

    Raise Productivity in Services?
    Tradable services can substitute to some extent for manufacturing, but the
    evidence to date on that has not been encouraging either. The reality is
    that an expansion of services is not necessarily a bad thing for structural


                                          33 
 
 




    transformation and growth, as long as the economy has been able to build up
    human capital and accumulate fundamental capabilities that transform those
    services into high-productivity activities (like finance and business services).
    However, this typically happens rather late in the development process, after
    industrialization runs its course, and high-productivity (tradable) segments of
    services cannot absorb as much labor. As for labor-intensive tradable services
    (like tourism), they have typically spawned few links to the rest of the econ-
    omy and have not produced much diversification.
         One prominent exception is the success of Hong Kong. Its structural trans-
    formation picture looks just like that in Vietnam, except that the roles of
    agriculture and manufacturing are reversed (Figure O.10). In Hong Kong,
    it is manufacturing that has rapidly shrunk since 1990, releasing more than
    20 percent of the economy’s labor force to other sectors. The displaced labor
    found employment in services (wholesale and retail trade, finance, insurance
    and business services, and so on), but at even higher levels of productivity. So
    deindustrialization was growth promoting. The difference with other coun-
    tries is that Hong Kong first achieved significant levels of industrialization

    FIGURE O.10 A move from manufacturing to services in Hong Kong


                                                                             Correlation between sectoral productivity and change
                                                                              in employment shares in Hong Kong (1990–2005)
                                                         2
                                                             β = 2.8359; t-stat = 2.51                                    pu
      Log of sectoral productivity/total productivity




                                                         1                                                                             fire

                                                                                                                          tsc
                                                         0
                                                                                                                       min             wrt
                                                                                                                                    cspsgs
                                                                                                                 con
                                                             man
                                                        –1

                                                                                                              agr
                                                        –2
                                                             –0.2                        –0.1                       0.0                       0.1
                                                                                   Change in employment share (∆Emp. Share)
                                                                                                      Fitted values

    Source: Author’s calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009); McMillan and Rodrik (2011).
    Note: Size of circles represents employment share in 1990; β denotes coefficient of independent variable in regression
    equation: ln(p/P) = α + βΔEmp. Share; agr = agriculture; cspsgs = community, social, personal services, and government
    services; fire = finance, insurance, real estate, and business services; con = construction; man = manufacturing; min =
    mining and quarrying; pu = public utilities (electricity, gas, and water); tsc = transport, storage, and communications;
    wrt = wholesale and retail trade.



                                                                                                34 
 
 




    before deindustrializing—and then used the intervening period to strengthen
    its human capital base and other fundamental capabilities.
        In principle, then, structural transformation can play a potent positive role
    both during the early stages of development when there is “excess supply of labor”
    in agriculture and informal economic activities, and during later stages when
    capabilities have accumulated and modern services have caught up with and sur-
    passed industrial activities. But neither outcome is ensured. Structural change is
    frequently slow, and often goes in the wrong direction. And the correspondence
    between market liberalization and structural change is weak, at best.


    Tempering Expectations
    All of this suggests that we should not be surprised if broad patterns of inter-
    sectoral structural change play a more muted role in the future. Development
    will have to happen the hard way for the most part, through the steady accu-
    mulation of skills and human capital and improvements in governance and
    institutions. In terms of the central growth-decomposition equation used in
    McMillan and Rodrik (2011) and the chapters that follow, growth will come
    mainly from the within-sector components of productivity change, rather
    than from structural change (Box O.2).
        A corollary is that rapid growth of the type experienced in South Korea,
    Taiwan, China, China, Vietnam, and other East Asian cases will be out of
    reach for most developing countries. It has proved significantly more
    complicated and time consuming to upgrade a country’s health system,
    tertiary education, or judiciary—to name just a few examples of nontradable
    sectors—to first- world standards than to ride the wave of global
    competitiveness in a narrow, but expanding, range of standardized
    manufacturing industries. Automatic escalators may be rare in
    nonmanufacturing parts of the economy.
        One reason is that improving human capital and institutions entails a wide
    range of reforms and investments that are highly context specific and comple-
    mentary to each other. Context specificity implies that off-the-shelf imported
    blueprints are not useful. Local experimentation and expertise are needed to
    get systems to cohere and work well. Complementarity means investments on
    a broad front are required for any of them to pay off. Together, these imply
    an S-shaped relationship between fundamentals and growth—investments in
    human capital and institutions produce at best moderate growth until they
    (and income) accumulate and reach a certain threshold (Rodrik 2013a). The
    downside of this mode of growth is that it can easily produce reform fatigue.


                                           35 
 
 




    Box O.2 Putting the focus on the “fundamentals”
    In all of our country studies, a frequent refrain is the need to improve “within-
    sector” productivity. Here, we try to illustrate the range of policies needed
    with current examples from our sample countries. These policies can be
    grouped into four key areas.

    Political economy. In Zambia, where structural change has not translated
    into economic transformation, a major problem has been a lack of macro-
    economic stability and persistent policy volatility—like currency swings
    and periodic trade bans on maize exports and wheat imports, which
    deter investment in agriculture and other sectors. In Botswana, some of the
    constraints are as much political economy as technical ones. Building
    up the industrial sector involves issues of political capture, and making
    more land available for business touches on issues of land markets and
    even immigration.

    Labor regulations. In India, labor regulations appear to be a major impedi-
    ment to employment growth in manufacturing. But in a democratic country
    such as India, changing these laws may take a long time—which is worri-
    some, given that the future potential of agriculture and services in gen-
    erating overall growth is limited (beyond a point) at India’s stage in the
    development process.

    Institutions and education. In Vietnam, which continues to feature large
    productivity gaps within and across sectors, it is vital to remove distortions
    (like improving access to land and capital) to help workers transition out of
    agriculture and to further enhance agricultural productivity. In Brazil, policies
    that raise overall labor productivity—like improving educational quality—are
    likely to have a deeper impact on growth than those that are strictly con-
    cerned with deepening an unfinished structural change.

    Infrastructure. In Nigeria, the employment share in low-productivity agricul-
    ture is still quite high, indicating a potential for rapid structural change. But
    the country’s levels of human capital and infrastructure are still abysmal,
    making a rapid exodus out of agriculture unlikely in the near future. In Ghana,
    which needs to diversify away from natural resource exports, a key focus
    is making the manufacturing sector more competitive. High nonlabor costs
    could be reduced by investing in roads, the power supply, and the regulatory
    framework. Although the business environment has improved greatly over
    the past 20 years, a lot remains to be done for Ghana to be as competitive
    as Mauritius or South Africa.

    Source: Authors.




                                           36 
 
 




    Growth payoffs will appear as disappointing, despite substantial efforts
    at reform.
        The bottom line is that the balance of forces going forward appears less
    favorable to rapid structural change than has been the case during the past six
    decades. We may well need to moderate the optimism that the recent experi-
    ence of high growth across the developing world has spawned.



    References
    Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
         Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91 (5): 1369–1401.
    Aghion, P., and P. Howitt. 1992. “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction.”
         Econometrica 60 (2): 323–351.
    Androe, G. 1981. Industry in Ghana. Production Form and Spatial Structure. Stockholm: Sweden:
         Scandinavian Institute of African Studies.
    Baldwin, R. 2011. Trade and Industrialisation after Globalisation’s 2nd Unbundling: How Building
         and Joining a Supply Chain Are Different and Why It Matters. Working Paper 17716.
         Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
    Devarajan, S. 2013. “Africa’s Statistical Tragedy.” The Review of Income and Wealth 59 (S1): S9–S15.
    de Vries, G. J., M. P. Timmer, and K. de Vries. 2015. “Structural Transformation in Africa: Static
         Gains, Dynamic Losses.” Journal of Development Studies 51 (6): 674–688.
    Diamond, J. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: Norton.
    Ewusi, Kodwo. 1986. Statistical Tables on the Economy of Ghana 1950–1985. Accra: Institute of
         Statistical, Social and Economic Research, University of Ghana.
    Field, A. J. 1978. “Sectoral Shift in Antebellum Massachusetts: A Reconsideration.” Explorations in
         Economic History 15 (2): 146–171.
    Foster, L., J. C. Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan. 2001. “Aggregate Productivity Growth. Lessons
         from Microeconomic Evidence.” In New Developments in Productivity Analysis, edited by
         C. R. Hulten, E. R. Dean, and M. J. Harper. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
    Glaeser, E. L., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer. 2004. “Do Institutions Cause
         Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth 9 (3): 271–303.
    Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and Michael E. Waugh. 2014. “The Agricultural Productivity Gap.”
         Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2): 939–993.
    Grossman, G., and E. Helpman. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy. Cambridge,
         MA: MIT Press.




                                                      37 
 
 




    GSS (Ghana Statistical Service). Various years. Population and Housing Censuses 1960, 1970,
         1984, 2000, and 2010. Accra.
    Gwartney, J., R. Lawson, and J. Hall. 2012. Economic Freedom of the World: 2012 Report. With
         contributions from S. L. Baier, C. Bjørnskov, M. Clance, A. M. Crisp, A. Dreher, G. P. Dwyer,
         N. J. Foss, and K. Gehring. Vancouver, BC: Fraser Institute.
    Haggblade, S., P. B. R. Hazell, and T. Reardon. 2007. Transforming the Rural Nonfarm Economy.
         Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
    Haltiwanger, J. 1997. “Measuring and Analyzing Aggregate Fluctuations: The Importance of
         Building from Microeconomic Evidence.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 79 (3):
         55–78.

    Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi. 2013. Growth and Structural Transformation.
         Working Paper 18996. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

    Jerven, M., and D. Johnston. 2015. Statistical Tragedy in Africa? Evaluating the Data Base for
         African Economic Development. London: Routledge.

    Johnston, B. F., and P. Kilby. 1975. Agriculture and Structural Transformation: Economic Strategies
         in Late-Developing Countries. New York: Oxford University Press.

    Johnston, B., and J. Mellor. 1961. “The Role of Agriculture in Economic Development.” American
         Economic Review 51 (4): 566–593.

    Lewis, W. A. 1954. “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor.” Manchester School
         of Economic and Social Studies 22 (2): 139–191.

    Matsuyama, K. 1992. “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and Economic Growth.”
         Journal of Economic Theory 58 (2): 317–334.

    McMillan, M. 2013. “The Changing Structure of African Economies.” Unpublished paper.
    McMillan, M., and K. Harttgen. 2014. What Is Driving the Africa Growth Miracle? Working Paper
         20077. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

    McMillan, M., and D. Rodrik. 2011. “Globalization, Structural Change, and Productivity
         Growth.” In Making Globalization Socially Sustainable. Geneva: International Labour
         Organization and World Trade Organization.

    Mokyr, J. 1976. Industrialization in the Low Countries, 1795–1850. New Haven: Yale University
         Press.

    Mundlak, Y., R. Butzer, and D. F. Larson. 2012. “Heterogeneous Technology and Panel Data:
         The Case of the Agricultural Production Function.” Journal of Development Economics 99 (1):
         139–149.

    Murphy, K., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1989. “Industrialization and the Big Push.’’ Journal of
         Political Economy 97 (5): 1003–1026.



                                                     38 
 
 




    Ranis, G., and J. C. Fei. 1961. “A Theory of Economic Development.” American Economic Review
         51 (4): 533–558.

    Rodrik, D. 2013a. The Past, Present, and Future of Economic Growth. GCF Working Paper 1.
         London: Global Citizen Foundation. www.sss.ias.edu/files/pdfs/Rodrik/Research/GCF_
         Rodrik-working-paper-1_-6-24–13.pdf.

    —. 2013b. “Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
         128 (1): 165–204.
    Schultz. T. W. 1953. The Economic Organization of Agriculture. New York: McGraw-Hill.
    Singal, M. S., and J. D. M. Nartey. 1971. Sources and Methods of Estimation of National Income at
         Current Prices in Ghana. Accra: Central Board of Statistics.
    Solow, R. M. 1956. “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of
         Economics 70 (1): 65–94.
    Timmer, M. P., and G. J. de Vries, 2009. “Structural Change and Growth Accelerations in Asia and
         Latin America: A New Sectoral Data Set,” Cliometrica 3 (2): 165–190.
    World Bank. Various years. Doing Business database. Washington, DC. www.doingbusiness.org/.
    World Bank. Various years. World Development Indicators database. Washington, DC. Accessed
         December 2015. http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
    Wright, G. 1979. “Cheap Labor and Southern Textiles before 1880.” The Journal of Economic
         History 39 (3): 655–680.




                                                    39 
 
