                                                    WPS8008


Policy Research Working Paper                      8008




          Challenges in Assessing the Costs
           of Household Cooking Energy
            in Lower-Income Countries
                               Michael Toman
                              Randall Bluffstone




Development Research Group
Environment and Energy Team
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8008


  Abstract
 The paper discusses challenges in analyzing the costs of                           household time, impacts of credit constraints on stove
 household cooking methods (fuels and associated stove                              selection, preferences for stove characteristics, and the mag-
 technologies) in lower-income countries, and sources of                            nitude of health and environmental externalities. All these
 divergence between observed and true social costs. The                             influences on cost require consideration of the local context.
 challenges in assessing social costs include valuation of




  This paper is a product of the Environment and Energy Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at mtoman@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
           Challenges in Assessing the Costs of
   Household Cooking Energy in Lower-Income Countries

    Michael Toman (Development Research Group, World Bank)
               Randall Bluffstone (Portland State University)




Key Words: Household energy. Clean cooking. Improved cookstoves.                Energy access.
Environment and development. Greenhouse gas emissions.
JEL Classification: Q42, Q53, Q54, Q56, O13


The authors are very grateful to Richard Hosier and Venkata Ramana Putti for comments on earlier
drafts of this paper. Financial support for the research was provided by the World Bank Energy
Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP). Responsibility for the contents of the paper
is the authors’ alone.
                                   Challenges in Assessing the Costs of
                           Household Cooking Energy in Lower-Income Countries
1. Introduction
Access to modern forms of energy like electricity and natural gas is particularly limited in low
income developing countries (UNDP and WHO, 2009), and about two-fifths of the human
population still relies on solid cooking fuels combusted in their homes (Grieshop et al., 2011; IEA,
2012; Jeuland and Pattanayak, 2012; Jeuland et al., 2015).1 Improving access to affordable,
reliable and safe forms of modern energy services has become a priority in efforts to reduce poverty
and promote economic progress (UNDP, 2005; WHO, 2006; UNDP and WHO, 2009; UNIDO,
2009; AGECC, 2010; World Bank and GACC, 2015). To that end, the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) include three energy targets, to be met by 2030: (1) ensure universal
access to affordable, reliable and modern energy services, (2) increase substantially the share of
renewable energy in the global energy mix, and (3) double the global rate of improvement in
energy efficiency (see https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg7). The Sustainable Energy for
All (SE4ALL) initiative (www.se4all.org) is promoting diffusion of modern energy services in
developing countries to meet these goals.
There are several widely recognized reasons for reducing dependence on solid cooking fuels like
fuelwood and increasing access to cleaner and improved cooking fuels and technologies. They
include greater household convenience; reduced exposure to severe health threats from indoor air
pollution; reduced greenhouse gases from lower emissions of black carbon; and the potential for
reduced pressures on standing forests, including lower net releases of carbon dioxide from forest
degradation.
Against these benefits, however, are considerations related to the cost of providing cleaner and
improved cooking energy and devices. Malla and Timilsina (2014) survey the determinants of
demands for different cooking fuels and associated cooking technologies, including fuel and
cookstove costs. Energy sources such as liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), natural gas and grid-
supplied electricity require major public infrastructure investments or costly supply chain
development, and often more expensive stoves.2 A study by IIASA’s Global Energy Assessment
estimated that for universal access to modern energy by 2030, including electricity grid
connections and improved access to clean cooking fuels, $US30 billion to US$41 billion would
need to be invested annually (GEA, 2012). While technologies are improving, without (and maybe
even with) expanded policies for increasing use of modern cooking energy, the use of traditional
biomass fuels by many people will continue for many years (IEA, 2006; 2014).
One key aspect of moving more rapidly away from traditional cooking methods is effectively
“pricing in” all the benefits and costs of cleaner and improved cooking. Inclusive measures of the
social costs of alternative stove-and-fuel combinations for household cooking, capturing both costs
                                                            
1
  As of 2016/2017, the World Bank classifies low-income economies as those with a gross national income (GNI) per
capita, calculated using the Atlas method, of $1,025 or less in 2015; lower middle-income economies are those with
a GNI per capita between $1,026 and $4,035; upper middle-income economies are those with a GNI per capita between
$4,036 and $12,475; high-income economies are those with a GNI per capita of $12,476 or more..
2
  Cooking with off-grid electricity is in principle possible, but devices for doing so (including storing sufficient
electricity to provide the heat required) are not yet practical.

2 | P a g e  
 
 
borne by the household and external effects, provide a conceptually solid base for comparing
different options – options that have lower social cost for providing a given level of cooking
services would be preferable to options with higher social cost. However, estimating a number of
key influences on the costs of alternative cooking modes remains a significant practical challenge.
The paper discusses challenges in analyzing the social costs of household cooking methods (fuels
and associated stove technologies) in lower-income countries. These challenges include valuation
of household time, impacts of credit constraints on stove selection, preferences for stove
characteristics, and the magnitude of health and environmental externalities. All of these
influences on cost require consideration of local context.
Section 2 of the paper provides a categorization of fuel-technology options for household cooking.
Section 3 provides a general framework for assessing the social cost of different cooking options.
Section 4 discusses challenges in assessing social costs. Section 5 shows the wide potential ranges
for social costs, depending on particular contexts. . Section 6 contains concluding remarks. The
Appendix provides examples of social cost calculation in specific contexts.


2. Characterizing Fuel-Technology Combinations for Household Cooking3
Different terminologies and definitions are used in categorizing household cooking energy types
(Figure 1).4 Different types of cookstoves are used by households and these stoves are associated
with the availability of specific energy types. Biomass is used in rural areas for traditional cooking
(with a pot supported on 3 stones over the fire), and with some simple enclosed stove designs.
Kerosene is used for cooking as well as lighting in some areas, especially where it is subsidized.
In contrast, cooking stoves using LPG, natural gas and electricity are more common in urban areas,
though their direct costs in terms of stove and fuel are higher. In recent years, biogas cookstoves
are also gaining popularity in rural areas of some developing countries, though the economics of
biogas cooking depends on the availability of cattle dung and the capital cost of the manure
digester. There are also efforts to expand the use of bio-ethanol for cooking.
The conversion efficiency of household cookstoves varies widely by stove design and energy
sources, and it depends on a variety of site-specific circumstances in developing countries. More
modern fuels have high energy content per kg of fuel used, while traditional biomass fuels have
low energy content. Traditional fuels also can be much more polluting than modern energy
sources, though this depends very much on the type of stove used as well. It is thus important to
understand how and why these different types of energy sources and stoves are used for cooking
in different parts of the developing world.




                                                            
3
    This section draws from Malla and Timilsina (2014). See also World Bank and GACC (2015).
4
  In the literature, "fuels" and "energy" are often used interchangeably. In this paper, fuel refers to any material which
is used to produce heat or power by burning, and energy refers to heat and power.

3 | P a g e  
 
 
 Development                Production                 Source               Urbanization                Income


      Traditional               Primary                Renewables                  Rural                    Low


                                                          Non-
      Intermediate             Secondary                                          Urban                     High
                                                       renewables


        Modern


Figure 1. Schematic illustration of categorizing household cooking energy types.
Sources: UN (1982; 2016); IEA (2005, 2012).


3. Defining the Social Costs of Cooking Energy Alternatives
We adopt a holistic definition of the full social costs of cooking energy options that includes, first,
the “direct costs,” such as investment in stoves and fuel storage (e.g. LPG cylinders), as well as
the cost of commercially purchased fuels and the opportunity cost of self-collected fuels (e.g. time
spent that could have been spent on some other valuable activities). The full social cost of cooking
energy options also includes any non-internalized externalities, such as effects on human health
from indoor smoke exposure, forest degradation, and the impacts of greenhouse gas emissions.
To develop a general expression for the social cost of different cooking options, we index different
combinations of fuels and stoves by subscripts i = 0, 1, 2, …. The index i = 0 can be thought of as
the most basic technology (e.g., three-stone cooking tripod), with other index values reflecting
different improved stove designs and/or alternative fuel types. We would like social cost measures
for a comparable amount of cooking activity. To that end, we focus here on cost calculations per
annum.
We can write the total annual social cost of using energy-plus-technology type i, denoted SOCi, as
shown in equation (1):
(1)                                                                     ∑                   .
In this equation, ki is the amortized annual capital cost for the stove, if any,5 and mi is the annual
stove maintenance cost (if any). fi is the price per unit of purchased fuel, and Qim is the amount of
purchased fuel. For LPG and electricity, fi should represent the levelized cost including amortized
expenditure for associated equipment (LPG canisters, household electricity connection). For
biomass fuel that is self-supplied, FTi is the collection time per annum, while w is a measure of

                                                            
5
   If the initial capital cost of a stove is Ki, its anticipated life is Ti years, and the annual discount rate is r, then ki is
given by ∑                 ↔          ∑            .

4 | P a g e  
 
 
the unit opportunity cost of time (discussed further below). Because the amount of time spent
cooking may differ across technologies, with fast-cooking fuel-technology packages offering time
savings benefits compared with other cooking methods, we denote the opportunity cost of cooking
time as CTi w , where CTi is the amount of cooking time. In addition, some stoves may cause more
disamenities than others, with amount of household smoke being a primary example. That cost is
denoted by Di. Finally, we denote by dij the annual value of natural resource damages of type j
(e.g., deforestation) from the use of stove-and-fuel combination i; pij is the annual emission of
pollutant type j from stove-and-fuel combination i; and the unit health damage cost of pollutant j
is hj. Then the total opportunity cost of natural resource and health damages for combination i is
given by ∑               .
One way to apply (1) to different stove-fuel combinations, given a comparable level of cooking
activity, is through controlled cooking tests, in which fuel consumption, cooking time, and (to the
extent possible) air quality in the vicinity of the cooking location are measured while cooking the
same meals with different methods. Satisfaction surveys can be used in connection with the
controlled cooking tests to gauge advantages and disamenities (Beyene et al., 2015), and natural
resource damage estimates can be made. This is obviously a time consuming and expensive
approach. A simpler but less precise method is to apply (1) to different cooking methods, holding
constant the total cooking heat produced as a way of approximating comparable levels of cooking
activity.6 Information about fuel costs and fuel gathering and cooking times also can be collected.
This can provide information about the more direct costs borne by the household, but it will not
shed light on natural resource damages, health effects, or amenity and disamenity values.


4. Challenges in Assessing Social Costs
The most fundamental challenge in estimating the social cost of cooking technology and fuel
combinations is that even direct cost information is often not easily available. Locally relevant
information is needed for commercial fuel prices, time spent collecting fuel, and actual costs of
stoves in the market. Information on stove performance is also needed, but this can be difficult
given the lack of internationally recognized performance standards and testing.
Missing markets for accessing financing can increase the cost for improved stove acquisition or a
switch to modern fuels by raising the effective cost of borrowing (Binswanger and Sillers 1983;
Yesuf and Bluffstone, 2009). Low-income households may need to make significant investments
to take advantage of electricity or LPG availability, and large investments are often needed to
establish biogas plants. However, the problem can arise even with much less costly technologies.
Bensch et al. (2015) investigate low uptake of improved biomass cookstoves in Burkina Faso and
find that the main barrier is affordability – even though the stove model investigated costs between

                                                            
6
  For i ≥ 1, let Qi be total fuel use (purchased and/or collected), HCi is the heat content of the relevant fuel (joules/kg),
and SEi is a dimensionless number reflecting the stove’s conversion efficiency (joules of cooking heat output per joule
of energy input). Given the definitions of Q, HC, and SE, we can write total cooking heat output as           ∗     ∗ .
Setting Hi = H0 yields               .		 One difficulty with this approach is that it does not allow for what is typically
referred to as “rebound effects,” in which households enjoy part of fuel savings in the form of additional cooking.
Relatively little seems to be known about the size of such cooking rebound effects in lower income settings.

5 | P a g e  
 
 
$4.00 and $7.00. Experiments have demonstrated increased interest in acquiring improved
biomass cookstoves with availability of micro-finance (Beltramo et al., 2015).
Difficulties in accessing cash employment opportunities can also inhibit investments in modern
technologies. Labor markets offer a backstop income source if something goes wrong with
agricultural production. If such opportunities are restricted – for example, because of high
mobility costs – households may be less willing to take risks.7 Conversely, improved
circumstances for women and girls can increase the opportunity cost of their labor for fuel
gathering, affecting the attractiveness of commercial fuels.
A major estimation challenge is how to value household time and other resources used to self-
supply and consume energy resources during the cooking process, versus undertaking other
productive activities or enjoying leisure. Assessing the opportunity cost requires inferences on
alternative uses of inputs devoted to energy self-provision (time, and land if an energy crop is
cultivated), and time spent cooking (since different stoves and fuels have different thermal
efficiencies and cooking speeds. A measure of local wages is often used to approximate the
opportunity cost of time, but this is only true if labor markets and household labor allocations work
well. In rural areas of many developing countries labor markets are very thin, implying that
households may not be able to get wage employment if they have free time. In such situations,
observed market wage rates may be poor proxies for the shadow value of time (Bluffstone, 1995).
Environmental and health impacts are important influences on the social cost of cooking energy
that are not reflected in market prices, and may therefore only be partly incorporated into
household cooking energy decisions. Prominent among these are the adverse effects on human
health of household exposure to smoke, primarily from traditional biomass fuels (Martin et al.,
2011; Smith et al., 2013; Lim et al., 2013; Jeuland et al., 2015). Household smoke from biomass
burning contains a number of harmful substances (Smith et al., 2013). Exposure to fine particulate
matter leads to health damages including acute respiratory infections and chronic pulmonary
obstruction, especially for more heavily exposed women and girls. In turn this results in more than
4 million cases of premature mortality, the single largest risk for premature mortality in the
developing world (WHO 2014a).8 A number of other health threats from smoke exposure have
been identified, including increased risk of low neonatal birth weight and impeded child cognitive
development (World Bank and GACC, 2015).
Reductions in these are therefore important potential benefits from improved stoves and cleaner
fuels (Jeuland et al., 2015). However, calculating these economic benefits requires a number of
measurements or assumptions about the extent of indoor air quality degradation attributable to
household cooking (compared to spillovers from neighbors’ cooking or ambient pollution more
generally).9 Information also is needed about the cost of illness from smoke exposure, and the


                                                            
7
  Difficulties in being able to insure against agricultural and other risks may also affect energy choices. Without
insurance, even an occasionally unreliable energy supply chain may be a deterrent to switching to more modern
energy. The same would apply when petroleum or natural gas based energy sources exhibit price volatility.
8
 The second largest is exposure to high levels of ambient air pollution, in particular in highly polluted large cities.
9
  Lacey et al. (2017) present remote-sensing based methods for assessing ambient concentrations of both fine
particulates and black carbon, notwithstanding the large spatial heterogeneity of these substances.

6 | P a g e  
 
 
welfare cost of elevated premature mortality risk (Narain and Sall, 2016), as well as the welfare
cost of threats to child health and development.
An additional important question, with philosophical as well as methodological dimensions,
involves the extent to which threats to family health are internalized by those making choices about
cooking approaches (including fuel, stove type, ventilation, and presence of children), and the
extent to which those preferences should drive policy decisions. Rational choice theory would
imply that users would balance costs and other factors against health threats when deciding how
to cook. In practice, however, households may not be very well informed about the consequences
of these choices; may discount the consequences of pollutant exposure, either because of their
longer-term nature or for other reasons; may find cleaner stoves or alternative fuels less convenient
to use; or for other reasons may value smoke reductions differently – and typically less – than
estimates based on highly controlled cost-of-illness studies (Mobarak et al., 2012).
Consequently, greater awareness of the adverse effects of exposure to indoor air pollution may
make cleaner fuels or stoves more attractive, but so would offering a package of measures for
promoting cleaner and improved cooking alternatives, including greater stove durability and ease
of use as well as financing options (Pattanayak et al., 2016). Aside from time discounting,
individuals may associate a relatively lower cost with pollutant exposure than would be implied
by cost-of-illness studies because they underestimate their own vulnerability, or because long-
established habits are not easily changed. Sunstein (2012-2013) provides a discussion of these and
other possibilities, and advances the argument that public policy should contain an element of
paternalism in such situations by not being entirely bound by revealed individual preferences if
those preferences reflect incomplete or incorrect information.
Other health threats for women and girls include insects and snake bites and musculoskeletal
injuries associated with collection of fuelwood for cooking. Especially disturbing is that fuelwood
collection is one of the key sources of physical and psychological violence against women. Somali
refugee women have been raped while gathering fuelwood around camps bordering the Somali-
Kenyan border, and women in Sarajevo, Bosnia, faced sniper fire while gathering fuel (Reddy et
al. 1997). In Darfur, Sudan, women were frequently assaulted and attacked while collecting
fuelwood; many trekked hours at dusk and dawn to avoid exposure to the sun, but these were also
the times when walking alone was least safe (Gaye 2008). Fuelwood collection is one of the
greatest risks of sexual violence against women in refugee camps in Africa.10
Another source of external cost is the contribution of cooking energy use to the accumulation of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. This could result from net forest degradation from fuelwood
gathering (van der Werf et al., 2009; Saatchi et al., 2011), or the effects of “black carbon” – a
short-lived pollutant from fuelwood use that contributes to climate change (Bond et al., 2013).
Forest degradation can also generate local natural resource damages, such as soil erosion that
compromises water sources, and losses of habitats and can increase fuelwood collection times
(Cooke et al., 2008; Amacher et al., 2004; Bluffstone, 1995). If forest resources are open access,
meaning that collections are uncontrolled, spillover effects of fuelwood harvest decisions on other
collectors are likely to not be properly internalized.

                                                            
10
 Energy Matters: Women at Risk, African Clean Energy, http://www.africancleanenergy.com/energymatters-
women-at-risk/.
7 | P a g e  
 
 
Table 1 summarizes key context features that can vary not only across fuels, but also across
locations. The Appendix provides examples of the application of (1) to actual situations.


Table 1 Likely Magnitudes of Effects of Local Context Factors on Costs of Household Fuels
                                       Contribution to Increased Household Costs
 Fuel           Under-developed       Financial Market Distortions     Indoor Air Pollution
                Fuel Markets
 Fuelwood       Limited               Low                                 High
 Dung/Ag.       Limited               Low                                 High
 Residue
 Electricity    Government supplied   Low                                 Low
 LPG            May be high due to    May be high if first cost is        Low
                transport costs       important
 Kerosene       Generally limited     Limited                             Limited
 Biogas         Nontradable. No       Very important, because of high     Low
                markets.              first cost and need for large
                                      animals


 Fuel           Poorly functioning    Stronger Standards for Child        Policies Restricting Open Access
                labor markets         Schooling and Higher Status of      to Biomass
                                      Women
 Fuelwood       Limited               High, because reduces “free”        High in short run. Possibly
                                      household labor/increases           negative in long run due to
                                      opportunity cost of time.           increased productivity of common
                                                                          lands.
 Dung/Ag.       Limited               High, because reduces “free”        Likely high in short run, because
 Residue                              household labor/increases           reduced open access reduces
                                      opportunity cost of time.           animal raising subsidies. Possibly
                                                                          negative in long run.
 Electricity    Limited, because of   Limited                             None
                subsidies
 LPG            High                  Limited                             None
 Kerosene       High                  Limited                             Not directly relevant
 Biogas         May be high           High, because opportunity cost of   Likely high in short run, because
                depending on          time rises and biogas depends on    reduced open access reduces
                subsidies             animal dung                         animal raising subsidies. Possibly
                                                                          negative in long run.


5. Ranges for Social Cost Evaluations
A meta-analysis presented in Jeuland and Pattanayak (2012) provides ranges of possible values
for many of the key parameters going into the social cost calculation in (1). Their parameter ranges
can be used to demonstrate the wide range of potential social costs for different cooking methods.
This in turn emphasizes further the importance of local context.
In Table 2 we present the ranges of values from Jeuland and Pattanayak (2012) for direct cost
parameters for traditional and ICS. The parameters in Table 2 include the costs of the stove, fuel
and cooking time, but leave out health and environmental effects.
8 | P a g e  
 
 
Table 2. Components of Direct Cost of Cooking
                                            Traditional Wood Stove             ICS Improved Wood Stove

 Cost component                     Units       Low      Medium      High      Low     Medium   High
 (1) Levelized capital cost         $/yr        0        0           0         3       15       50
 (2) Cooking time                   hrs/day     2        3           4         1.4     2.9      6.0
 (3) Energy content of fuel         MJ/kg       16       16          16        16      16       16
 (4) Fuel use rate                  kg/hr       0.3      0.6         1
 (5) Stove        heat   transfer
 efficiency                         (none)      0.07     0.11        0.15      0.13    0.25     0.4
 (6) % of fuel purchased                        0        0.25        0.5       0       0.25     0.5
 (7) Fuel price                     $/kg        0.03     0.12        0.2       0.03    0.12     0.2
 (8) Time collecting fuel           hrs/day     0.3      1           3         0.3     1        3
 (9) Additional time for fuel
 preparation                        hrs/day     0        0           0         0.17    0.33     0.5
 (10) Wage (cost of time)           $/hr        0.13     0.2         0.5       0.13    0.2      0.5
 (11) Annual fuel use               kg/yr       219      657         1460      117.9   289.1    547.5
 (12) Annual         fuel cost
 (purchase,           collection,
 preparation)                       $/yr        14.24    74.46       419.75    22.3    87.5     419.8
 (13) Total annual cost for
 stove and fuel                     $/yr        14.24    74.46       419.75    25.30   102.51   469.75
 (14) Opportunity cost        of
 annual cooking time                $/yr        94.9     219         730       66.4    208.1    1095.0
 (15) Total annual “direct”
 opportunity cost                   $/yr        109.14   293.46      1149.75   91.73   310.56   1564.75
Source: Calculations based on Jeuland and Pattanayak (2012).


Consider first the traditional wood stove. There is no capital or maintenance cost. Lines 2 and 4
give the amount of time spent cooking each day and the fuel use per hour of cooking. Multiplying
these two numbers together and then multiplying by 365, we can compute annual fuel use (line
11). Line 10 gives the implicit or “shadow” cost of time based on a nonagricultural wage.
Combining lines 2 and 10 and multiplying by 365, can compute the annual opportunity cost of
cooking time (CTi w in equation (1)).

To compute the cost of acquiring fuel, we first apply the percentage in line 6 to calculate the fuel
portion of purchased fuel and then multiply by the price of fuel in line 7. This gives us fiQim in
equation (1). For fuel that is collected, line 8 provides the time spent in collection activity, while
line 10 gives the shadow value of that time. Together these give FTi w in equation (1). Combining
the cost figures for purchased and collected fuelwood and multiplying by 365, we obtain the total
9 | P a g e  
 
 
annual fuel cost in line 12. Combining lines 12 and 14, we calculate the total direct opportunity
cost per year (line 15).

To make the calculations for the ICS, we apply the heat-equivalence method described in footnote
9. Lines 3 and 5 give the energy content and the stove heat transfer efficiency (HC and SE) of the
traditional stove and ICS. Applying this equation along with the total fuel use for the traditional
stove in line 10 (the parameter Q0 in footnote 9), we can calculate the total fuel use per year for
the ICS. From there the calculations proceed as described above. Of special note is the importance
of the implicit (i.e., “shadow”) value of cooking time. Women spend a lot of time on cooking and
therefore small changes in daily cooking time, depending on the value used, can have big effects.
In some scenarios improved stoves reduce cooking time sufficiently to offset higher levels of other
costs.
Table 3 presents levelized direct costs for six different combinations of stoves and fuels, including
electric stoves, based on the information in Jeuland and Pattanayak (2012). The columns labeled
stove+fuel costs omit the opportunity cost of cooking time, in order to highlight the importance of
that component.


Table 3. Comparison of Annual Direct Costs for Different Fuel-and-Stove Combinations
                                                                   Total Direct Cost      including
  Technology                Stove+Fuel Cost ($/yr)                 Cooking Time ($/yr)
                            Low        Mid           High          Low       Mid         High
  Traditional wood          14         74         420              109       293         1150
  Improved wood             25         103           470           92        311         1565
  Traditional charcoal      8          91            451           64        255         1181
  Improved charcoal         8          81            303           65        245         1033
  Kerosene                  15         67            200           63        220         857
  Propane                   63         123           250           107       269         907
  Electricity               108        374        789              142       512         1446
Calculations based on Jeuland and Pattanayak (2012).


As can be seen from Table 3, the ranges of potential direct costs for each technology are quite
large. The figures suggest that in general more advanced technologies tend to be less costly,
because of improved thermal efficiency and higher energy density, even though capital costs and
fuel costs may be higher. Less anticipated perhaps is the very wide range of costs. The figures
also emphasize the substantial impact of cooking times on opportunity costs.
Tables 4 and 5 present estimated differences in the cost of acute respiratory illness induced by
exposure to household air pollutants. Table 4 shows the relative capabilities to reduce acute
respiratory illness of the other technologies in Table 3, compared to traditional wood stoves. To
translate these relative risk reductions into economic benefits per household, we need the baseline
incidence of acute respiratory illness (number of cases per person per year), to which the
10 | P a g e  
 
 
percentage reductions in can be applied. In addition, we need figures on cost per illness and family
size.
The estimates of avoided costs using this information are presented in Table 5. The figures indicate
huge ranges for these avoided costs. This reflects the wide ranges of figures for avoided illness
and cost of illness in Table 4. Also of considerable interest is that with the exception of the
improved woodstove technology, the differences among the technologies in terms of avoided
illness cost per family, per year, are not that large. This is a relevant consideration since gas and
electric cooking methods tend to be costlier than ICS using biomass.11


Table 4: Parameters for Assessing Relative Impacts of Different Cooking Technologies on
Social Cost of Acute Respiratory Disease
                                                Low            Mid            High
                                                Percent reduction acute respiratory relative to
     Technology                                 traditional wood stove
     Traditional wood                           NA             NA             NA
     Improved wood                              10             40             70
     Traditional charcoal                       0              20             40
     Improved charcoal                          10             40             70
     Kerosene                                   45             60             75
     Propane                                    45             60             75
     Electric                                   45             60             75

     Cost of illness ($/case)                   2              15             60
     Baseline      incidence
     (cases/person-year)                        0.1            0.5            1.0
     Household                        size
     (number)                                   4              5              6
Source: Jeuland and Pattanayak (2012).




                                                            
11
 WHO (2014b) expresses significant reservations about kerosene use based on safety considerations, and
worrisome health risks from vapor inhalation as well as post-combustion air pollution. 
11 | P a g e  
 
 
Table 5: Avoided Costs of Acute Respiratory Illness per Year, per Family by Technology
                            Low            Mid         High
                            Avoided illness cost per family per year
  Technology                relative to traditional wood stove ($/yr)
  Traditional wood          NA             NA          NA
  Improved wood             0.08           15          252
  Traditional charcoal      0              7.5         144
  Improved charcoal         0.08           15          252
  Kerosene                  0.36           22.5        270
  Propane                   0.36           22.5        270
  Electric                  0.36           22.5        270
Calculations based on Jeuland and Pattanayak (2012).


6. Concluding Remarks
This paper discusses some of the critical elements associated with assessing preferences for and
social opportunity costs of alternative cooking energy and technology choices, and some of the
key challenges in making those assessments. A significant number of socioeconomic,
demographic, behavioral, social, and cultural factors influence preferences. If not effectively
addressed, some of these preference determinants become barriers to cleaner cooking adoption.
For example, while the cost of modern cookstoves or energy sources can be a barrier for low-
income households, the uptake of less expensive ICS can be low even when heavily subsidized.
In these cases, stove designs that are unreliable or inconvenient to use, or do not provide customary
food tastes, are more significant considerations.
The opportunity cost of cooking energy use likewise depends on a considerable amount of
location- and context-specific data on fuel and stove costs and quality, and the opportunity cost of
household time, as well as adjustments for a range of market and policy failures affecting cooking
energy incentives and choices. In particular, to assess the value of avoided health damages,
information is needed on baseline disease incidence, cost of illness and the value of reduced
mortality risk, as well as individual attitudes toward such health risks, while information on
ecosystem damages and their economic consequences is needed to assess environmental impacts.
What are some priorities among these topics for attention in further empirical work? In a
sensitivity analysis examining the principal influences on costs across fuels and stove technologies,
Jeuland and Pattanayak (2012) find that for improved stoves burning wood, the key factors
influencing cost are the frequency with which improved stoves are used and the cooking time
required for each cooking event. If a stove is used infrequently and as a consequence is not used
very efficiently, the opportunity cost will be greater than a traditional wood stove. For improved
charcoal stoves, time efficiency also matters, but the main drivers of overall cost are the cost of
charcoal and improvement in energy efficiency relative to traditional stoves. One implication of
these observations is that better understanding stove adoption and use decisions in the field is
important for reducing uncertainty about social costs.

12 | P a g e  
 
 
As noted above, more highly improved stove technologies and modern fuels have lower total social
costs for some but not all plausible values of key underlying parameters. For LPG in particular,
the improvement in energy efficiency relative to the traditional stove is key, but so is the baseline
incidence of acute respiratory illness. Much of the potential benefit from LPG comes from reduced
health impacts. Consequently, if the incidence of respiratory illness is relatively low in the baseline
(e.g. due to high ventilation or cooking outdoors), the health benefits from adopting these costlier
technologies will be lower; if households do not put a high value on respiratory health risks, the
perceived health benefits will be lower. Finally, as one would expect, the energy efficiency of
electric stoves and the cost of electricity are significant factors for that technology.
Since more highly improved stoves and modern fuels are likely to remain costlier than less
advanced alternatives in a number of locations for some time to come, one key question for
increasing the adoption and use of more modern cooking methods is the size of externality costs
and how they might be priced into actual transactions. One way this could be done would be
through packaging a stove and/or energy source improvement program to include “carbon finance”
– payments by third parties reflecting the avoided greenhouse gas emissions of the program. This
is already a possibility under existing climate change mitigation mechanisms, such as REDD+.
For example, the firm DelAgua Health has distributed more than 100,000 EcoZoom stoves in
Rwanda (http://www.delagua.org/projects/rwanda) and Project Surya (www.projectsurya.org) is
an interesting example of a nonprofit project relying on carbon finance.
Nevertheless, possibilities are relatively limited as demonstrated by the current low prices of CO2
in voluntary markets. Extending the scope for such transactions requires not only solid information
on the avoided emissions – including solid information on stove and fuel use patterns, not just
stoves distributed in the field – but also the evolution of a mechanism for cross-border financing
of greenhouse gas emissions reductions under the 2015 Paris Agreement.
Another mechanism can be domestically provided subsidies for improved stoves and modern fuels
that reflect the avoided health costs from less clean cooking methods. Calculating the value of
such avoided costs requires information on both new stove and fuel use patterns, and on baseline
exposure to local pollutants. Beyond the calculations, however, the approach requires strong
political commitment to use the public budget to reduce the burden of disease from traditional
cooking.


Appendix: Numerical Illustrations of Social Cost Calculations: Cases from Senegal
Traditional Versus Improved Wood Stoves
Bensch and Peters (2015) present results of a randomized controlled trial field experiment
involving a wood-fueled ICS in rural Senegal. In this approach, a random sample of rural
households was generated, and then a random subset of those households received an ICS. Data
were obtained from controlled cooking trials, measurement of wood use in actual practice (to try
to account for actual frequency of use of the ICS), and responses to follow-up questions about
respiratory illness and eye problems from exposure to cooking smoke. The baseline was a
traditional three-stone stove, though some households in the sample also used a traditional
(unimproved) metal stove (and this was accounted for in the statistical analysis).


13 | P a g e  
 
 
Key information from the field experiment is summarized in Table 6. The first point to note is the
low cost of the ICS, which is roughly 0.01 (1 percent) of the 2012 per-capita income in Senegal
(based on 2012 UN statistics for Senegal). Information from USAID (n.d.) indicates that the type
of ICS used in the experiment could be expected to have a useful life of at least 2-3 years, and
often 5-6 years. This implies a cost per year on the order of only 0.2 percent of annual per-capita
income).12
The next finding is that while firewood consumption drops considerably with use of the ICS (on
the order of 31% below the baseline), fuelwood collection time is very little affected by adoption
of the ICS. Bensch and Peters (2015) speculate that this could reflect, among other things,
household decisions to carry less wood per collection trip, rather than reducing the total time spent
on collection. This point illustrates the importance of trying to obtain field-validated data for
evaluation of ICS, as opposed to just relying on the assumption that collection time dropped in
proportion to wood use.


Table 6. Findings from a field experiment for introducing ICS in Senegal
  Parameter                                                    Traditional wood stove   Wood ICS
  Stove purchase cost                                          0                        $8-11
  Fuelwood collection time                                     23                       22
  (hours per week)
  Firewood consumption                                         88                       61
  (kg/week)
  Cooking duration (hours per                                  39                       30
  week)
  Percentage of households       17.3                                                   9.1
  with occurrence of respiratory
  disease symptoms*
Sources: Bensch and Peters (2015); Tijdens et al (2012); USAID (n.d.)
*
 Based on self-reported information of symptom occurrence over the past three months for at least one woman in the
household involved in cooking. Total number of observations = 227.


The drop in wood use is somewhat below the estimate obtained from controlled cooking tests
(around 40%). This may in part reflect a typical difference between controlled and in-the-field
behaviors. It could also reflect in part to a “rebound effect:” – with a more fuel-efficient stove in
effect lowering the opportunity cost of cooking, households may elect to do more cooking (which
could also explain the limited impact of the ICS on collection times). Support for this supposition
                                                            
12
  This rough calculation does not account for the difference between rural and national average incomes, reflecting
higher incomes in urban areas. On the other hand, the cost per household will be smaller than indicated in the text
given multiple income earners in the household.
14 | P a g e  
 
 
is provided by other information in Bensch and Peters (2015) indicating that the ICS reduced
firewood use per dish cooked by around 48%.
Notwithstanding any rebound effect, however, Table 6 indicates that the increased thermal
efficiency of the ICS significantly reduced time spent cooking (by almost one-quarter).
Information from WageIndicator Foundation (Tijdens et al 2012) suggests that a relevant hourly
value for this time (based on wage rates for informal sector work) would be $0.40 – $0.80 per
hour. This would put the weekly value of time saved from the ICS at $3.60 – $7.20 per week,
implying a very fast payback on the stove cost in terms of the opportunity cost of time alone.
Finally, Table 6 indicates that households with an ICS in the experiment report a sharp decline in
the occurrence of respiratory illness symptoms (a decline of almost half in the frequency of
symptom reporting within a household, relative to the baseline). To carry out the calculations for
the economic value of health benefits shown in Tables 4-5 of the main text, we would need to have
figures on typical household size, baseline occurrence of acute respiratory illness, and cost of an
episode of illness.


Ethanol, LPG, and Fuelwood
A study by Practical Action et al. (2014) examines possibilities for improved fuels and/or stoves
in several different parts of Senegal. We focus here on the part of the study concerned with the
possibility of introducing ethanol fuel and stoves in the Saint-Louis region (chapter 5 of the report).
Ethanol is of interest in this area because the country’s main sugar producer is located there, and
is already producing significant quantities of ethanol for non-fuel markets.
The study focuses on the possibility of ethanol fuel penetration in the urban cooking energy market
within Saint-Louis, and so we begin with that here. According to figures supplied by Practical
Action et al. (2014), the urban population in 2010 was about 394,000, about 44% of the total
population. About 60% of the region’s urban population already are using LPG. However, many
of them also use charcoal as a secondary fuel, and charcoal is used as the primary fuel by the
majority of the other households; about 75% of all urban households have a simple charcoal stove,
while 16% have an improved charcoal stove.
As noted, the cost comparison between ethanol and LPG for cooking needs to take into account a
variety of factors including fuel cost differences and differences in their thermal content,
differences in amortized stove cost and thermal efficiency, and differences in environmental
impacts. The Practical Action et al. (2014) report indicates that both ethanol and LPG stoves have
a conversion efficiency of about 50%. It provides a range for potential ethanol stove costs of $30-
$60, but does not provide information on LPG stove costs.
To look more deeply into this, we drew upon information in a review of clean cooking alternatives
for all of Sub-Saharan Africa (World Bank, 2014). Appendix 1 of that report indicates that more
sophistical ethanol stoves would cost on the order of $50-$80 (cheaper but less durable stoves
using gel alcohol cost less). Multiple burner LPG stoves would cost on the order of $50-$90 (less
convenient single burner ones, $10-$50). Figure 44 in the main body of the report indicates that
the LPG stove is typically costlier than an ethanol stove, but only modestly so – and such a cost
difference likely would be even smaller in Senegal given an established urban market for LPG.

15 | P a g e  
 
 
We can thus conclude on the basis of this information on stove costs and conversion efficiencies
that differences in stove costs are more of a second-order consideration in comparing ethanol and
LPG. Similarly, Figure 11 of World Bank (2014) suggests that the environmental performances
of the two stove-plus-fuel options are likely to be fairly comparable. Accordingly, the main factor
to consider initially is how the two fuel costs compare.
Practical Action (2014, Annex A) reports that LPG costs are CFAF 666-814 per kg, depending on
cylinder size (the higher unit cost is for the smaller cylinder). Using an exchange rate of CFAF
500 = $US1, we can express this as $1.33-1.63/kg. Given 42.5 MJ of energy per kg of LPG, we
can re-express this range as $0.031 - $0.039/MJ.
To compare these figures to the cost of ethanol, we must speculate on the price of fuel-grade
ethanol since no market currently exists. It turns out that the sugar producer produces as a joint
product with industrial grade (100%) ethanol a supply of 90-95% ethanol (referred to as “head.”)
This material has no market currently and the company burns it off, although it would be well
suited for fuel. The company has indicated that it believes it could supply fuel grade ethanol for a
price of CFAF 320 per liter. Since there are 28MJ/liter of ethanol, this indicative price is
equivalent to $0.023/MJ.
These figures would seem to indicate that ethanol is less costly. However, the ethanol price used
above is a producer price, while the LPG figures are consumer prices including cost of distribution
to retail suppliers. The difference shown above may not be enough to make ethanol cost-
competitive at delivery.
Yet, this comparison is not the end of the story. At present, the producer of the fuel-grade ethanol
burns off the product because it has no market outlet and thus no economic value. If an urban
market for ethanol fuel were to develop, a price far lower than CFAF 320 per liter would provide
the producer with a more profitable alternative to the status quo.13 By this reasoning, the
development of an urban ethanol fuel market in Saint-Louis (along with a market for the stoves)
would seem quite promising; the issue instead is putting in place the supply chains.
Let us turn now to consideration of the potential for ethanol use in rural Saint-Louis. This involves
comparing ethanol costs versus costs associated with a traditional 3-stone stove that is used by
89% of people in rural Senegal. Practical Action et al (2014) concludes that there is little prospect
for penetration of ethanol into rural areas in the nearer term, given differences in fuel and stove
costs and set-up costs for supply chains associated with bringing ethanol fuel and stoves to rural
areas. In Table 7 we use parameters from Practical Action et al (2014) and other sources to further
investigate the comparison.
Practical Action et al. (2014) indicate that in rural Saint-Louis, about 98 kg per household of
fuelwood is used each month, with about 25% collected and the remainder purchased. Annex A
of their report indicates that the price of fuelwood in Saint-Louis is CFAF 80-100 per kg. Using
the approach shown in Table 2, we can compute the monthly cost of fuelwood as follows. The
monthly cost of fuelwood purchased, 75% of 98kg or about 74kg, would be CFAF 5880-7350 or
$US11.76- 14.70. From the figure of 23 hours per week for fuelwood collection time in Table 6,
which assumed no purchases, we could infer that about 23 hours per month would be spent
                                                            
13
  Presumably the floor price for the producer is above zero because there would be costs of maintaining availability
of the “head,” in particular costs of storage.
16 | P a g e  
 
 
collecting fuelwood in rural Saint-Louis. Valuing that time at an opportunity cost of $0.40-0.80/hr,
we find that the total opportunity cost of fuel for the traditional wood stove users per month would
be roughly $20.96-33.10.


Table 7. Comparing ethanol and traditional woodstove cooking in rural Saint-Louis region,
Senegal
    Parameter                         Traditional wood stove        Ethanol
    Stove purchase cost               0                             $50-80&&
    Fuelwood collection time          23 hours/month*               NA
    (for ¼ of total use)
    Opportunity cost of               $9.20-18.40/month             NA
    fuelwood collection time
    (at $0.40-0.80/hr)**
    Total fuel consumption            98 kg/month                   0.5 liters/month #
    Fuel price                        $0.16-0.20/kg                 $0.64/liter?##
    Total opportunity cost of         $20.96-33.10 per month        $19.20 per month?
    fuel***
    Cooking duration&                 156 hr/month                  109 hr/month
    Opportunity cost of               $62.40-$124.80/month          $43.60-87.20/month
    cooking time (at $0.40-
    0.80/hr)**
    Total non-stove costs             $92.56-176.30/month           $62.80-106.40/month
Sources: See notes.
*
    Based on collection time per week in Table 6.
**
     See text for discussion of the range of unit time values.
***
   Equal to the opportunity cost of collection time for one-fourth of total fuelwood use plus total purchase cost for
three-fourths of fuelwood use.
&
  Entry for wood stove comes from Table 6. The figure for ethanol assumes that this cooking fuel and technology has
about the same cooking time savings relative to a traditional wood stove as a kerosene stove, which in turn are taken
from Jeuland and Pattanayak (2012) (the figures behind the summary cost numbers in Table 3).
&&
   Cost range for a more sophisticated stove; could significantly overstate the actual cost of a smaller and less durable
stove using alcohol gel.
#
    See text for explanation of this figure.
##
  As noted in text, the actual price of ethanol fuel for consumers in Saint-Louis is uncertain. This figure does not
include distribution costs but likely is an upper bound for the cost of fuel at the plant gate.




17 | P a g e  
 
 
Practical Action et al. (2014) also indicate that typical use of ethanol for cooking is on the order
of 1 liter per day. Given the other information they provide in their Annex A, including 50%
average conversion efficiency for ethanol stoves and 28MJ/liter for ethanol fuel, 1 liter/day of fuel
use implies 420MJ of useful heat from ethanol for cooking each (30 day) month. In contrast, with
an average efficiency of a 3-stove of 12%, 18MJ/kg for fuelwood, and 98kg of fuelwood used per
month, total useful heat for cooking with a tradition stove would be about 212MJ. This large
disparity in heat use goes against the key assumption of Jeuland and Pattanayak (2012) that heat
demand can be treated as constant across stove-plus-fuel options.
One explanation for this could be that the figure of 1 liter per day of ethanol use is for higher-
income urban households, since urban ethanol use is the focus of the Practical Action et al analysis.
With higher incomes, demands for energy use in cooking also would be larger. We thus assume
for the purpose of the analysis that follows that if ethanol could penetrate into rural areas, its use
would be more like 0.5 liters/day. This makes the two levels of heat consumption referenced above
almost identical between the two fuels.
We discussed above that the actual price of ethanol fuel for consumers in Saint-Louis is uncertain.
The figure in Table 7, which reflects information in the Practical Action et al. report, does not
include distribution costs but likely is an upper bound for the cost of fuel at the plant gate. This of
course makes the monthly cost of ethanol fuel uncertain as well.
We noted in connection with Tables 2 and 3 that differences in cooking time can be an important
element in comparing opportunity costs of different cooking approaches. In Table 7, the cooking
time figure for ethanol assumes that this cooking fuel and technology has about the same cooking
time savings relative to a traditional wood stove as a kerosene stove, which we can compute using
figures in Jeuland and Pattanayak (2012) that were also used in Table 3. Both cooking durations
then can be valued at the same hourly opportunity cost as that applied to wood collection.
Overall, Table 7 suggests that the fuel cost of ethanol might be competitive with fuel costs
(purchasing and gathering) for traditional wood stoves, even before considering differences in
cooking times – assuming a reasonable well-functioning supply chain can be put in place. Clearly
delivery cost for rural markets would be higher than for urban markets. On the other hand, for
reasons already discussed, the producer price for ethanol fuel in Saint-Louis could be quite a bit
lower than the figure stated in the Practical Action et al. report. If this price, as set in an urban
ethanol market in Saint-Louis, were well below the figure in Table 7, there could be “room” for a
considerable distribution cost margin.
So far, we have not accounted for the ethanol stove cost. The $50-$80 purchase cost translates
into $1.32-$2.11/month if amortized over 5 years (well under the working stove life) at a
borrowing rate of 20%. Thus, while the up-front cost certainly can be a barrier, even relatively
costly small-scale financing could make it reasonably affordable (assuming also that repayment
can be reasonably assured).
Finally, recall from the discussion above that ethanol stoves could reduce health-damaging
emissions from traditional solid fuel combustion by something like 95%. Even if ethanol use in
rural areas was not cost-competitive with traditional stoves, there could be a case for subsidizing
it as a way of establishing its use in order to address that serious public health issue. More in-
depth analysis of the case would be needed to settle this and other issues noted above.

18 | P a g e  
 
 
References
AGECC (Advisory Group on Energy and Climate Change). 2010. Energy for a Sustainable
  Future.      New         York:      United       Nations.           Available    at:
  http://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/Publications/download/AGECCsummaryreport.
  pdf
Amacher, G., L. Ersado, D.L. Grebner, and Hyde, W. 2004, “Disease, microdams, and natural
  resources in Tigray, Ethiopia: Impacts on productivity and labour supplies.” Journal of
  Development Studies 40: 122–145.
Bailis, R, R. Drigo, A. Ghilardi, O. Masera. 2015. “The Carbon Footprint of Traditional
   Woodfuels,” Nature Climate Change 5: 266- 272.
Barnes, D. F, S. R. Khandker, and H. A. Samad. 2011. "Energy poverty in rural Bangladesh."
   Energy Policy 39 (2):894-904.
Beltramo, T. and D.I. Levine. 2013. “The Effect of Solar Ovens on Fuel Use, Emissions and
   Health: Results from a Randomised Controlled Trial.” Journal of Development Effectiveness
   5: 178–207.
Bensch, G. and J. Peters. 2015. “The Intensive Margin of Technology Adoption – Experimental
   Evidence on Improved Cooking Stoves in Rural Senegal.” Journal of Health Economics 42:
   44-63.
Binswanger, H., and D. Sillers. 1983. “Risk Aversion and Credit Constraints in Farmers Decision-
   Making: A Reinterpretation.” Journal of Development Studies 20: 5–21.
Bluffstone, R. 1995, “The Effect of Labor Markets on Deforestation in Developing Countries
   under Open Access: An Example from Rural Nepal.” Journal of Environmental Economics
   and Management 29: 42–63.
Bond, T., Doherty, S., Fahey, D., Forster, P., Bernsten, T., DeAngelo, B., Flanner, M., Ghan, S.,
   Karcher, B., Koch, D., Kinne, S., Kondo, Y., Quinn, P., Arofim, M., Schultz, M., Schulz, M.,
   Venkataraman, C., Zhang, H., Zhang, S., Bellouin, N., Guttikunda, S., Hopke, P., Jacobsen,
   M., Kaiser, J., Klimont, Z., Lohmann, U., Schwarz, J., Shindell, D., Storelvmo, T., Warren, S.
   and Zender, C. 2013. “Bounding the role of black carbon in the climate system: A scientific
   assessment.” Journal of Geophysical Research Atmospheres 118: 5380–5552.
Gaye, A. 2008. “Access to Energy and Human Development,” United Nations Development
   Program Human Development Report Office Occasional Paper. New York: UNDP. Available
   at: http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/gaye_amie.pdf.
GEA (Global Energy Assessment). 2012. Global Energy Assessment - Toward a Sustainable
  Future. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA and the
  International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria.
Grieshop, A. P., J. D. Marshall, and M. Kandlikar. 2011. "Health and climate benefits of cookstove
   replacement options." Energy Policy 39 (12):7530-7542.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2005. Energy Statistics Manual. Paris: IEA.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2010. World Energy Outlook 2010. Paris: IEA.
19 | P a g e  
 
 
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2012. World Energy Outlook 2012. Paris: IEA.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2014. World Energy Outlook 2014 Factsheet. Paris: IEA.
Jeuland, M.A. and S.K. Pattanayak. 2012. “Benefits and costs of improved cookstoves: Assessing
    the implications of variability in health, forest and climate impacts.” Plos ONE 7(2): 1-15.
Jeuland, M. A, Pattanayak, S. and Bluffstone, R. 2015. “The economics of household indoor air
    pollution.” Annual Review of Environmental and Resource Economics 7(1): 81-108.




20 | P a g e  
 
 
Lacey, F.G, D. K. Henze, C. J. Lee, A. van Donkelaar, and R. V. Martin, “Transient climate and
   ambient health impacts due to national solid fuel cookstove emissions.” PNAS 114(6): 1269–
   1274.
Lim, S. S., T. Vos, A. D. Flaxman, G. Danaei et al. 2012. "A comparative risk assessment of
   burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions,
   1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010." The Lancet
   380 (9859): 2224-2260.
Madubansi, M., and C. M. Shackleton. 2007. "Changes in fuelwood use and selection following
  electrification in the Bushbuckridge lowveld, South Africa." Journal of Environmental
  Management 83 (4):416-426.
Malla, S., and G. R Timilsina. 2014. “Household cooking fuel choice and adoption of improved
   cookstoves in developing countries : a review.” Policy Research Working Paper 6903.
   Washington,        DC,        World      Bank        ,      June.      Available       at:
   http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/542071468331032496/Household-cooking-fuel-
   choice-and-adoption-of-improved-cookstoves-in-developing-countries-a-review.
Martin II, W J., R. I. Glass, J. M. Balbus, and F. S. Collins. 2011. “A major environmental cause
  of death.” Science 344: 180-181.
Mobarak, A. M, P. Dwivedi, R. Bailis, L. Hildemann, and G. Miller, 2012. “Low demand for
  nontraditional cookstove technologies,” Proceedings of the National Academies of Sciences
  109: 10815-10820.
Modi, V., S. McDade, D. Lallement, and L. Saghir. 2005. Energy Services for the Millennium
  Development Goals. Washington, D.C. and New York: World Bank and UNDP.
Narain, U. and C. Sall. 2016. Methodology for Valuing the Health Impacts of Air Pollution:
   Discussion of Challenges and Proposed Solutions. Washington DC: World Bank. Available
   at: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/832141466999681767/pdf/106607-WP-
   ADD-AUTHORS-ABSTRACT-PUB-DATE-PUBLIC.pdf
Practical Action Consulting, Enda, and World Bank. 2014. Baseline and Feasibility Assessment
   for Alternative Cooking Fuels in Senegal. Washington, DC, World Bank, May. Available at:
   https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/18956/884510WP0REPLA0g
   0May20140Box385191B.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
Reddy, A.K.N., R.H. Williams, T.B. Johansson, S. Baldwin. 1997. Energy After Rio. New York:
   UN Development Programme.
Saatchi SS, Harris NL, Brown S, Lefsky M, Mitchard TAE, Salas W, Zutta BR, Buermann W,
   Lewis SL, Hagen S, Petrova S, White L, Silman M and Morel A. 2011. “Benchmark map of
   forest carbon stocks in tropical regions across three continents.” Proceedings of the National
   Academies of Sciences 108(24): 9899-9904.
Smith, K. R., H. Frumkin, K. Balakrishnan, C. D. Butler, Z. A. Chafe, I. Fairlie, P. Kinney, T.
   Kjellstrom, D. L. Mauzerall, T. E. McKone, A. J. McMichael, and M. Schneider. 2013.
   "Energy and human health." Annual Review of Public Health 34:159-188.


21 | P a g e  
 
 
Sunstein, C. R. 2012-2013. “The Storrs Lectures: Behavioral economics and paternalism.” Yale
   Law Review 122: 1826-1899.
Tijdens, K, J. Besamusca, A. Kane, and E.N. Tingum. 2012. Wages in Senegal: WageIndicator
    Survey 2012.     Amsterdam, WageIndicator Foundation, November.         Available at:
    http://www.wageindicator.org/documents/publicationslist/publications-
    2012/AIAS_WI_f2f_countryreport_Senegal_20121205_en.pdf
UN 1982. Concepts and Methods in Energy Statistics with Special Reference to Energy Accounts
  and      Balances.         New      York:         United    Nations.       Available   at:
  https://unstats.un.org/unsd/publication/SeriesF/SeriesF_29E.pdf
UN 2016. International Recommendations for Energy Statistics (IRES).Department of Economics
  and Social Affairs, Statistical Papers Series M, Number 93. New York: UN. Available at:
  https://unstats.un.org/unsd/energy/ires/IRES_Whitecover.pdf
UNDP. 2005. Energizing the Millennium Development Goals: A Guide to Energy’s Role in
  Reducing       Poverty.      New        York:      UNDP.              Available      at:
  http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/environment-
  energy/sustainable_energy/energizing_the_mdgsaguidetoenergysroleinreducingpoverty.html
UNDP and WHO. 2009. The Energy Access Situation in Developing Countries: A Review
    Focusing on the Least Developed Countries and Sub-Saharan Africa. New York: UNDP.
    Available at:
http://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/Environment%20and%20Energy/Sustainable%2
    0Energy/energy-access-situation-in-developing-countries.pdf
UNIDO. 2009. Scaling up Renewable Energy in Africa. 12th Ordinary Session of Heads of State
  and Governments of the African Union, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Vienna: United Nations
  Industrial    Development        Organisation     (UNIDO).             Available      at:
  https://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/Services/Energy_and_Climate_Change/Renew
  able_Energy/Publications/Scaling%20Up%20web.pdf
USAID (US Agency for International Development). n.d. Senegal Household Energy Project:
  October 1996 — January 2002. Available at:
  http://www.enterpriseworks.org/recentprog_energy_sen.asp.
van der Werf, G. R.; D. C. Morton; R. S. DeFries; J. G. J. Olivier; P. S. Kasibhatla; R. B. Jackson;
   G. J. Collatz; and J. T. Randerson. 2009. “CO2 Emissions from Forest Loss,” Nature
   Geoscience 2: 737 – 738.
World Health Organisation (WHO). 2006. Fuel for Life: Household Energy and Health. Geneva:
  WHO. Available at: http://www.who.int/indoorair/publications/fuelforlife.pdf
World Health Organisation (WHO). 2014a. Burden of Disease from Household Air Pollution for
  2012:       Summary       Report.       Geneva:       WHO.           Available        at:
  http://www.who.int/phe/health_topics/outdoorair/databases/FINAL_HAP_AAP_BoD_24Mar
  ch2014.pdf




22 | P a g e  
 
 
WHO (World Health Organization). 2014b. WHO Indoor Air Quality Guidelines: Household
  Fuel        Combustion.                Geneva,       WHO.             Available at:
  http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/141496/1/9789241548885_eng.pdf?ua=1
World Bank. 2014. Clean and Improved Cooking in Sub-Saharan Africa. Washington, DC:
  World Bank.
World Bank and Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves (GACC). 2015. The State of the
  Global Clean and Improved Cooking Sector. ESMAP Technical Report 007-15.
  Washington,       DC:              World       Bank.            Available     at:
  http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/385081467992479462/pdf/96499-ESM-
  P127219-PUBLIC-Box391453B-ESMAP-State-of-Globa-Clean-Improved-Cooking-
  sector-Optimized.pdf
Yesuf, M. and R. Bluffstone. 2009. “Poverty, Risk Aversion and Path Dependence in Low
   Income Countries: Experimental Evidence from Ethiopia,” American Journal of
   Agricultural Economics 91(4): 1022-10.




23 | P a g e  
 
 
