                                                         WPS8155


Policy Research Working Paper                           8155




Can Business Input Improve the Effectiveness
            of Worker Training?
              Evidence from Brazil’s Pronatec-MDIC

                               Stephen D. O’Connell
                               Lucas Ferreira Mation
                              João Bevilaqua T. Basto
                                   Mark A. Dutz




Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group
July 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8155


  Abstract
 This study evaluates the employment effects of a public-                           distinguishable from those of a broader and institutional-
 ly-run national technical vocational education training                            ly-similar publicly-administered skills training program run
 program in Brazil that explicitly takes input from firms in                        at the same time that did not take input from firms. The
 determining the location, scale, and skill content of courses                      study finds that the demand-driven program better aligned
 offered. Using exogenous course capacity restrictions, the                         skill training with future aggregate occupational employ-
 study finds that those completing the course following                             ment growth—suggesting the input from firms captured
 receipt of a course offer have an 8.6 percent increase in                          meaningful information about growth in skill demand.
 employment over the year following course completion.                              Courses offered in occupations that grew more over the
 These effects come from previously unemployed train-                               year following requests exhibited larger employment effects,
 ees who find employment at non-requesting firms. The                               explaining the effectiveness of the demand-driven model.
 demand-driven program’s effects are larger and statistically




  This paper is a product of the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at mdutz@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
Can Business Input Improve the Eﬀectiveness of Worker
     Training? Evidence from Brazil’s Pronatec-MDIC

                     Stephen D. O’Connell, Lucas Ferreira Mation,
                           ao Bevilaqua T. Basto, Mark A. Dutz
                         Jo˜

                                            July 31, 2017




Keywords: Vocational education and technical training; Training programs; Business de-
velopment services; Labor demand; Unemployment; Brazil. (JEL J24, J23, J31, J68, J62,
M53)

Author aﬃliations and contact: O’Connell: Corresponding author; Department of
Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and the IZA Institute of Labor
                                                                        omica Aplicada
Economics, soconnel@mit.edu; Ferreira Mation: Instituto de Pesquisa Econˆ
(IPEA), lucas.mation@ipea.gov.br; Bevilaqua: World Bank, jbevilaqua@worldbank.org; Dutz:
World Bank, mdutz@worldbank.org.
Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful for invaluable research assistance by Nicolas Soares Pinto
and Pui Shen Yoong. The authors thank several colleagues for helpful input and discussions, including Onur
Altında˘g, John Giles, Aguinaldo Nogueira Maciente, David McKenzie, Pedro Olinto, Truman Packard, and
Romero Rocha, as well as participants in seminars at The World Bank, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Javeriana,
the 2016 Jobs for Development Conference, Secretaria Especial do Assuntos Estrat´                   encia da
                                                                                     egicos - Presidˆ
Rep´ublica, and the Minist´           ustria, Com´
                           erio da Ind´                                  cos. Staﬀ at MDIC and MEC were
                                                   ercio Exterior e Servi¸
instrumental in providing data and details of program administration. The study was conducted in partner-
ship with the Instituto de Pesquisa Econˆomica Aplicada (IPEA) and funded as part of Brazil’s Productivity
Programmatic Approach (P152871) at the World Bank. Views expressed are those of the authors and not
of any institution with which they are associated.
1      Overview

A primary objective of active labor market policy is to shape a workforce that matches and
continuously upgrades the skill distribution to the evolving labor demand of enterprises.
Vocational training programs remain among the most common incarnation of active labor
market policies despite a sizable historical literature providing only mixed evidence as to their
eﬀectiveness (Card et al. (2015), Kluve (2010), and Heinrich et al. (2013), among others).
Betcherman et al. (2004) provide an early synthesis of research of over 150 evaluations of
active labor market programs, suggesting a cautious approach in what such policies can
“realistically achieve.”

    Whether the design of publicly-funded skills training can increase its eﬀectiveness is par-
ticularly important for policymakers choosing whether to start, adapt, or abandon such
programs. In this paper, we investigate the employment returns to a large-scale, publicly
administered, technical skills training program in Brazil that explicitly takes input from
ﬁrms in determining course oﬀerings. To our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst study to evaluate
a “demand-driven” training program in which ﬁrms provide direct input to the government
as to the type, volume, and location of skills in demand by private-sector businesses. Be-
cause of the unique institutional setting, we then compare program eﬀects to those of an
otherwise-similar national skills training program run in parallel within the same institu-
tional and logistical context. This allows us to more meaningfully gauge the potential for a
demand-driven design to improve program eﬀectiveness.

    Using comprehensive monthly administrative panel data on employment, estimates con-
trolling for individual-level unobservables suggest the program increased the employment
rate of trainees by approximately two to three percentage points in the year following the
course. To address the endogeneity of course completion, we use exogenous restrictions
in course space availability across individuals to implement a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences IV


                                               1
strategy estimating the causal eﬀects of training. Some registrants were able to attend and
complete the course while others who registered for the course were not allowed to attend
due to class oversubscription. The IV estimates suggest those completing the course fol-
lowing receipt of a course oﬀer had an eight-percentage-point higher employment rate than
those who did not receive a course oﬀer. This eﬀect is statistically distinguishable from the
concurrent technical skills training program without demand-driven features, which had a
negligible eﬀect on employment. The demand-driven program is more eﬀective in nearly all
subgroups based on course and trainees characteristics. We then explore diﬀerences in the
composition of courses oﬀered in the two programs, ﬁnding that business input improves the
matching of course supply to future growth in private sector skill demand.

  The current study builds on the literature in a number of ways. First, and most impor-
tantly, we evaluate a skills training program that explicitly elicited demands from businesses
for the skills and volume of traineeships required in a given area to serve their needs. Because
of this, we refer to our focal program, Pronatec-MDIC, as being demand-driven. Second,
the institutional setting allows us to compare the program’s eﬀects across types of trainees
within Pronatec-MDIC courses, and to similar courses provided outside the demand-driven
segment. That is, we investigate diﬀerential employment eﬀects for ﬁrm-supplied trainees
compared to broader sets of registrants concurrently attending the same business-requested
courses, including unemployment beneﬁciaries and those who self-registered. Third, we com-
pare employment eﬀects of the business-requested courses to those from a national training
program in which businesses did not provide input into the choice of program course oﬀer-
ings. We provide credible evidence in making these comparisons by using the same empirical
strategy that addresses endogenous course completion in both programs. We also eschew
common concerns over post-program sample attrition through the use of comprehensive ad-
ministrative social security data containing monthly employment and earnings information
available for all formal sector workers in Brazil.



                                               2
    The following section places the current study in the recent literature evaluating similar
programs. We then provide further details on the Pronatec and Pronatec-MDIC programs
and describe the program records we used to link the course requests, courses held, and stu-
dent records to the administrative data. We then discuss our empirical strategy and present
results. We discuss why the program likely exhibited greater eﬀectiveness in generating em-
ployment among trainees, and provide concluding observations on the program and thoughts
for future work.




2         Background: Technical vocational education and train-

          ing around the world

Evidence of the eﬀectiveness of skill training programs remains quite mixed. In a meta-
analysis of nearly 100 studies, Card et al. (2010) conclude that skills training programs
can eﬀect employment gains in the medium- and long-term, although many programs are
ultimately ineﬀective in reducing unemployment. A host of studies have found widely varying
degrees of eﬀectiveness of publicly-provided skill training. Positive employment eﬀects have
                                    opo et al., 2007; D´
been found among programs in Peru (N˜                  ıaz and Rosas Shady, 2016),
Colombia (Attanasio et al., 2011; Kugler et al., 2015), Liberia (Adoho et al., 2014), Nepal
(Chakravarty et al., 2015), Malawi (Cho et al., 2013), and Kenya (Honorati, 2015). Other
                                                                          a and Brassiolo,
programs have shown negligible impacts, including those in Argentina (Alzu´
2006), Germany (Caliendo et al., 2011), Dominican Republic Card et al. (2011), Kenya
(Hicks et al., 2013), Jordan (Groh et al., 2016), and in an RCT in Turkey (Hirshleifer et al.,
2016).1

    Speciﬁcally in Brazil, Reis (2015) provides a comprehensive overview of the history of
training programs, which began as early as 1942. He analyzes the impact of PLANFOR,
    1
        For earlier reviews, see Betcherman et al. (2004) and Kluve (2010).


                                                        3
a worker training program that began in the 1990s, ﬁnding short-term eﬀects of the train-
ing program of approximately one percentage point increase in employment and seven to
eight percent increases in monthly wage rates. Related to the current study, Corseuil et al.
(2012) evaluate an apprenticeship-based youth employment program in Brazil, ﬁnding that
apprentices have a higher probability of getting a formal job in the years after the program.

  Causal evaluations of vocational training are available for a newer generation of programs
that focus on disadvantaged youth, oﬀer training through private providers, and combine
coursework with an internship or work experience at a private ﬁrm. Despite remarkably
similar in program design, the rigorous experimental evaluations of such programs that exist
for Colombia and the Dominican Republic ﬁnd markedly diﬀerent results. Attanasio et al.
(2011) show that this training in Colombia improved women’s, but not men’s, employment
and wages. While their original study was based on a surveyed sample, a more recent study
that uses administrative records to track the full applicant pool ﬁnds positive eﬀects for
both men and women in the short and long run (Attanasio et al., 2017). Results for the
Dominican Republic (DR) indicate no eﬀect on employment and only very modest eﬀects on
earnings Card et al. (2011). A follow-up study indicates positive results in terms of tested
skill acquisition and short term employment for women, a negative eﬀect on employment and
no skill acquisition among men, and no long term eﬀects except on women’s expectations
and self-esteem (Acevedo et al., 2017).

  A strand of the recent literature has argued for the eﬀectiveness of new approaches to
reduce unemployment, including cash or capital injections to small businesses or providing
business training to potential entrepreneurs (see Blattman and Ralston (2015) for an in-depth
review of this literature). Another dimension of this debate focuses on whether existing
programs can be reformulated to more closely involve the private sector in determining
which skills to provide (World Bank, 2013). Although there are many means by which skills
training can be aligned more closely with the needs of the private sector, few of the proposed


                                              4
formulations have been rigorously evaluated in a context where eﬀectiveness across program
types can be compared. Our paper contributes to the above studies in several ways. First,
the credible studies cited above argue that the work experience component obliges course
providers to oﬀer courses for which there is actual demand. However, this feature is a
singular design aspect of these programs. Therefore, the importance of the demand-driven
design cannot be compared to traditional programs in the same context. In our context, we
can compare the eﬀectiveness of a demand-driven and a non-demand driven program, both
of which are provided by quasi-public institutions. Second, we evaluate a national program
at scale, serving several hundred thousand trainees in the demand-driven segment and more
than one million trainees in the main program segment – which are orders of magnitude
larger than existing studies. This aspect allows us to maintain statistical power even when
disaggregating by course and student characteristics. We also evaluate a program that is not
explicitly focused on youth, which, in addition to being a national program, allows us to make
broader claims of external validity. In the following section, we describe the institutional
context and design of the program that is the focus of this study.




3    Brazil’s Pronatec and Pronatec-MDIC

We study a publicly-provided vocational technical skills training program that was among
the ﬁrst to directly incorporate private sector demand into its design and provision of skills
training, and compare its performance with a concurrent, traditionally-designed vocational
technical skills training program. In 2011, the federal government of Brazil created the
National Program for Access to Technical Education and Employment (Pronatec ). The
program was launched at a time of falling unemployment, with the goal of raising the earnings
and employability of lower-income segments of the workforce through participation in the
formal labor market. Through late-2015 the program had enrolled more than eight million



                                              5
people in “initial and continuing training courses” that carry a moderate in-class training
component (less than 500 hours) and train in skills relevant to a particular occupation. The
structure of Pronatec is such that several federal ministries administer and contribute to
course and trainee selection.

  The focus of this paper is Pronatec-MDIC – the segment of Pronatec administered by
Brazil’s Ministry of Industry, Foreign Trade and Services (hereafter MDIC). The unique
feature of Pronatec-MDIC is its “demand-driven” nature: MDIC receives explicit requests
for speciﬁc skills training courses from individual businesses. This program began with only
a limited number of training courses in 2013, greatly expanded in 2014, and drastically
reduced its scale in 2015 due to federal budget constraints. In 2014, more than 2,000 ﬁrms
applied for more than 16,000 skills training courses to be given to current or prospective
employees across a wide range of industries and occupations. Ultimately more than 300,000
prospective trainees were registered for Pronatec-MDIC -requested courses in 2014 or 2015,
with approximately 40 percent of these registrants completing their training course. Below,
we discuss the characteristics of the data sources used to analyze eﬀects of the program.



3.1     Program administrative records


Figure 1 summarizes the process from application to course provision in the Pronatec-MDIC
program. MDIC receives course requests through a standardized process in which ﬁrms
indicate the skills, occupation, or course they are looking to have taught, and the number of
“seats” (individuals trained) they would like to be provisioned in the given municipality for
which they are making the request. These requests have no pecuniary cost for the requesting
ﬁrms. The requests go through an initial screening by MDIC staﬀ in terms of their viability
and appropriateness.2 Approximately one half of ﬁrms’ requests were denied at this stage.
   2
    In correspondence with MDIC staﬀ involved in administering Pronatec-MDIC, we were informed that
the review process was made to ensure a reasonable volume of seats requested relative to the ﬁrm’s scale and



                                                     6
Some ﬁrms chose to reapply with a diﬀerent (lower) number of seats requested, while others
did not. The process between a course request and the ﬁrst day of a course can vary, and is
discussed in further detail below.

  MDIC provided us a comprehensive listing of the course requests in 2014, which contains
a measure of the demand for courses/trainees by requesting ﬁrms. Each of these requests
includes the number of people the requesting organization would like trained (seats), as well
as the name of the company or organization that submitted the request, the company’s tax
ID, the course requested, the occupation code related to the course, and the municipality in
which the course is requested.

  Table 1 shows that there were 16,782 records for course applications to MDIC in 2014.
Of these, approximately half (8,340) were approved by MDIC. The average number of seats
requested in a given course was approximately 38; the average number of seats in approved
courses was only slightly higher at 43.6. Not all requestors were ﬁrms, however: 17% of course
requests were made either by industry or workers’ associations. Among the ﬁrm requestors,
we are able to match 97% to administrative employment records (described below) based on
either the tax ID or the combination of ﬁrm name and municipality.

  Requests approved by MDIC were then forwarded to the Ministry of Education, which
is the body responsible for the overall administration of Pronatec. The Ministry of Educa-
tion aggregates course demands across ministries, and this aggregation is further screened
according to course viability (i.e., having the minimum number of seats to hold a course in
a municipality requested across ministries), technical criteria, and budget availability. The
Ministry of Education is also responsible for selecting training providers and for setting the
criteria for the registration of students. There are a number of providers that oﬀer Pronatec
courses, although the majority are oﬀered by Brazil’s Sistema S, which in principle ensures
projected needs. If found excessive, course requests would be denied (as opposed to adjusted) to discourage
ﬁrms from seeking training that signiﬁcantly exceeded their projected needs.



                                                    7
a certain homogeneity in the training provided.3 The training providers all receive identical
reimbursement from the Ministry of Education at a rate of around 10 Reais (approx. 4 USD
in 2014) per student-class hour.

  The essential diﬀerence between the MDIC program and the rest of Pronatec is that the
genesis of the requests that MDIC forwards to the Ministry of Education are responsive to
direct input from ﬁrms. Course requests from other ministries do not come from an explicit
application process but rather from varied processes originating within the requesting min-
istries without formal consultation with prospective employers. This includes taking input
from municipal bodies, social assistance centers, and unemployment beneﬁts (UB) programs.
Table 2 presents summary statistics on the ﬁrm-requested courses. Appendix Figure 1 shows
how ﬁrm-requested courses were in more skill-intensive occupations (as measured by the me-
dian wage rate in 2012 for the occupation corresponding to the course).4 More than 25% of
courses approved by MDIC were not approved by the Ministry of Education. The average
course size (conditional on being approved) had 13 seats.5 That is, based on the average
number of seats per ﬁrm request several classes would be held to ﬁll a single course demand.
The average class ran for 200 course hours, met for approximately eight hours per week, and
lasted between ﬁve and six months in duration.

  In Table 3 we compare characteristics of students in ﬁrm-requested courses to students in
the rest of the Pronatec program. The student ﬁle provides rich information on students’
backgrounds, including employment status, gender, age, and the completion status of the
student in the class, as well as additional class-level ﬁelds including meeting dates and times
   3
     Sistema S is an amalgamation of quasi-governmental organizations in Brazil that administer low-cost or
free professional training courses at schools and learning centers throughout the country.
   4
     We ﬁnd that ﬁrm-requested classes were concentrated in more speciﬁc skill-intensive sectors, including
those covering industrial processes and production, infrastructure, and ICT. Course topics relatively under-
requested through MDIC were more likely to be in service-oriented ﬁelds (education/social development,
tourism and hospitality, and environment and health sectors). χ2 tests across MDIC and non-MDIC courses
strongly reject equal distributions.
   5
     Note that there are more classes oﬀered than requested, as requests were typically 2-3 times larger than
class sizes available.



                                                     8
and the institution providing the training. Compared to students in non-MDIC classes,
students in MDIC courses are slightly older, more likely to be male, and more likely to have
been unemployed at the time of registration, and exhibit higher course completion rates.

  Because all records contain unique national identiﬁcation numbers, we are able to link the
students in Pronatec-MDIC courses with national administrative data from the Ministry of
Labor containing information on all formal sector employment. In the following section we
describe the employment data and how we linked them to trainees in ﬁrm-requested courses.



3.2     Monthly employment records


                                      cao Anual de Informa¸
Our employment data come from the Rela¸                   c˜oes Sociais (hereafter RAIS).
RAIS is an annual administrative dataset containing employment and earnings informa-
tion collected primarily for the purpose of administering social welfare programs such as
unemployment and retirement beneﬁts. Our data contain full details on the monthly em-
ployment and wage earnings of all formally employed workers in Brazil from calendar years
2013 to 2015. RAIS contains employer-reported records of a worker’s hours, earnings, hir-
ing/dismissal dates and reasons (if applicable), as well as the ﬁrm’s industrial classiﬁcation,
the worker’s occupational classiﬁcation, and the worker’s sex, education level, and age. The
data importantly contain unique identiﬁers (i.e., tax IDs) for both workers and employing
ﬁrms, which are the standard identiﬁcation provided to and used by ﬁrms and workers for
their various dimensions of interaction with the government. These ﬁelds are used to link
the student information to their employment records as well as to identify employment at
requesting ﬁrms versus other businesses. We deﬂate earnings using a standard monthly
consumer price index (IBGE, 2016).6
   6
    For workers who have multiple records within a given month, or who worked only part of the month
(based on precise hiring and ﬁring dates), we add all deﬂated earnings across jobs, and construct a monthly
wage rate based on the share of the month worked.




                                                    9
  Table 4 contains summary statistics on the worker-level panel dataset used for analysis.
There are 335,300 unique individuals in the administrative data that registered for any of
the ﬁrm-requested courses, including registrants supplied by requesting ﬁrms, unemploy-
ment beneﬁciaries, and others. 60 percent of the sample is male, and 40 percent completed
the training course for which they registered. Although only eight percent of the sample
was denied a seat for exogenous reasons (which we term “administrative constraints”), 60
percent of all students were in a class that had at least one registrant not complete the
course due to these reasons. Nine percent of the students were registered through MDIC
by requesting ﬁrms, and while the average employment rate was 60 percent, only four per-
cent were employed in requesting ﬁrms. The average employment rate across person-months
was 57 percent, and the mean real monthly earnings (excluding months unemployed) was
approximately 1,250 (in 2012 Reais).

  Since courses are typically not exclusive to a particular type of registrant, the ﬁrm-
requested courses are comprised of a mix of trainees who registered through diﬀerent chan-
nels. Appendix Tables 1, 2, and 3 contain summary statistics on the three focal subsamples of
registrants in the ﬁrm-requested courses: those who were pre-registered by requesting ﬁrms,
unemployment beneﬁciaries, and those who were registered through neither channel.7 As we
expected, and these tables show, these groups of registrants have very diﬀerent labor market
situations: the ﬁrm-supplied registrants have higher employment rates (75%, compared to
60% for UB registrants and 53% for others), were far more likely to be employed in request-
ing ﬁrms (23.7% vs. <2.5% in both other groups), and earned higher wages (R$1,492/month
vs. R$1,135/R$1,129). In the analyses below, we estimate eﬀects both for all registrants in
ﬁrm-requested courses as well for as these three focal subsamples.
   7
    Unemployment beneﬁciaries are required to register for a Pronatec training course as a condition to
receive unemployment beneﬁts in certain cases (for those seeking unemployment beneﬁts for the second time
within 10 years).




                                                   10
4      Empirical Strategy

Firm-requested courses were oﬀered throughout all months in 2014 and 2015. We exploit
diﬀerential course timings and the detailed information on the reasons why students did or
did not complete the course for which they registered to estimate eﬀects of course completion.

    We ﬁrst estimate course eﬀects on employment in a standard diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences ap-
proach. One concern with this approach is the construction of the counterfactual group, as it
is well-documented that the timing of the start of skills training is related to time-variant un-
observables – in particular, recent unemployment spells (i.e., the “Ashenfelter Dip”). In our
context, however, the counterfactual group is constructed of individuals who registered for
training courses with speciﬁc start dates, but did not attend or complete them. This allows
us to estimate a diﬀerence in the relative employment across these two groups controlling
for common employment patterns relative to the start of the training course.

    Because course attendance may have diﬀerent eﬀects on trainees during the course versus
after its conclusion, we segment the analysis window into three time periods: pre-course
(before the course begins), during the course, and post-course. The diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences
estimator is then:



    Yict = β0 + β1 ∗ courseict + β2 ∗ postcourseict + β3 ∗ courseict ∗ Completeri

                                         + β4 ∗ postcourseict ∗ Completeri + λi + γt + uict (1)


In equation 1, i indexes individuals registered for class c whose employment is being observed

in month t. β1 and β2 capture aggregate level diﬀerences in employment in the course and
post-course period (relative to the pre-course period), β3 captures the “during course” eﬀect
of course completion on employment, and β4 gives the focal diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimator
of the course completion on the outcome. The vector of individual ﬁxed eﬀects in λi absorbs


                                                11
individual-level unobservables (as well as location and classroom eﬀects, and the “main
eﬀect” of completion) and γt controls for common (monthly) shocks to the labor market.
We then correct for within-class correlations in the error term (i.e., across students taking
the same course in the same place for the same period; >15,000 classes/clusters) and for
potential aggregate correlations by month t (36 clusters). We limit the sample to 18 months
before and after the start of the course, and estimate equation 1 via OLS.

  As a complement to the above approach, we then estimate program eﬀects in an event
study framework to better gauge the evolution of eﬀects over varying horizons relative to
training. We choose this to accommodate the amount of time it may take for eﬀects to mate-
rialize from vocational/technical training (Card et al., 2015), as it allows for an unrestricted
examination of the diﬀerences in labor market outcomes in the months before and after a
worker begins the training course. From the event study analysis, we are then better able
to characterize the likely pattern of eﬀects we expect to see during a slightly longer time
horizon.

  In the event study speciﬁcation, each month relative to the start of the course is given its
own diﬀerential eﬀect for completers and is estimated by the following equation:



  Yict = α0 +       αk ∗ [M onths to Startct = k ]
                k

                         +       βk ∗ [M onths to Startct = k ] ∗ Completeri + λi + γt + uict (2)
                             k


In equation 2, the vector β measures diﬀerences in outcomes for completers relative to non-

completers at each period relative to course start, capturing the eﬀect of program completion.
Similar to the above, individual ﬁxed eﬀects in λ and month ﬁxed eﬀects in γ control for
individual selection on time-invariant unobservables and common aggregate shocks. In the
estimation, the course start month (indexed to zero) is the omitted group.



                                                12
5      Results


5.1     Completers vs non-completers with individual ﬁxed eﬀects


We ﬁrst discuss the main diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences results, with coeﬃcients from the estima-
tion of equation 1 on the ﬁrm-requested-course registrants presented in Table 5. We ﬁnd a
0.023 percentage-point (or 0.046 standard deviation) increase in the probability of employ-
ment for course completers, on average, in the year following course completion. This eﬀect
can then be decomposed, across panels B and C, into eﬀects emanating from employment
at requesting ﬁrms versus employment outside requesting ﬁrms, respectively. We ﬁnd that
a small fraction of this eﬀect comes from employment at requesting ﬁrms, while the ma-
jority comes from higher employment probability at non-requesting ﬁrms. In column 2, we
condition the estimation just on the sample of ﬁrm-supplied registrants, and ﬁnd that their
overall employment eﬀect (0.031) comes largely through increased employment at requesting
ﬁrms (0.020).8 We estimate sizable negative eﬀects of course completion on employment
among UB registrants (column 3), and small but signiﬁcant positive eﬀects among all other
registrants who ﬁnd employment at requesting ﬁrms (Panel B, column 4).

    Event study estimates from the estimation of equation 2 are presented in Appendix Tables
4 to 5, with results plotted graphically in Figures 2 to 10, respectively. In the graphs, series
for completers and non-completers correspond to equation 2 vectors α and (α + β ), respec-
tively. The event study analysis provides some immediately apparent patterns regarding
employment and participation in worker training in this context that would otherwise not
be apparent from the main analysis. Figure 2 shows how the employment rate of program
participants in the month in which they start their course is, for the overall sample, at its
lowest point in the preceding months, conﬁrming that a substantial share – more than 40%
   8
     It is important to note that many of the registrants already worked for requesting ﬁrms prior to the
training course, so this estimate is necessarily net of pre-course employment at these ﬁrms.



                                                   13
– of individuals selecting into the program experienced a job loss in the year prior to the
start of their course (commonly known as “Ashenfelter’s dip”). We then see non-completers
outpace course completers in their employment rate for the months following the start of
their course. There may be a number of reasons for this, the most likely being that job oﬀers
received prior to or in the early stages of the course period induce dropout. Nevertheless,
the event study provides visual evidence (or not) of the parallel trends assumption in the
diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimator.

  Across the three groups, the employment patterns in the pre-course period are markedly
diﬀerent. Among MDIC-supplied registrants, we ﬁnd no stark pre-course dip in employment
rates (Figure 4). This is likely attributable to the selection of individuals who are registered
through the MDIC process who have higher pre-course employment rates than the average
trainee and have not been registered for a training course due to recent unemployment.
Figure 4 highlights two additionally important points. First, completers are signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from non-completers in pre-course employment levels. Second, while employment
rates for completers are approximately maintained in the post-course period, those for non-
completers exhibit a ﬂat trend after the course, while completers continue trending upward.
The gap in employment rates leads to a nearly ten-percentage-point diﬀerence for the year
following the end of the course. Among unemployment beneﬁciaries who also attended ﬁrm-
requested courses, we ﬁnd a sharp pre-course reduction in employment rates (Figure 5),
reﬂecting precisely the institutional situation described above. The approximately equal
diﬀerentials across completers and non-completers before and after the course validate the
DD estimates showing that the program had minimal employment eﬀect on these registrants.
Table 4 contains a subset of focal coeﬃcients in the β vector capturing the diﬀerence in the
outcome for the completers relative to non-completers in months before the training begins,
in the month of completion, and three, six, nine, and 12 months after the end of the course.
Employment eﬀects are statistically distinguishable by the end of the course period (for
the overall sample, and MDIC registrants) or within a few months after the completion of

                                              14
the course (for the “all other” registrants), although these point estimates do not account
for pre-course diﬀerences. This analysis additionally allows us to gauge the likely trend in
program eﬀects over our study horizon. Eﬀects appear to be steadily increasing over time
(for all but UB registrants), suggesting that estimates in the current analysis may be smaller
than those that use a longer horizon.



5.2    Identiﬁcation challenges


The identifying assumption in the analysis above is that completers and non-completers
experienced common shocks in the months prior to the start of the course and would have
exhibited similar employment patterns in the absence of treatment. The approach assumes
that the endogeneity between course completion and later employment is entirely due to
time-invariant individual-level unobservables. This is a strong assumption, precisely because
employment gained during the course period might aﬀect whether an individual completes
the course. That is, some individuals may receive acceptable employment oﬀers during the
course period that cause them to drop the course. Since these oﬀers are not observable,
increase employment, and are negatively correlated with course completion, we can then
reason that this approach above likely gives a downward-biased estimate of the eﬀect of
training on employment. In the next section, we address this concern by using exogenously
determined variation in space availability in courses to identify the causal eﬀect of training
on employment.



5.3    IV estimates using course oﬀer as instrument


Since we remain concerned about the endogeneity of course completion, we make use of
the detailed information on the reasons why students did not complete the courses they
registered for to identify students who were kept from attending a course due to exogenous

                                             15
reasons. In general, the reasons for which an individual would register for a course but not
be able to complete it could be either personal (e.g., quits and no-shows) or what we refer to
as “administrative reasons” – those outside the control of the individual registrant. These
typically include a lack of seats due to class oversubscription or space limitations.9 In the case
of course oversubscription, which is the cause of the vast majority of course oﬀer restrictions,
the segment of unemployment beneﬁciary registrants was used to make space for various
other groups registered through other channels. This was done on a ﬁrst-come, ﬁrst-served
basis, although the administrative program data did not retain suﬃcient detail to observe the
precise cutoﬀ for course oﬀer receipt. We use this information on administrative restrictions
to create an instrument for whether a student received a “course oﬀer” – taking the value
of one for those who had registered for a class and were not restricted administratively from
attending the class. Because the analysis is split into three periods relative to course start
and end, we then interact the instrument separately with indicators for the during-course
and post-course periods. The structural equation remains as in equation 1, where the two
endogenous variables, courseict ∗ Completeri and postcourseict ∗ Completeri are instrumented
with courseict ∗ Of f eri and postcourseict ∗ Of f eri . (Note that the main eﬀects of Of f eri
are absorbed in the individual ﬁxed eﬀects.)



5.4     Test of parallel trends


One of the central assumptions underlying this approach is whether the two groups satisfy the
“parallel trends” assumption – that is, that trends across oﬀer recipients and non-recipients
were parallel in the pre-course period and would have continued to be so in the absence of
the course. We test the ﬁrst part of this assumption (whether there were parallel trends
prior to the course) by limiting the sample to all pre-course observations and estimating a
   9
    We conﬁrmed with the Ministry of Education that the record codes used to identify administrative
non-completers always corresponded to reasons for non-completion that were outside the control of trainees
themselves; e.g., force majeure cancellations or seat reductions, class oversubscription, etc.



                                                   16
slope coeﬃcient on the number of months relative to the course and a slope diﬀerential for
oﬀer recipients, via:



  Yict = α0 + α1 ∗ months relative to courseict

                             + α2 ∗ months relative to courseict ∗ of f eri + λi + γt + eict (3)




  In equation 3, α2 gives the slope diﬀerential for oﬀer recipients’ pre-course employment
trends. In this case, a positive coeﬃcient would raise concerns about upward bias in the
resulting estimates (and vice versa for a negative coeﬃcient). The coeﬃcients from this esti-
mation across the pooled and separated samples are in Table 6. In column 1, the estimated
slope diﬀerential is small and statistically insigniﬁcant at conventional levels. Because of
the precision aﬀorded by the sample, we can reject slope coeﬃcients as small as 0.001 –
a magnitude still not large enough to present meaningful concern for our estimates below.
Even among subsamples there is no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerential trend among oﬀer
recipients, lending support for the parallel trends assumption as applied to the pre-course
period.



5.5       IV estimates: First- and second stages


First stage coeﬃcients from the estimation of the focal endogenous variable, postcourseict ∗
Completeri , are in Table 7. The coeﬃcient eﬀectively reﬂects the completion rate among
those oﬀered a seat in the course (i.e., compliance), which, as expected, is slightly higher than
the overall course completion rate. Second stage coeﬃcient estimates are in Table 8. We ﬁnd
average employment eﬀect (Panel A, column 1) at 8.6 percentage points to be substantially
larger than the naive diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence estimates. This implies the reduced form intent-


                                               17
to-treat eﬀect of course oﬀer receipt is just under four percentage points. We ﬁnd that the UB
registrants (column 3), to whom the instrument was particularly relevant and from whom
the IV estimates are largely identiﬁed, exhibit large (14.6 percentage-point) employment
eﬀects of course completion induced from receiving a course oﬀer. Firm-supplied registrants
(column 2) do not appear to exhibit employment eﬀects from this variation, and all other
registrants (column 4) exhibit small but signiﬁcant increases in employment. The majority
of the large eﬀects for UB registants (Panel A) are attributable to employment at non-
requesting ﬁrms (Panel C). The strong eﬀects among the unemployed ﬁnding employment
in non-requesting ﬁrms may be partly explained by the fact that “lead” ﬁrms would submit
requests on behalf of smaller, local suppliers – providing further evidence that the courses
requested were indicative of general skill shortages experienced by several ﬁrms.

  We ﬁnd these eﬀects to be relatively large, especially in view of the mixed results found
in previous literature. However, the identifying variation comes from students in courses
that had suﬃcient demand to be oversubscribed; if student demand is at all an indicator
of the quality of courses or the employment prospects they generate, we can reason that
these estimates will be larger than those for the entire course distribution. Among the types
of students taking courses in our context, the UB registrants have the lowest pre-course
employment rates and are thus more likely to exhibit eﬀects on the extensive margin of
employment compared to, for example, ﬁrm-supplied registrants of whom many are employed
at the start of the course.



5.6    Robustness: Common support sample


We address further concerns of unobservable diﬀerences between oﬀer recipients and those
not receiving a course oﬀer by constructing a within-class, common support matched sample.
In this process, we take the set of registrants who do not receive a course oﬀer and match them



                                              18
with their nearest neighbor (without replacement) based on oﬀer propensity predicted by a
discrete choice model using individual characteristics and detailed employment histories to
estimate the oﬀer indicator. This eﬀectively balances the sample to have 50% oﬀer recipients
and leaves a ﬁnal sample comprised of individuals from the set of classes that experienced any
capacity constraints. The results from this matched analysis (available up on request) mirror
closely the magnitudes for the UB sample in Table 8 of approximately a 15 percentage-point
eﬀect on employment.



5.7      Estimation of eﬀects from the broader Pronatec program


A major beneﬁt of the Brazilian context is our ability to perform the exact same analysis
on an otherwise-similar national skills training program that did not take input from ﬁrms
in allocating skills training. This program, which was implemented by the same ministries
and course providers, existed at the same time as our focal program and essentially ran in
parallel to the demand-driven program. Over the study period, the main Pronatec program
was approximately six times larger than the demand-driven segment, serving over 1.6 million
trainees for whom we can similarly observe complete employment and wage histories in the
administrative data. We undertake the same analysis as above on all Pronatec trainees
outside the ﬁrm-requested courses who registered for a class scheduled to be held in 2014 or
2015 (corresponding to the same period during which the business-requested courses were
held).

  We estimate the IV speciﬁcation for individuals who registered for a training course out-
side of the demand-driven segment. The estimates for the broader Pronatec program are
presented in Table 9, and show a markedly diﬀerent pattern from those of the demand-driven
segment: IV estimates of the program eﬀect are negligible overall, and precisely estimated.
This masks substantial heterogeneity across UB recipients and the majority of other reg-



                                             19
istrants: UB registrants saw average increases of eight percent in employment probability
following the course (compared to approximately 15 percent in the MDIC program, Table 8,
Panel A, column 3), while other registrants saw a nearly ten percent lower employment rate
– combining into an overall minimal and statistically insigniﬁcant eﬀect on employment.



5.8    Eﬀect heterogeneity by skill group, region, and trainees’ for-

       mal education


To better understand eﬀect heterogeneity within and across the programs, we estimate the
IV speciﬁcation across subgroups in four dimensions. In Table 10 we present the IV coeﬃ-
cients for both program segments estimated separately by each of seven major occupational
subgroups, ﬁve skill levels (based on the 2013 median wage in the occupation trained), ﬁve
regions of the country, and trainee education level.

  We ﬁnd that even within occupational groups, the demand-driven segment exhibited either
similar or meaningfully larger eﬀects in courses in the four occupational groups (Industrial
Processes and Production; Management and Business; Information and Communication;
and Environment, Health and Education) that comprise approximately three-quarters of
individuals trained in either the demand-driven program or Pronatec overall. We then seg-
ment courses into quintiles based on the median wage of the occupation for which they
were training. The demand-driven program had substantially larger eﬀects than the main
program in the lowest-skill courses, as well as middle- and upper-skill trainings (the latter
of which exhibited negative eﬀects in the main program). Again, the overall eﬀect is not
driven by a compositional eﬀect but by diﬀerential eﬀectiveness within skill levels. Finally,
the demand-driven program was more eﬀective in four regions of the country (all except the
North, where performance was similar). The demand-driven program has a slightly larger
share of trainings in the Northeast, where it was almost three times as eﬀective as the main


                                             20
program, compared to a larger proportion of trainings in the Southeast by the main program,
where employment eﬀects were negative. By trainee skill level, we ﬁnd that the demand-
driven program was more eﬀective at all levels – and was particularly more eﬀective among
primary- and middle-school educated trainees.



5.9    Can eﬀectiveness be explained by selection on students?


A ﬁnal concern is that the diﬀerential eﬀectiveness of the two programs may be explained by
selection of UB trainees who join the ﬁrm-requested courses versus the overall program. We
believe this is unlikely for institutional reasons (ﬁrm-requested courses were never outwardly
advertised or known to applicants or providers to have their provenance from this channel).
We show below empirically that this was not the case.

  To test for diﬀerential selection of UB trainees into the ﬁrm-requested courses versus the
main program, we take the pooled sample of UB registrants in both programs and estimate an
indicator for registering for a ﬁrm-requested course in a multivariate regression containing
the registrants’ pre-course employment history at diﬀerent periods relative to the course
start. Despite the empirical strategy fully accounting for individual-level unobservables, this
test allows us to speak to whether the UB registrants in either program were systematically
diﬀerent from each other in their pre-course employability. We estimate the indicator for
being in a demand-driven course with individual employment between one and six months
prior to the course start. Results from this estimation are found in Appendix Table 6, and
show that, if anything, UB registrants in the demand-driven segment had lower employment
rates prior to the course than those in the main program segment.




                                              21
5.10     Alternative cross-sectional IV


Finally, we present below an alternative IV strategy used to validate the main results. Since
the assignment mechanism is ultimately cross-sectional, we estimate employment rates at
each month after the start of the individual’s course, starting from the month of course
completion and up to 18 months after the start of the course. In this approach, we are also
able to explicitly control for diﬀerential pre-course employment and education levels as well
as saturate the speciﬁcation with pre-course employment indicators.

  As before, the ﬁrst stage estimation reveals the rate at which those with a course oﬀer
complete the course, conditional on the included ﬁxed eﬀects and covariates. The cross-
sectional ﬁrst-stage equation is given by:


                         Completedic = δ0 + δ1 ∗ of f eri + λc + uic                      (4)


where i indexes individuals across courses c. Table 11 presents estimates from the ﬁrst stage

equation. Column 1 contains the ﬁrst stage coeﬃcient including only a vector of month ﬁxed
eﬀects. Column 2 presents estimates of the ﬁrst stage relationship with a full set of class
ﬁxed eﬀects, and Column 3 adds the education level of the individual registrant. We ﬁnd
that the ﬁrst stage coeﬃcient is stable around .40 across these columns, indicating the course
completion rate of approximately 40 percent as shown in Table 4. The ﬁrst-stage coeﬃcient
remains unchanged with the inclusion of a larger vector of class ﬁxed eﬀects, the registrant’s
education level, as well as pre-period employment indicators.

  The second stage equation is then given by:


                                                 ˆ
                       Employedic = β0 + β1 ∗ Completedi + γc + eic                       (5)


Table 12 presents estimates of the second-stage coeﬃcient on course completion estimated

                                             22
across varying speciﬁcations and months relative to the start of the registrant’s course. As
above, we estimate separate speciﬁcations including month ﬁxed eﬀects, class ﬁxed eﬀects,
and including education and pre-period employment rates as additional controls. The ﬁnal
speciﬁcation, with a full set of controls for pre-course employment at one, three six, and
nine months prior to the start of the course, has slightly larger estimates than the main IV
estimates above – although they are sharply decreasing over the study period. Nonetheless,
the employment eﬀects are still sizable and, on average, of a comparable magnitude to the
main estimates above, and we conﬁrm that these magnitudes are largely driven by the UB
registrant sample (Table 13).




6      Explaining program eﬀectiveness: Matching skill train-

       ing to growth in skill demand

Why did the demand-driven program exhibit such substantially larger employment eﬀects
than the larger, non-demand-driven segment? Our primary hypothesis is that the input
from ﬁrms contained meaningful information that allowed the provision of skill trainings to
be better aligned with aggregate growth in skill demand. To assess whether this was the
case, we compare the occupational and geographic distribution of trainings in the demand-
driven and main program to two “reference” distributions: the cross-sectional distribution of
aggregate employment, and growth in employment over the 2013 - 2015 period. We compute
the sum of squared deviations (SSD) of the focal training program to the two reference
distributions to understand which training program was better matched to the cross-section
of employment and which was better matched to aggregate employment growth.

    In Table 14 we present the values of the SSD for the main and demand-driven programs
compared to the focal reference distributions for three categorical variables: three-digit occu-



                                              23
pation, state, and state-by-occupation. (Note that higher values indicate greater mismatch.)
The conclusions from this analysis are clear. Comparing Columns 1 and 2, the main program
was better aligned with the cross-section of employment both geographically and occupa-
tionally. Comparing Columns 3 and 4, the demand-driven program was better matched to
the growth in skill demand by occupation. (Note also that the programs are, in general,
better matched to the cross-section of employment than its growth, given by the lower mag-
nitudes in Columns 1-2 compared to Columns 3-4). We note that this diﬀerence between
the two programs is particularly pronounced when we focus our reference distribution just
on the period of end-2014 to end-2015 (not presented), which comprises a period that oc-
curred following the timing of requests made by ﬁrms (rather than spanning the period of
requests) – suggesting the requests indicated expected future demand rather than recent
trends. This provides further evidence that business input into training programs can be
useful in identifying economy-wide skill shortages and future growth in skill demand.

  Whether better matching of courses to future employment growth explains diﬀerential
eﬀectiveness across programs hinges on the existence of diﬀerential eﬀectiveness of courses
oﬀered in faster-growing occupations. To test whether this is indeed the case, we estimate
heterogeneous eﬀects of the program by interacting the instrument and focal endogenous
variable with the 2013 to 2015 share of aggregate employment growth corresponding to the
occupation of the course attended. We transform this measure to have mean zero and unit
standard deviation, and estimates for both program segments are found in Table 15. We ﬁnd
stronger employment eﬀects are among faster-growing occupations in both segments. That
is, courses oﬀered in fast-growing occupations exhibited larger employment eﬀects, which ex-
plains the eﬀectiveness of the demand-driven model. We also ﬁnd this is particularly relevant
for employment among the vast majority of self-supplied registrants, and that diﬀerential
eﬀect is larger among the non-demand-driven segment – possibly due to diminishing margins
in the degree of program alignment to growth in skill demand.



                                             24
7      Conclusion

The fast-evolving skill demand of employers in both developed and developing countries has
the potential to leave those less skilled, less connected, and already economically marginalized
even further behind. Occupational training programs are a common active labor market
policy with the potential to address skill shortages and mismatch, although their eﬀectiveness
across contexts varies greatly. In this paper, we evaluate the eﬀects of a recent large-scale
technical skill training program in Brazil that took informational input from ﬁrms into
consideration for the provision of publicly administered vocational technical training. Our
empirical strategy and use of comprehensive monthly labor market data allow us to avoid
several of the common challenges in the evaluation of occupational training programs. We
ﬁnd that the program has a substantial causal eﬀect on employment appearing shortly after
course completion and persisting for at least one year following the course. Program eﬀects
are substantially larger than those in a similarly-run occupational training program that
does not take input from ﬁrms in deciding the content and scale of skills training. The
informational input from ﬁrms allows the allocation of skill trainings to better match future
growth in skill demand rather than the static distribution of employment, which we show
likely explains increased program eﬀectiveness.

    There may be an important eﬃciency-equity tradeoﬀ in demand-driven programs. This
is particularly germane in contexts where economic inequality is sought to be attenuated
through active labor market policies. Such designs have the potential to exclude segments
of ﬁrms and workers from accessing program beneﬁts. In particular, we ﬁnd that the dis-
tribution of courses provided under the demand-driven program is concentrated in more
skill-intensive occupations that are more likely to ﬁnd employment in industries oﬀering
relatively higher-wage formal employment. Participating businesses may also comprise a se-
lected segment of the distribution of ﬁrms. For workers, if initial skill levels play a meaningful
role in access or ability to complete these courses, this dimension may serve to exacerbate

                                               25
inequality between program trainees and those not able to access the program’s beneﬁts.
Similar eﬀects may occur if ﬁrms’ access to the demand-driven program is limited by their
size or the scale of their requests.

  Nevertheless, our results conﬁrm the potential for partnership between the public and pri-
vate sectors in investing in skills. We ﬁnd strong evidence of employment eﬀects among regis-
trants not previously connected to requesting ﬁrms who gain employment at non-requesting
ﬁrms. This suggests two things: the ﬁrms requesting skills training are indicating local skills
shortages applicable to more than just their own ﬁrm, and the trainings requested under the
program are likely providing general rather than ﬁrm-speciﬁc skills. When this is the case,
trainees (as opposed to ﬁrms) are the residual claimants to the skills provided – suggesting
the training program is eﬀective in garnering information about broader local skills shortages
and that the ultimate beneﬁciaries of the training are trainees, rather than partnering ﬁrms.
This allows for a cautious optimism regarding the potential to expand demand-driven train-
ing programs in other contexts in ways that can have pro-poor impacts. Future work in this
and other contexts should investigate how demand-driven training programs aﬀect request-
ing businesses’ labor demand and output expansion, as well as aﬀect workers’ productivity
and occupational mobility within and across ﬁrms.




                                              26
References

Acevedo, P., G. Cruces, P. Gertler, and S. Martinez (2017): “Living Up to
  Expectations: How Job Training Made Women Better Oﬀ and Men Worse Oﬀ,” NBER
  Working Paper No. 23264.

Adoho, F., S. Chakravarty, K. Jr, D. T., M. Lundberg, and A. Tasneem (2014):
  “The Impact of an Adolescent Girls Employment Program: The EPAG Project in Liberia,”
  World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, no. 6832.

    ´ , M. L. and P. Brassiolo (2006): “The impact of training policies in Argentina:
Alzua
  an evaluation of Proyecto Joven,” Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper.

                      ın, C. Medina, and C. Meghir (2017): “Vocational Training
Attanasio, O., A. Guar´
  for Disadvantaged Youth in Colombia: A Long-Term Follow-Up,” American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 9, 131–143.

Attanasio, O., A. Kugler, and C. Meghir (2011): “Subsidizing Vocational Training
  for Disadvantaged Youth in Developing Countries: Evidence from a Randomized Trial,”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3, 188–220.

Betcherman, G., K. Olivas, and A. Dar (2004): “Impacts of Active Labor Market
  Programs: New Evidence from Evaluations with Particular Attention to Developing and
  Transition Countries,” Social Protection Discussion Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Blattman, C. and L. Ralston (2015): “Generating employment in poor and fragile
  states: Evidence from labor market and entrepreneurship programs,” Columbia University,
  Mimeo.

                  ¨ nn, and R. Schmidl (2011): “Fighting Youth Unemployment:
Caliendo, M., S. Ku
  The Eﬀects of Active Labor Market Policies. IZA DP No. 6222,” Institute for the Study
  of Labor.

                                            27
                    ´ n, F. Regalia, D. Rosas-Shady, and Y. Soares (2011):
Card, D., P. Ibarrara
  “The Labor Market Impacts of Youth Training in the Dominican Republic,” Journal of
  Labor Economics, 29, 267–300.

Card, D., K. J., and A. Weber (2015): “What Works? A Meta Analysis of Recent
  Active Labor Market Program Evaluations,” NBER Working Paper No. 21431.

Card, D., J. Kluve, and A. Weber (2010): “Active labour market policy evaluations:
  A metaanalysis,” The Economic Journal, 120, 452–477.

Chakravarty, S., M. Lundberg, P. N. Danchev, and J. Zenker (2015): “The role
  of training programs for youth employment in Nepal: impact evaluation report on the
  employment fund.” The World Bank, Washington, DC.

Cho, Y., D. Kalomba, A. M. Mobarak, and V. Orozco (2013): “Gender Diﬀerences
  in the Eﬀects of Vocational Training: Constraints on Women and Drop-Out Behavior,”
  IZA DP No. 7408.

Corseuil, C. H., M. Foguel, G. Gonzaga, and E. P. Ribeiro (2012): “The Eﬀect
  of an Apprenticeship Program on Labor Market Outcomes of Youth in Brazil,” Presented
  in the 7th IZA/World Bank Conference: Employment and Development, New Delhi.

 ıaz, J. J. and D. Rosas Shady (2016): “Impact Evaluation of the Job Youth Training
D´
  Program Projoven,” Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper.

Groh, M., N. Krishnan, D. McKenzie, and T. Vishwanath (2016): “The Impact of
  Soft Skills Training on Female Youth Employment: Evidence from a Randomized Exper-
  iment in Jordan,” IZA Journal of Labor and Development, 5, 9.

Heinrich, C. J., P. R. Mueser, K. R. Troske, K.-S. Jeon, and D. C. Kahvecioglu
  (2013): “Do Public Employment and Training Programs Work?” IZA Journal of Labor
  Economics, 2, 1–23.


                                          28
Hicks, J. H., M. Kremer, I. Mbiti, and E. Miguel (2013): “Vocational education in
  Kenya: Evidence from a randomized evaluation among youth,” Mimeo.

Hirshleifer, S., D. McKenzie, R. Almeida, and C. Ridao-Cano (2016): “The
  Impact of Vocational Training for the Unemployed: Experimental Evidence from Turkey,”
  Economic Journal, 126, 2115–2146.

Honorati, M. (2015): “The Impact of Private Sector Internship and Training on Urban
  Youth in Kenya,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 7404.

IBGE (2016): “´                     cos ao Consumidor Amplo (IPCA),” Instituto
              Indice Nacional de Pre¸
                                ıstica, Sistema Nacional de `
  Brasileiro de Geograﬁa e Estat´                                         cos ao Consumidor
                                                            Indices de Pre¸
  (IBGE/SNIPC).

Kluve, J. (2010): “The Eﬀectiveness of European Active Labor Market Programs,” Labour
  Economics, 17, 904–918.

Kugler, A., M. Kugler, J. Saavedra, and L. O. H. Prada (2015): “Long-term
  direct and spillover eﬀects of job training: Experimental evidence from Colombia (No.
  w21607),” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series.

 ˜ po, H., M. Robles, and J. Saavedra (2007): “Occupational Training to Reduce Gen-
No
  der Segregation: The Impacts of ProJoven,” Inter-American Development Bank Working
  Paper.

Reis, M. (2015): “Vocational Training and Labor Market Outcomes in Brazil,” B.E. Journal
  of Economic Analysis and Policy, 15, 377–405.

World Bank (2013): “World Development Report 2013: Jobs,” World Bank Group. Wash-
  ington, DC.




                                            29
            Table 1: Summary Statistics, MDIC course demand applications

       Variable                                       Mean Std. Dev.         Obs
       Whether course was approved [0/1]               0.50      0.50      16,782
       Number of seats requested                       37.8     178.1      16,782
       Number of seats requested — approved            43.6      82.3       8,340
       Requestor is worker/industry association [0/1]  0.17      0.37      16,782
       Whether requestor found in RAIS — ﬁrm           0.97      0.17      13,969
Source: Authors’ calculations using MDIC course demand data.

                 Table 2: Summary Statistics, MDIC-requested courses

           Variable                             Mean Std. Dev.         Obs
           Whether course was approved [0/1]       0.74        0.44 35,834
           Number of seats | approved              16.0        36.5 22,198
           Course hours | approved                198.4        44.6 26,666
Source: Authors’ calculations using MEC course data. Note: Sample comprised of records
matching course-municipality of requests to MDIC. Less than 1% of approved requests were
among courses with greater than 150 seats.




                                          30
                           Table 3: Comparison of MDIC-course students vs. non-MDIC-course students

              Variable                         MDIC non-MDIC diﬀerence              s.e.     t p-value            N
              Completed course [0/1]             0.399          0.322      0.077 0.001 111.1       <0.001 4,235,525
              Age of student (years)            29.272        27.629       1.644 0.012 108.7       <0.001 4,219,858
              Male [0/1]                         0.544          0.384      0.160 0.001 223.2       <0.001 4,235,525
              Unemployed at registration [0/1]   0.273          0.182      0.090 0.000 156.2       <0.001 4,235,525
     Source: Authors’ calculations using MEC course data. Note: MDIC course students comprised of records matching course and
     municipality of requests to MDIC.




31
         Table 4: Summary statistics, all registrants in MDIC-requested courses

                 Variable                   Mean      Std. Dev.   Min.   Max.        N
 Worker number of observations              30.55       4.183      18      35     335300
 Male[0/1]                                   0.6         0.49       0       1     335300
 Course Oﬀer                                0.931       0.253       0       1      335300
 Unemployment beneﬁts registrant            0.185       0.388       0       1      335300
 MDIC registrant                            0.087       0.282       0       1     335300
 Completed course[0/1]                      0.397       0.489       0       1      335300
 Course had admin. noncompleters [0/1]      0.597        0.49       0       1     335300
 Employed [0/1]                             0.565       0.496       0       1    10243541
 Employed in an MDIC-requesting ﬁrm         0.041       0.199       0       1    10243541
 Gross deﬂated monthly earnings(R$)        1186.507    771.306      1   6139.095 5458730
 ln( gross deﬂated monthly earnings(R$))    6.897       0.643       0     8.722   5458730
 Gross deﬂated monthly wage rates          1251.957    787.062    1.009 6139.095 5458902
 ln(gross deﬂated monthly wage rates)       6.982       0.547     0.009   8.722   5458902
Notes: Authors’ calculations using RAIS.




                                              32
        Table 5: Program employment eﬀects, diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimates
 Outcome:                                         Employed [0/1]
 Sample                    All registrants MDIC registrants Unemp. Beneﬁc.   All others
                                 (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)
                            Panel A: Employment at any ﬁrm
 Post-course * completed        0.023***       0.031***         -0.042***      0.005
                               (0.003)        (0.006)          (0.006)        (0.003)
 Mean of outcome                0.565          0.748            0.604          0.533
 St. dev. of outcome            0.496          0.434            0.409          0.499
 R2                              0.40           0.45             0.39          0.43

                       Panel B: Employment at requesting ﬁrms
 Post-course * completed      0.004***     0.020***         -0.003**           0.004***
                             (0.000)      (0.004)          (0.001)            (0.000)
 Mean of outcome              0.041        0.237            0.009              0.025
 St. dev. of outcome          0.198        0.425            0.094              0.156
 R2                            0.76         0.82             0.42              0.69

                     Panel C: Employment at nonrequesting      ﬁrms
 Post-course * completed     0.018***      0.010                -0.038***      0.001
                            (0.003)       (0.007)              (0.006)        (0.003)
 Mean of outcome             0.524         0.511                 0.595         0.508
 St. dev. of outcome         0.499          0.5                  0.491           0.5
   2
 R                            0.42          0.60                  0.39         0.44

 N (all panels)             10,243,541        912,053         1,872,837      7,458,651
Notes: Table presents present diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences IV estimates of course comple-
tion. Heteroskedasticity-consistent robust standard errors two-way clustered by class and
month*year reported in parentheses. All speciﬁcations include an unreported constant term
and vectors of individual and month*year ﬁxed eﬀects. Signiﬁcance indicated by: ∗ p < .1,
∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01.




                                            33
                      Table 6: Testing for diﬀerential pre-course trends
 Outcome:                                               Employed [0/1]
 Sample                        All registrants   MDIC registrants Unemp. Beneﬁc.    All others
                                     (1)                (2)              (3)             (4)
 Months relative to course        0.000928          -0.001781        -0.001771       -0.000028
 * course oﬀer                  (0.001117)         (0.001428)       (0.001851)      (0.000532)

 R2                                 0.61                 0.60           0.32           0.62
 N                               4,794,972             485,327        816,802       3,492,843
Notes: Table presents estimates from the estimation of equation 3 in the text, adjusted to
test parallel trends in pre-course employment diﬀerentially across those receiving the course
oﬀer and those not. Sample comprised of all periods prior to the start of registrants’ training
course. The coeﬃcient for [Months relative to course*oﬀer] gives the diﬀerential slope term
for those oﬀered a course seat in the pre-course period. Heteroskedasticity-consistent robust
standard errors two-way clustered by individual and month*year reported in parentheses.
All speciﬁcations include an unreported constant term, a primary slope coeﬃcient for months
relative to the course, and vectors of individual and month*year ﬁxed eﬀects. Signiﬁcance
indicated by: ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01.


                 Table 7: First stage estimates, diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences IV
 Outcome:                               Post-course period [0/1] * Completed course
 Sample                      All registrants MDIC registrants Unemp. Beneﬁc.     All others
                                   (1)               (2)               (3)           (4)
 Post-course period [0/1]       0.435062***       0.519792***       0.367063***   0.442523***
 * course oﬀer                (0.003203)         (0.006737)        (0.007700)    (0.002292)

 R2                              0.57                0.61            0.54             0.57
 N                            10,243,541           912,053        1,872,837        7,458,651
Notes: Table presents ﬁrst-stage coeﬃcients from the estimation of the endogenous vari-
able [Post-course * Completed] in equation 1 as predicted by an indicator for being in the
post-course period and having received a course oﬀer. Heteroskedasticity-consistent robust
standard errors two-way clustered by class and month*year reported in parentheses. All
speciﬁcations include an unreported constant term and vectors of individual and month*year
ﬁxed eﬀects. Signiﬁcance indicated by: ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01.




                                                  34
       Table 8: Program employment eﬀects, diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences IV estimates
 Outcome:                                          Employed [0/1]
 Sample                    All registrants MDIC registrants Unemp. Beneﬁc.     All others
                                 (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
                            Panel A: Employment at any ﬁrm
 Post-course * completed        0.086***       -0.029            0.146***        0.023*
                               (0.014)        (0.032)           (0.032)         (0.013)
 Mean of outcome                0.565           0.748            0.604           0.533
 St. dev. of outcome            0.496           0.434            0.409           0.499
 R2                              0.41            0.45             0.37           0.43

                       Panel B: Employment at requesting ﬁrms
 Post-course * completed      0.009***     0.032            0.005                0.009***
                             (0.002)      (0.022)          (0.003)              (0.002)
 Mean of outcome              0.041        0.237            0.009                0.025
 St. dev. of outcome          0.198        0.425            0.094                0.156
 R2                            0.76         0.82             0.42                0.69

                     Panel C: Employment at nonrequesting ﬁrms
 Post-course * completed      0.077***     -0.062*         0.140***              0.014
                            (0.014)       (0.036)         (0.032)               (0.013)
 Mean of outcome             0.524          0.511          0.595                 0.508
 St. dev. of outcome         0.499           0.5           0.491                   0.5
 R2                           0.42           0.60           0.37                  0.44
 N                         10,243,541     912,053        1,872,837             7,458,651
Notes: Table presents second-stage coeﬃcients capturing eﬀects of course completion induced
by receiving a course oﬀer. Heteroskedasticity-consistent robust standard errors two-way
clustered by class and month*year reported in parentheses. All speciﬁcations include an
unreported constant term and vectors of individual and month*year ﬁxed eﬀects. Signiﬁcance
indicated by: ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01.




                                            35
  Table 9: Pronatec program employment eﬀects, diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences IV estimates

  Outcome:                                      Employed [0/1]
  Sample                         All registrants Unemp. Beneﬁc.               All others
                                       (1)            (2)                         (3)

  Post-course * completed              0.005                0.088***            -0.112***
                                      (0.016)              (0.021)             (0.013)
  Mean of outcome                      0.561                0.602               0.558
  St. dev. of outcome                  0.496                0.489               0.497
  R2                                    0.45                0.40                 0.46

  N                                 51,082,933            3,505,993          47,576,940
Notes: Table presents second-stage coeﬃcients capturing eﬀects of course completion induced
by receiving a course oﬀer, estimated on the sample of all Pronatec course registrants exclud-
ing MDIC-requested courses. Heteroskedasticity-consistent robust standard errors two-way
clustered by class and month*year reported in parentheses. All speciﬁcations include an un-
reported constant term and vectors of individual and month*year ﬁxed eﬀects. Signiﬁcance
indicated by: ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01.




                                             36
      Table 10: Comparing demand-driven and overall program eﬀects by subgroup

                                                      Estimated coeﬃcients
                                             Demand-driven program Pronatec (all)
                                                         (1)              (2)
  All sectors                                           0.086***         0.005
                            Panel A: by occupational group
  Industrial Processes and Production                   0.106**          0.001
  Management and Business                               0.093***         0.079*
  Infrastructure                                       0.085***          0.064***
  Information and Communication                        0.153***          0.074
  Environment, Health and Education                     0.088**          0.117***
  Food Production                                      0.185*            0.171***
  Natural Resources, Culture and Tourism                0.118**          0.056*
                        Panel B: by occupational skill/wage level
  1 (Low)                                              0.080**           0.046***
  2                                                    0.090***          0.057***
  3                                                    0.086***         -0.043
  4                                                    0.127***         -0.328***
  5 (High)                                             -0.198*          -0.771***
                                  Panel C: by region
  North                                                 0.105***         0.017
  Northeast                                             0.078***         0.016
  Southeast                                             0.090***         0.014
  South                                                0.043*           -0.024
  Midwest                                              0.045**           0.027
                          Panel D: by worker education level
  Primary Incomplete                                   0.056            -0.043
  Primary                                               0.236***         0.107***
  Middle                                               0.094***          0.026
  Secondary                                             0.074***         0.052***
  Post-secondary                                       0.036             0.033
Notes: Columns 1 and 2 present diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences IV estimates of course comple-
tion, estimated separately by course or trainee characteristics in ﬁrm-requested and broader
Pronatec courses. Signiﬁcance for coeﬃcients presented in Columns 1 and 2 indicated by: ∗
p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01.




                                            37
Table 11: Alternative crosssectional IV: First-stage estimates of completion based on course
oﬀer
 Outcome:                                     Completed course [0/1]
                                                         Class FE        Class FE
 Speciﬁcation:               Month FE       Class FE
                                                          + educ     + educ + Et−1,3,6,9
                                (1)            (2)          (2)              (3)
 Course oﬀer                   0.427          0.398        0.397           0.398
                              (0.000)***     (0.002)***   (0.002)***      (0.002)***
 Worker education (years)                                  0.009           0.009
                                                          (0.001)***      (0.001)***
 Employment 6 mos.                                                         0.015
 before course start                                                      (0.001)***

 Month ﬁxed eﬀects               Y              N              N                N
 Class ﬁxed eﬀects               N              Y              Y                Y
 N                            335,300        334,954        334,954          334,249
 R2                            0.049          0.229          0.231            0.231
Notes: Table presents coeﬃcients from the crosssectional ﬁrst-stage regression estimating
completion with course oﬀer status across speciﬁcations indicated in the column headings.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent robust standard errors clustered by course reported in paren-
theses. All speciﬁcations include an unreported constant term. Signiﬁcance indicated by: ∗
p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01.




                                            38
Table 12: Alternative crosssectional IV: Second-stage coeﬃcient estimates by time period
relative to course start – All MDIC registrants

    Outcome:                                   Employed [0/1]
                                                     Class FE       Class FE
    Speciﬁcation:        Month FE       Class FE
                                                      + educ    + educ + Et−1,3,6,9
                             (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)
    t+6 (course ends)       0.081***     0.070***      0.067***       0.110***
    t+7                     0.071***     0.060***      0.058***       0.098***
    t+8                     0.073***     0.069***      0.066***       0.104***
    t+9                     0.068***     0.059***      0.057***       0.092***
    t+10                    0.069***     0.059***      0.056***       0.090***
    t+11                    0.058***     0.051***      0.048***       0.078***
    t+12                    0.058***     0.051***      0.047***       0.077***
    t+13                    0.053***     0.047***      0.043***       0.072***
    t+14                    0.048***     0.041***      0.038***       0.065***
    t+15                    0.052***     0.050***      0.046***       0.070***
    t+16                    0.055***     0.057***      0.053***       0.075***
    t+17                    0.050***     0.046***      0.043***       0.064***
Notes: Table presents second-stage coeﬃcients from the estimation of equation 5 in the
text. Each row comes from a separate cross-sectional estimation of employment at the
indicated month relative to course start. Speciﬁcation variants are indicated in the column
headings. Heteroskedasticity-consistent robust standard errors two-way clustered by course
and month*year reported in parentheses. All speciﬁcations include an unreported constant
term. Signiﬁcance indicated by: ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01.




                                            39
Table 13: Alternative crosssectional IV: Second-stage coeﬃcient estimates by time period
relative to course start – UB registrants only

    Outcome:                                   Employed [0/1]
                                                     Class FE       Class FE
    Speciﬁcation:        Month FE       Class FE
                                                      + educ    + educ + Et−1,3,6,9
                             (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)
    t+6 (course ends)       0.087***     0.093***      0.092***       0.094***
    t+7                     0.085***     0.094***      0.092***       0.093***
    t+8                     0.097***     0.113***      0.111***       0.112***
    t+9                     0.097***     0.108***      0.107***       0.105***
    t+10                    0.110***     0.114***      0.113***       0.113***
    t+11                    0.089***     0.094***      0.092***       0.089***
    t+12                    0.085***     0.084***      0.082***       0.081***
    t+13                    0.075***     0.077***      0.074***       0.072***
    t+14                    0.069***     0.061***      0.059**        0.058**
    t+15                    0.068***     0.070***      0.068***       0.067***
    t+16                    0.071***     0.075***      0.072***       0.071***
    t+17                    0.061***     0.061**       0.058**        0.057**
Notes: Table presents second-stage coeﬃcients from the estimation of equation 5 in the text
for the sample of unemployment beneﬁciary registrants. Each row comes from a separate
cross-sectional estimation of employment at the indicated month relative to course start.
Speciﬁcation variants are indicated in the column headings. Heteroskedasticity-consistent
robust standard errors two-way clustered by course and month*year reported in parentheses.
All speciﬁcations include an unreported constant term. Signiﬁcance indicated by: ∗ p < .1,
∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01.




                                            40
               Table 14: Did the demand-driven program match training to the stock or ﬂow of aggregate employment?

                                                             Reference distribution:
                                          2013 empt. crosssection        Aggregate empt. growth, 2013-2015
              Focal program:         Demand-driven program Main program Demand-driven program Main program
              Distribution across:           (1)                (2)                (3)             (4)
              3-digit occupation            0.050              0.033              0.219           0.289
              Dtate                         0.057              0.035              0.194           0.138
              State-occupation              0.006              0.004              0.057           0.061
     Notes: Table presents the sum of squared deviations (SSD) across program training and aggregate reference distributions
     (indicated in column headings) for the categorical variables indicated in row headings.




41
               Table 15: Diﬀerential eﬀects by post-program employment growth, diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences IV estimates

      Outcome:                                                           Employed [0/1]
      Sample                                      All registrants MDIC registrants Unemp. Beneﬁc.                   All others
                                                        (1)             (2)              (3)                            (4)
                                          Panel A: Demand-driven segment
      Main eﬀect                                       0.075***       -0.040           0.155***                       0.011
                                                      (0.015)        (0.034)          (0.034)                        (0.014)
      Main * standardized employment growth share      0.005***       0.007*           -0.000                         0.005***
                                                      (0.001)        (0.004)          (0.002)                        (0.001)

      Mean of outcome                                         0.565              0.748               0.604            0.533
      St. dev. of outcome                                     0.496              0.434               0.409            0.499
      R2                                                       0.40               0.44                0.37             0.42
      N                                                     8,212,030           817,655            1,409,271        5,985,104




42
                                              Panel B: All other courses
      Main eﬀect                                      -0.005                                         0.105***         -0.136***
                                                     (0.018)                                        (0.023)          (0.016)
      Main * standardized employment growth share     0.011***                                       -0.000           0.012***
                                                     (0.001)                                        (0.001)          (0.001)

      Mean of outcome                                         0.041                                  0.009            0.025
      St. dev. of outcome                                    0.198                                   0.094             0.156
      R2                                                      0.45                                    0.39              0.46
      N                                                    45,919,339                              2,752,395        42,920,272
     Notes: Table presents present diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences IV estimates of course completion. Heteroskedasticity-consistent robust
     standard errors two-way clustered by class and month*year reported in parentheses. All speciﬁcations include an unreported
     constant term and vectors of individual and month*year ﬁxed eﬀects. Signiﬁcance indicated by: ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗
     p < .01.
                                                                                       Figure 1: Overview of course request process

                                                            Course demand                       Class creation         Enrollment




      Stage
                                                             aggregation


                                                               MDIC                                    MEC
                                                            application                            application
                                                             rejections                             rejections
                                                               (50%)                                  (26%)




      Courses cut
                                                                                                                                                              Reasons:
                                                                                                                                                          N   •   Oversubscription
                                                                                                  Evaluation of                                               •   Course cancellation
                                                                                                  Budget and      Approved                                    •   No-shows
                                                                                                   creation of     courses                                    •   Quit




                                   MEC
                                                                                                     classes


                                                                                                                                            Was
                                                                                                                                          Training
                                          Course requests                   MDIC approved                                                completed
                                                              MDIC                                                     Individuals
                                          from companies                      requests                                                        ?
                                                              review                                                 employed in the




                                   MDIC
                                             (demand)                           (50%)                                   company
                                                                                                                                                          Y



                                                                            MDS demand for
                                                                             similar courses                          Individuals on      Registrants
                                                                                                                     Social assistance   (student file)




                                   MDS




43
     Ministry-specific processes
                                                                            MDS demand for
                                                                             other courses



                                                                            MTE demand for                              Individuals on
                                                                             similar courses                           unemployment




                                   MTE
                                                                                                                           benefits
                                                                            MTE demand for
                                                                             other courses


     Notes: Figure presents a stylized depiction of the process by which MDIC receives course requests/applications
     and the various stages of screening and approval required until prospective trainees register and a course is held.
Figure 2: Change in employment relative to course start: completers and non-completers

                                                                                                                               All registrants

                                          -.04 .01 .06 .11 .16 .21 .26 .31 .36 .41
         Parameter estimate with 95% CI                                                                                                               Course




                                                                                     -18   -16   -14   -12   -10   -8    -6    -4      -2      0      2     4        6    8       10   12   14   16   18
                                                                                                                        Months relative to start of employment training


                                                                                                                              Non-completers                         Completers




       Notes: Figure depicts the set of coeﬃcients for course completers and non-
       completers corresponding to (αk +βk ) and (αk ), respectively, from equation
       2 estimated for employment [0/1]. 95% conﬁdence intervals constructed
       from heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered by individual
       and month.




                                                                                                                                       44
Figure 3: Change in ln(real monthly wage rate) relative to course start: completers and
non-completers

                                                                                            All registrants
                                                                                                                   Course
                                           .06
          Parameter estimate with 95% CI
                                           .01
                                           -.04




                                                  -18   -16   -14   -12   -10   -8    -6    -4      -2      0      2     4        6    8       10   12   14   16   18
                                                                                     Months relative to start of employment training


                                                                                           Non-completers                         Completers




        Notes: Figure depicts the set of coeﬃcients for course completers and
        non-completers corresponding to (αk + βk ) and (αk ), respectively, from
        equation 2 estimated for ln(real monthly earnings). Sample implicitly
        comprised of person-months with positive wage earnings. 95% conﬁdence
        intervals constructed from heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors
        clustered by individual and month.




                                                                                                    45
Figure 4: Change in employment relative to course start: completers and non-completers,
MDIC registrants

                                                                                        MDIC registrants
                                           .11
                                           .06                                                                     Course
          Parameter estimate with 95% CI
                                           .01
                                           -.04
                                           -.09
                                           -.14




                                                  -18   -16   -14   -12   -10   -8    -6    -4      -2      0      2     4        6    8       10   12   14   16   18
                                                                                     Months relative to start of employment training


                                                                                           Non-completers                         Completers




        Notes: Figure depicts the set of coeﬃcients for course completers and non-
        completers corresponding to (αk +βk ) and (αk ), respectively, from equation
        2 estimated for employment [0/1]. 95% conﬁdence intervals constructed
        from heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered by individual
        and month.




                                                                                                    46
Figure 5: Change in employment relative to course start: completers and non-completers,
UB registrants

                                                                                                                                UB registrants
                                           -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.11.2                                                                    Course
          Parameter estimate with 95% CI




                                                                                       -18   -16   -14   -12   -10   -8    -6    -4      -2      0      2     4        6    8       10   12   14   16   18
                                                                                                                          Months relative to start of employment training


                                                                                                                                Non-completers                         Completers




        Notes: Figure depicts the set of coeﬃcients for course completers and non-
        completers corresponding to (αk +βk ) and (αk ), respectively, from equation
        2 estimated for employment [0/1]. 95% conﬁdence intervals constructed
        from heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered by individual
        and month.




                                                                                                                                         47
Figure 6: Change in employment relative to course start: completers and non-completers,
all other registrants

                                                                                         All other registrants
                                           .37
                                           .32
                                           .27                                                                         Course
          Parameter estimate with 95% CI
                                           .22
                                           .17
                                           .12
                                           .07
                                           -.03 .02




                                                      -18   -16   -14   -12   -10   -8    -6    -4      -2      0      2     4        6    8       10   12   14   16   18
                                                                                         Months relative to start of employment training


                                                                                               Non-completers                         Completers




        Notes: Figure depicts the set of coeﬃcients for course completers and non-
        completers corresponding to (αk +βk ) and (αk ), respectively, from equation
        2 estimated for employment [0/1]. 95% conﬁdence intervals constructed
        from heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered by individual
        and month.




                                                                                                        48
Figure 7: Change in employment relative to course start: completers and non-completers,
MDIC registrants at MDIC ﬁrms

                                                                            MDIC reg. at requesting ﬁrms
                                           .05
                                           0                                                                       Course
          Parameter estimate with 95% CI
                                           -.05
                                           -.1
                                           -.15
                                           -.2




                                                  -18   -16   -14   -12   -10   -8    -6    -4      -2      0      2     4        6    8       10   12   14   16   18
                                                                                     Months relative to start of employment training


                                                                                           Non-completers                         Completers




        Notes: Figure depicts the set of coeﬃcients for course completers and non-
        completers corresponding to (αk +βk ) and (αk ), respectively, from equation
        2 estimated for employment [0/1]. 95% conﬁdence intervals constructed
        from heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered by individual
        and month.




                                                                                                    49
Figure 8: Change in employment relative to course start: completers and non-completers,
UB registrants at non-MDIC ﬁrms

                                                                                                               UB reg. at nonrequesting ﬁrms
                                           -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.11.2                                                                    Course
          Parameter estimate with 95% CI




                                                                                       -18   -16   -14   -12   -10   -8    -6    -4      -2      0      2     4        6    8       10   12   14   16   18
                                                                                                                          Months relative to start of employment training


                                                                                                                                Non-completers                         Completers




        Notes: Figure depicts the set of coeﬃcients for course completers and non-
        completers corresponding to (αk +βk ) and (αk ), respectively, from equation
        2 estimated for employment [0/1]. 95% conﬁdence intervals constructed
        from heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered by individual
        and month.




                                                                                                                                         50
Figure 9: Change in employment relative to course start: completers and non-completers,
all other registrants at MDIC ﬁrms

                                                                          All other reg. at requesting ﬁrms
                                           .01                                                                     Course
          Parameter estimate with 95% CI
                                           0
                                           -.01




                                                  -18   -16   -14   -12   -10   -8    -6    -4      -2      0      2     4        6    8       10   12   14   16   18
                                                                                     Months relative to start of employment training


                                                                                           Non-completers                         Completers




        Notes: Figure depicts the set of coeﬃcients for course completers and non-
        completers corresponding to (αk +βk ) and (αk ), respectively, from equation
        2 estimated for employment [0/1]. 95% conﬁdence intervals constructed
        from heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered by individual
        and month.




                                                                                                    51
Figure 10: Change in employment relative to course start: completers and non-completers,
all other registrants at non-MDIC ﬁrms

                                                                         All other reg. at nonrequesting ﬁrms
                                           .37
                                           .32
                                           .27                                                                         Course
          Parameter estimate with 95% CI
                                           .22
                                           .17
                                           .12
                                           .07
                                           -.03 .02




                                                      -18   -16   -14   -12   -10   -8    -6    -4      -2      0      2     4        6    8       10   12   14   16   18
                                                                                         Months relative to start of employment training


                                                                                               Non-completers                         Completers




        Notes: Figure depicts the set of coeﬃcients for course completers and non-
        completers corresponding to (αk +βk ) and (αk ), respectively, from equation
        2 estimated for employment [0/1]. 95% conﬁdence intervals constructed
        from heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered by individual
        and month.




                                                                                                        52
                             Appendix: For Web Publication Only


A1       Cost beneﬁt calculations

Using parameters from the data and estimated employment eﬀects, we calculate the net
present value (NPV) of the training course based on increased employment earnings. We
describe the funding/cost structure of the program below, and then present calculations for
the representative course and trainee. It is important to note that these calculations do not
include administrative costs nor impacts on training markets, including possible crowding
out of alternate training providers. Furthermore, the calculations rely on several assumptions
regarding interest and depreciation rates, as well as the rate at which formal employment
displaces informal earnings.

  Pronatec courses were ﬁnanced by the federal government on a student-hour basis. For
2014, cost per student-hour was R$10.00 for in-person courses. Course providers were then
reimbursed for the student-hours of “conﬁrmed students.” These were students who: (a)
attended at least 20% of the course hours or (b) attended 25% of the course hours in the ﬁrst
four months of the course.10 Course providers were reimbursed according to the full number
of hours of the course for all students who reached this minimum attendance threshold,
independent of whether the student completed those hours or dropped out before the end of
the course.

  The average course in the demand-driven program consists of 200 hours of classroom
time. Across all courses, this results in an average cost of R$2,000 per trainee (approxi-
mately 1,780 in real 2012 Reais). However, because some registrants did not incur costs
as described above, the per-registrant cost is slightly smaller than the amount above (80
percent of course registrants are counted in the calculation of course costs) – resulting in
a per registrant cost ﬁgure of approximately R$1,470. In this calculation, we assume that
the beneﬁts of the program are captured entirely in earnings from increased employment
  10
   See article 64 of Portaria No. 168/2013, available at http://pronatec.mec.gov.br/images/stories/
pdf/port_168_070313.pdf.


                                                53
                           Appendix: For Web Publication Only


rather than increased wage rates. The estimates of employment eﬀects used in conjunc-
tion with the median monthly wage rate of approximately R$1,380 to estimate the nominal
monthly earnings beneﬁt of the program of approximately R$119 per month assuming an
8.6 percentage-point employment eﬀect. However, since these beneﬁts are realized only by
course completers, the per-registrant beneﬁt is around 40% of this ﬁgure, or approximately
R$46 per month.

  This ﬁgure, however, does not account for the displacement eﬀect of increased formal
employment, which will reduce the net beneﬁt depending on the degree to which trainees
would have otherwise been informally employed. We ﬁrst assume that the formal net wage
premium is 20 percent, and then present calculations based on two scenarios. The ﬁrst,
more conservative scenario assumes that all those who gained formal employment due to the
program would have been otherwise informally employed, so displaced earnings are 80% of
the gained employment earnings. The second scenario assumes that the program displaces
informal employment among 75% of trainees, the remaining 25% of whom would have been
unemployed – resulting in a net earnings displacement of 60%. Assuming a ﬁve percent
annual interest rate and also ﬁve percent annual real depreciation of skills, we ﬁnd that
under 60% earnings displacement the per-registrant NPV of the program is R$2,189, which
after course ﬁscal costs yields a net beneﬁt of R$638. Assuming displaced informal earnings
would have been 80% of formal earnings, the program yields a NPV of R$1,094 per registrant,
resulting in a net beneﬁt of -R$456 after course costs.




                                             54
                          Appendix: For Web Publication Only


A2      Appendix Tables and Figures

                Appendix Table 1: Summary statistics, MDIC registrants

                Variable                    Mean Std. Dev.       Min.   Max.       N
 Worker number of observations              31.131  4.283          18     35     29297
 Male[0/1]                                   0.781  0.414           0     1     29297
 Course Oﬀer                                  0.96   0.195         0       1     29297
 Unemployment beneﬁts registrant               0       0           0       0     29297
 MDIC registrant                               1       0            1     1      29297
 Completed course[0/1]                       0.493    0.5           0     1      29297
 Course had admin. noncompleters [0/1]       0.341  0.474           0     1      29297
 Employed [0/1]                              0.748  0.434           0     1     912053
 Employed in an MDIC-requesting ﬁrm          0.237  0.425           0     1     912053
 Gross deﬂated monthly earnings(R$)         1491.79 879.04       1.038 6138.825 659514
 ln(gross deﬂated monthly earnings(R$))      7.148   0.593       0.038  8.722   659514
 Gross deﬂated monthly wage rates          1530.628 882.11       1.218 6138.825 659520
 ln(gross deﬂated monthly wage rates)        7.191   0.537       0.197  8.722   659520
Notes: Authors’ calculations using RAIS.

       Appendix Table 2: Summary statistics, Unemployment beneﬁts registrants

                 Variable                   Mean      Std. Dev. Min.     Max.       N
 Worker number of observations              30.209        3.76    18       35     61995
 Male[0/1]                                   0.61        0.488     0        1     61995
 Course Oﬀer                                0.832       0.374      0        1     61995
 Unemployment beneﬁts registrant               1           0       1        1     61995
 MDIC registrant                               0           0      0         0     61995
 Completed course[0/1]                        0.3        0.458     0        1     61995
 Course had admin. noncompleters [0/1]       0.822       0.382     0        1     61995
 Employed [0/1]                              0.604       0.489     0        1    1872837
 Employed in an MDIC-requesting ﬁrm          0.009       0.096     0        1    1872837
 Gross deﬂated monthly earnings(R$)        1134.875     666.16  1.019   6139.095 1091600
 ln( gross deﬂated monthly earnings(R$))    6.881        0.601  0.019     8.722  1091600
 Gross deﬂated monthly wage rates          1213.404    694.817   1.01   6139.095 1091624
 ln(gross deﬂated monthly wage rates)       6.982        0.481   0.01    8.722   1091624
Notes: Authors’ calculations using RAIS.




                                             55
                          Appendix: For Web Publication Only




              Appendix Table 3: Summary statistics, All other registrants

                Variable                    Mean Std. Dev. Min.       Max.         N
 Worker number of observations              30.567   4.264   18         35       244008
 Male[0/1]                                   0.576   0.494    0         1       244008
 Course Oﬀer                                 0.953   0.212    0         1       244008
 Unemployment beneﬁts registrant               0       0      0          0       244008
 MDIC registrant                               0       0      0         0        244008
 Completed course[0/1]                       0.411   0.492    0          1       244008
 Course had admin. noncompleters [0/1]       0.571   0.495    0         1        244008
 Employed [0/1]                             0.533    0.499    0         1       7458651
 Employed in an MDIC-requesting ﬁrm         0.025    0.157    0         1       7458651
 Gross deﬂated monthly earnings(R$)        1129.573 714.946   1      5209.774   3690130
 ln(gross deﬂated monthly earnings(R$))      6.849   0.645    0       8.558     3690130
 Gross deﬂated monthly wage rates          1192.811 724.908 1.009    5209.774   3690272
 ln(gross deﬂated monthly wage rates)        6.937   0.547  0.009     8.558     3690272
Notes: Authors’ calculations using RAIS.




                                             56
                        Appendix Table 4: Employment eﬀects of worker training: selected β coeﬃcient estimates
                                                                                Estimation of employment across
                                                                              course completers and non-completers
                    Outcome:                                                                Employed [0/1]
                    Sample                                    All registrants   MDIC registrants Unemp. Beneﬁc.      All others
                                                                     (1)                (2)                (3)           (4)
                    18 months prior to course start (t=-18)         0.014             0.041              0.135          0.043
                                                                  (0.006)**          (0.010)***         (0.014)***    (0.004)***
                    12 months prior to course start (t=-12)         0.008              0.04              0.119          0.042
                                                                  (0.006)            (0.010)***         (0.009)***    (0.004)***
                    9 months prior to course start (t=-9)          0.002              0.039              0.105          0.046
                                                                  (0.006)            (0.010)***         (0.010)***    (0.004)***
                    6 months prior to course start (t=-6)          0.001              0.028              0.105          0.048
                                                                  (0.007)            (0.010)***         (0.011)***    (0.004)***
                    1 month prior to course start (t=-1)            0.03              0.012              0.094          0.038
                                                                  (0.006)***         (0.009)            (0.018)***    (0.003)***
                    At end of course (t=+6)                        -0.014             0.045              0.011         -0.002




57
                                                                  (0.006)**          (0.012)***         (0.011)       (0.003)
                    3 months after course (t=+9)                   0.018              0.059              0.062          0.035
                                                                  (0.006)***         (0.011)***         (0.011)***    (0.004)***
                    6 months after course (t=+12)                   0.037             0.068              0.083          0.056
                                                                  (0.005)***         (0.012)***         (0.010)***    (0.004)***
                    9 months after course (t=+15)                   0.052             0.073              0.094          0.073
                                                                  (0.005)***         (0.013)***         (0.010)***    (0.005)***
                                                                                                                                           Appendix: For Web Publication Only




                    12 months after course (t=+18)                  0.059             0.074              0.098          0.079
                                                                  (0.005)***         (0.013)***         (0.010)***    (0.004)***
                    Individual ﬁxed eﬀects                            Y                  Y                  Y             Y
                    Year * Month ﬁxed eﬀects                          Y                  Y                  Y             Y
                    Mean of outcome                                0.565              0.748              0.604          0.533
                    St. dev. of outcome                            0.496              0.434              0.409          0.499
                    R2                                              0.41               0.45               0.44           0.43
                    N                                          10,243,541            912,053           1,872,837     7,458,651
     Notes: Table presents selected coeﬃcients measuring the diﬀerence in outcomes between course completers versus non-completers
     at diﬀerent time periods relative to the start of course completion (β vector in equation 2 in the text) for the sample group indi-
     cated in the column headings. Heteroskedasticity-consistent robust standard errors two-way clustered by class and month*year
     reported in parentheses. All speciﬁcations include an unreported constant term and vectors of individual and month*year ﬁxed
     eﬀects. Signiﬁcance indicated by: ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01.
        Appendix Table 5: Employment eﬀects due to MDIC-requestors and outside employers: selected β coeﬃcient estimates
                                                                                         Estimation of employment across
                                                                     course completers and non-completers, by employer requesting status
             Outcome:                                           Employed in requesting ﬁrm [0/1]                       Employed in other ﬁrm [0/1]
             Sample                                     MDIC                    UB               All others     MDIC        Unemp. Beneﬁc.     All others
                                                          (1)                    (2)                 (3)           (4)             (5)              (6)
             18 months prior to course start (t=-18)     0.005                 0.003               -0.003        0.036            0.132            0.047
                                                        (0.008)               (0.001)**           (0.000)***    (0.010)***       (0.014)***      (0.004)***
             12 months prior to course start (t=-12)     0.005                 0.005               -0.001        0.036            0.114            0.043
                                                        (0.007)               (0.001)***          (0.000)       (0.008)***       (0.009)***      (0.004)***
             9 months prior to course start (t=-9)       0.006                 0.005             <0.001          0.033             0.1             0.047
                                                        (0.005)               (0.001)***          (0.000)       (0.008)***       (0.011)***      (0.004)***
             6 months prior to course start (t=-6)       0.004                 0.005             <0.001          0.024             0.1             0.048
                                                        (0.005)               (0.001)***          (0.000)       (0.008)***       (0.012)***      (0.004)***
             1 month prior to course start (t=-1)      <0.001                  0.002                0.001        0.012            0.092            0.038
                                                        (0.006)               (0.000)**           (0.000)**     (0.005)**        (0.018)***      (0.003)***
             At end of course (t=+6)                     0.023               <0.001                 0.001        0.022            0.011           -0.003
                                                        (0.005)***            (0.000)             (0.000)**     (0.009)**        (0.011)         (0.003)
             3 months after course (t=+9)                0.023                 0.002                0.004        0.036            0.060            0.031




58
                                                        (0.006)***            (0.000)             (0.000)***    (0.010)***       (0.011)***      (0.004)***
             6 months after course (t=+12)               0.026                 0.001                0.004        0.042            0.082            0.052
                                                        (0.007)***            (0.001)             (0.000)***    (0.010)***       (0.010)***      (0.004)***
             9 months after course (t=+15)               0.027                 0.001                0.004        0.046            0.093            0.069
                                                        (0.009)***            (0.001)             (0.000)***    (0.012)***       (0.010)***      (0.005)***
             12 months after course (t=+18)              0.026                 0.001                0.004        0.048            0.097           0.075
                                                        (0.010)**             (0.001)             (0.000)***    (0.010)***       (0.010)***      (0.004)***
             Individual ﬁxed eﬀects                        Y          Individual ﬁxed eﬀects          Y             Y               Y                Y
                                                                                                                                                              Appendix: For Web Publication Only




             Year * Month ﬁxed eﬀects                      Y        Year * Month ﬁxed eﬀects          Y             Y               Y                Y
             Mean of outcome                             0.237                 0.009                0.025        0.511            0.595           0.508
             St. dev. of outcome                         0.425                 0.096                0.157         0.5             0.491             0.5
             R2                                           0.82                  0.42                 0.69         0.60             0.44            0.44
             N                                         912,053               1,872,837           7,458,651     912,053         1,872,837        7,458,651

     Notes: Table presents selected coeﬃcients measuring the diﬀerence in outcomes between course completers versus non-completers
     at diﬀerent time periods relative to the start of course completion (β vector in equation 2) for the sample group indicated in
     the column headings. Heteroskedasticity-consistent robust standard errors two-way clustered by class and month*year reported
     in parentheses. All speciﬁcations include an unreported constant term and vectors of individual and month*year ﬁxed eﬀects.
     Signiﬁcance indicated by: ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01.
                          Appendix: For Web Publication Only


  Appendix Table 6: Testing selection of UB registrants on observables across programs

 Outcome:                              UB registrant took ﬁrm-requested course[0/1]
 Speciﬁcation:                            Base                Incl. wages
                                           (1)                     (2)
 Employed 1 month before course [0/1]    -0.025***               -0.022**
                                        (0.005)                 (0.007)
 Employed 3 months before course [0/1]    0.012*                  0.025**
                                        (0.007)                 (0.009)
 Employed 6 months before course [0/1]   -0.047***               -0.029
                                        (0.012)                 (0.015)
 ln(wage) 1 month before course                                  -0.006*
                                                                (0.003)
 ln(wage) 3 months before course                                  0.004
                                                                (0.003)
 ln(wage) 6 months before course                                  0.011*
                                                                (0.005)
 Education (years)                                                0.012***
                                                                (0.001)
 Class ﬁxed eﬀects                          Y                       Y
 N                                      167,706                 167,706
 R2                                      0.006                   0.0065
Notes: Table presents coeﬃcients from the estimation of an indicator for being in
a ﬁrm-requested course among all UB registrants of Pronatec and Pronatec-MDIC.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent robust standard errors clustered by class reported in paren-
theses. All speciﬁcations include an unreported constant term. Signiﬁcance indicated by: ∗
p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p < .01.




                                           59
                                     Appendix Figure 1: MDIC course skill intensity


                                     Density plot of Pronatec courses by skill level, 2014




                  5
                                                                                        MDIC courses
                                                                                        nonMDIC courses




                  4
                                                                                        Difference (MDIC−nonMDIC)




                  3

        Density
                  2
                  1




60
                  0
                  −1
                             6.5                         7.0                            7.5                         8.0
                                                                                                                          Appendix: For Web Publication Only




                                         median ln(wage) for occupation corresponding to course




     Note: Figure depicts diﬀerence in skill distribution of courses requested under Pronatec-MDIC compared to all
     other Pronatec courses oﬀered in 2014. Skill level is measured by the median 2012 monthly wage in the occupation
     served by the course. Diﬀerence in densities (MDIC - non-MDIC) shown in black. Bandwidth chosen at 0.03.
