                                                    WPS8035


Policy Research Working Paper                      8035




Consumption Smoothing and Shock Persistence
   Optimal Simple Fiscal Rules for Commodity Exporters

                                 Arthur Mendes
                                 Steven Pennings




Development Research Group
Macroeconomics and Growth Team
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8035


  Abstract
 A common criticism of balanced budget fiscal rules is that                         rules close to optimal. For commodities like oil, where
 they increase the consumption volatility of financially                            price shocks are highly persistent, it is optimal to spend
 constrained households who are unable to smooth con-                               more than two-thirds of windfall revenues in times of high
 sumption. This paper evaluates the welfare consequences                            prices, and in some cases even spend the entire windfall.
 of simple fiscal rules in a model of a small commodity-ex-                         But for commodities where price shocks are less persistent,
 porting country with a share of financially constrained                            like bananas or sugar, the optimal rule involves spend-
 households, where fiscal policy takes the form of transfers.                       ing less than half of above-average commodity revenues
 A main finding is that balanced budget rules for commodity                         (with the rest saved in a SWF). It is also best to respond
 revenues often outperform more sophisticated fiscal rules                          counter-cyclically to non-resource GDP shocks, because
 where commodity revenues are saved in a Sovereign Wealth                           those shocks are less persistent (and also affect households
 Fund (SWF). Because commodity price shocks are typi-                               other income). The government does not have the ability
 cally highly persistent, the households’ current income is                         to perfectly smooth constrained households’ consumption
 close to their permanent income, making balanced budget                            without adversely affecting unconstrained households.



  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Growth Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors
  may be contacted at spennings@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    CONSUMPTION SMOOTHING AND SHOCK PERSISTENCE: OPTIMAL
         SIMPLE FISCAL RULES FOR COMMODITY EXPORTERS

                                 ARTHUR MENDES AND STEVEN PENNINGS



                                           This version: April 20171

                                               1. Introduction

   Commodity-exporting economies are often characterized as having needlessly pro-cyclical ﬁscal
policy: spending when commodity prices are high, and then cutting back when commodity prices
fall (i.e. a balanced budget rule, BBR). One of the purposes of Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs),
combined with structural surplus ﬁscal rules (SSRs), is to smooth out government expenditure
over time: to save when commodity prices are high and build up a buﬀer which can be drawn
upon in times of lower prices.2
   Two widely admired countries in this literature are Norway and Chile. Norway’s ﬁscal rule
involves storing its oil revenue in a SWF, and withdrawing around 4% (the long run rate of
return) per year to fund expenditure (Gonzalez et al 2013). Pieschacon (2012) ﬁnds that if Mexico
had adopted Norway’s ﬁscal rule, it would have been better oﬀ by around 7.5% of steady state
consumption. Chile’s celebrated structural surplus rule (SSR) involves saving copper revenues that
are above their perceived long-run level and drawing upon these savings when copper prices are
low.3 Based on a small open economy New Keynesian model calibrated to Chile, Kumhof and
Laxton (2013) ﬁnd that the welfare gains from adopting a SSR, relative to a BBR, are around
5 times the gains from adopting optimal monetary policy.4 The welfare gains are even larger
when Chilean government expenditure responds counter-cyclically to non-resource tax revenues.
The authors argue that the reason for these large gains is that the “key task of ﬁscal policy
1
 Mendes: PUC-Rio (Email: agalegomendes@gmail.com). Pennings (corresponding author): Development Research
Group, The World Bank (Email: spennings@worldbank.org or steven.pennings@nyu.edu) We would like to thank
Luis Serven, Maya Eden, Damiano Sandri, Fernando Blanco, Fritzi Kohler, Daniel Lederman and seminar partici-
pants at the World Bank and the ERF. Mendes thanks the ERF and the World Bank for ﬁnancial support. JEL:
E62, O11, E21, E32. Keywords: commodity prices, consumption smoothing, ﬁscal rules, Sovereign Wealth Funds
(SWFs)
2
 Of course SWFs also have other functions, such as intergenerational equity, but in this paper we focus on their
role in smoothing macroeconomic shocks.
3
 The current formulation of Chile’s ﬁscal rule is based on the deviation of the current copper price from a long-run
“reference” price formed by a committee of experts, rather than on the deviation from the long-run average price
(Fornero and Kirchner 2014). An important diﬀerence is that the reference price of copper can (and does) change,
as it did over 2005-13 when it tripled in USD terms (Fornero and Kirchner 2014 Figure 7). This means that in
practice the Chilean ﬁscal rule is more pro-cyclical over the medium term than it is characterized in the literature,
and our critique is more based on this characterization than the operation of the rule in practice.
4
 The gain is around 0.13% of steady state consumption, which is relatively large given then well-known low welfare
costs of business cycles. For example, with log utility, consumers in the US are only willing to spend 0.05% of
steady state consumption to avoid all business cycle ﬂuctuations (according to Lucas’s formula).
                                                         1
                                       OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                               2

is stabilization of LIQ [liquidity constrained] household’s income” — because those households
cannot save/borrow to smooth commodity revenues for themselves.
   In this paper, we show that the optimal ﬁscal rule for commodity export revenue is surprisingly
pro-cyclical. Moreover, we ﬁnd that simple balanced budget rules are often preferred to the
structural surplus rules in reducing consumption volatility. To reach these conclusions we use
several simple models, each with a share of hand-to-mouth (liquidity constrained) households and,
like Kumhof and Laxton (2013), we assume that transfers are the key ﬁscal variable that adjusts
to shocks. The fully optimal ﬁscal rule in our benchmark results involves spending around 70%
of commodity revenues above their long-run level (with the remaining 30% saved in a SWF). In
contrast, Kumhof and Laxton (2013) ﬁnd that almost all of windfall commodity revenue should
be saved.
   Shock persistence and pro-cyclicality The most important factor driving our results is the
persistence of commodity price shocks. When commodity price shocks are transitory, we get the
same results as others in the literature that the optimal ﬁscal rule is closely approximated by a
structural surplus rule (where all deviations from the long-run value of the commodity prices are
saved). However, commodity price shocks are not transitory, they are highly persistent. Figure 1
shows the time path of real log prices for oil (Panel A, LHS) and copper (Panel B, RHS). One can
see that prices in each case show little tendency to revert to their mean in the short-to-medium run.
The annual persistence coeﬃcient is 0.9 − 0.96, similar to the persistence coeﬃcients of 0.89-0.94
found by Borensztein, Jeanne and Sandri (2013) (henceforth BJS2013), or a half life of somewhere
between 6-17 years. Other papers in the literature usually assume a much less persistent process
for commodity prices.5 For example Kumhof and Laxton (2013) estimate copper prices to have a
half-life of 2 years based on a short 8 year sample (1999-2007), and Garcia-Cicco and Kawamura
(2015) estimate a half-life of copper prices to be one year after removing a structural break in
2005.6
   When shocks are highly persistent, balanced budget rules perform well because shocks don’t need
smoothing. The permanent income hypothesis suggests that households should only consume out
of their permanent income. Temporary shocks need to be smoothed by saving/borrowing because
permanent income diﬀers from current income. But for highly persistent shocks, current income
is similar to permanent income, so simply spending current income is close to optimal.
5One   reason for this is that as shocks become persistent, shock variances increase which creates computational
problems.
6There is a vast literature testing whether commodity prices follow a random walk (which generally cannot be
rejected), and trying to estimate more sophisticated models with temporary variations and structural breaks. In
Appendix A we compare our estimates of commodity price persistence for diﬀerent commodities to those in Cashin
et al (2000) (who use a median-unbiased estimator) and ﬁnd similar results. From a policy perspective, we argue the
break down into permanent vs temporary components to be unhelpful for most countries. Identifying permanent vs
temporary changes is diﬃcult enough in hindsight, even harder in real time (when ﬁscal decisions must be made),
and often can be counterproductive. For example, Basch and Engel (1993) argue that in the 1970s and 1980s, Latin
American countries generally considered positive shocks to be permanent, and negative shocks to be temporary,
when in fact the opposite was true. Moreover, the welfare losses from over-reacting to a temporary shocks are much
lower than under-reacting to a permanent one. See Fornero and Kirchner (2014) for a model where agents learn
about the true persistence of commodity prices.
                                   OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                        3




                      Figure 1. The persistence of commodity prices

   While the optimal rule is pro-cyclical with respect to highly persistent commodity revenues, it is
strongly countercyclical with respect to non-resource shocks, which are much less persistent (and
aﬀect households’ other income). In our main results, we ﬁnd that the optimal simple rule insures
hand-to-mouth (HtM) households from the vast majority of variation in non-resource income by
increasing (decreasing) transfers when non-resource income falls (rises).
   Optimal rules by commodity. Although many commodity prices are quite persistent, there
is substantial variation across individual commodities and the optimal ﬁscal rule is sensitive to this
variation. For example, while around three-quarters of windfall oil revenues should be spent, only
half of above-average gas revenues should be spent, and around a quarter of sugar revenues (see
Appendix Table 7 for a full list). As such, superﬁcially similar commodity exporting countries can
have very diﬀerent optimal rules. The reason is that the optimal degree of pro-cyclicality increases
non-linearly with the persistence of commodity price shocks.
   Debt-elastic interest rates and precautionary savings. In our quantitative model we
follow Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003) and others in assuming that as a country’s assets become
larger (smaller) the country’s interest rate premium declines (increases), reﬂecting a lack of invest-
ment opportunities on the upside, and greater ﬁnancial risks on the downside. This variation in
interest rates makes large variation in the size of the SWF very costly to households in terms of
interest income. We ﬁnd that there is a positive relation between the debt-elastic interest spread
of the country and the optimal speed of convergence of the SWF towards its target size. In our
baseline calibration, the optimal rule is for governments to spend around 10% of the deviation of
the value of the SWF from its target size each year, which is well above the real rate of return of
the SWF (around 4% per year, as with Norway’s SWF).
   A real world concern for optimal ﬁscal rules is that countries face a borrowing limit which inhibits
the ability of the government to smooth spending after a long period of low commodity prices.
Jeanne and Sandri (2016) (henceforth JS2016) model an economy with non-linear constraints like
                                      OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                             4

this, and derive optimal precautionary holdings of reserves (equivalent to an SWF). Since our main
results rely on a linear model, it is natural to ask if we are overestimating the pro-cyclicality of
optimal ﬁscal rules because we abstract from non-linear constraints. In fact, JS2016 ﬁnd that an
optimal simple linear rule similar to the one used in this paper is able to deliver the vast majority
of the welfare gains from optimal non-linear reserve management. It turns out that our simple
linear model is able to capture much of the dynamics of precautionary savings in JS2016 when we
increase the debt-elastic interest spread. When we choose the debt-elastic interest spread to match
the autocorrelation of net assets/reserves in JS2016 (with their calibration) we ﬁnd almost exactly
the same degree of pro-cyclicality of the ﬁscal rule — as well as the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation
of the trade balance-to-output ratio observed in the data — even though neither of these were
calibration targets. When we use that debt-elasticity with our default calibration, we ﬁnd that it
actually increases the fraction of above-average commodity revenues that are spent. These results
suggest that (i) our simple linear model with a reduced form ﬁnancial friction is able to capture
much of the dynamics of more complicated non-linear models, and (ii) if anything our simple linear
model understates the pro-cyclicality of optimal ﬁscal rules.
   Commodity price spillovers and endogenous GDP Another real-world concern is that
in commodity intensive economies, shocks to commodity prices spill over into the non-resource
economy, potentially complicating the optimal simple rule and motivating greater smoothing of
commodity price shocks. In two extensions, ﬁrst with exogenous spillovers and second in a real
business cycle (RBC) model, we show that actually spillovers make the variation in the non-resource
economy more persistent, which increases the pro-cyclicality of the optimal ﬁscal rule with respect
to commodity revenues. In these economies, the optimal rule involves spending all of commodity
revenues — as these are the ultimate cause of the increase in persistence in non-resource GDP —
but still responding counter-cyclically to temporary non-resource GDP shocks as before.
   Government objectives, untargeted transfers and an irrelevance result As there are
two types of households, the government might care more about some households than others. For
example, the government might care more about the welfare of HtM HHs because they are poorer.7
In the extreme case that the government only cares about HtM HHs, it possible to completely insure
HtM HHs from all risk, though this results in large welfare losses for the Ricardian (unconstrained)
HH, and so some risk sharing across households is generally optimal if the government cares about
the welfare of both households.
   Although the government might be able to target transfers to particular groups, it is unlikely
that they would be able to do so perfectly. Practically, this is not a huge problem, because
Ricardian households are indiﬀerent to changes in the timing of transfers, so long as their present
value remains the same. In the paper, we show that under some conditions, the ﬁscal rule followed
will be irrelevant for Ricardian HH consumption and welfare. Even if those strict conditions are
not met, Ricardian HHs welfare is fairly insensitive to many changes in ﬁscal rules, which means
7In our main results, we assume that all households have the same per capita income and their weights in the
government’s social welfare function are equal. Alternatively, if HtM households were poorer, then a utilitarian
government would automatically put more weight on minimizing volatility in their consumption.
                                     OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                           5

that government can choose the untargeted ﬁscal rule to be fairly similar to the rule they would
like to target at the HtM HHs. This rule is similar to the one that maximizes HtM HH welfare,
conditional on transfers being untargeted.
   Relation to literature As discussed above, most recent quantitative models of ﬁscal rules
for commodity exporters have argued that commodity revenues should be saved, and balanced
budget rules are suboptimal. To our knowledge, there are no recent papers that challenge that
view. While it has been known for some time that (i) commodity prices are close to a random
walk, and (ii) permanent changes in income should be spent (for example, see Basch and Engel
1993), researchers have generally avoided incorporating highly persistent shocks into quantitative
models of optimal ﬁscal rules. This has led to the current consensus in favor of saving commodity
revenues.8
   Our results are related to several papers which treat commodity price shocks as highly persistent,
though none of these papers calculate optimal ﬁscal rules. First, our ﬁndings are consistent with
the policy discussion in Cashin et al (2000), who argue that highly persistent commodity price
shocks are likely to undermine commodity price stabilization schemes. Cashin et al (2000) focus
on estimating the persistence of commodity prices and make their policy argument descriptively,
rather than calculating the welfare consequences of diﬀerent rules as we do here. Second, our
results are related to JS2016. Although our results are consistent with theirs (suitably modiﬁed to
a consistent framework as discussed above and in Section 5), JS2016 evaluate optimal reserve man-
agement rather than optimal ﬁscal rules and do not include Hand-to-Mouth (liquidity constrained)
households. Finally, Fornero and Kirchner (2014) decompose copper prices into temporary and
persistent components and ﬁnd that the latter is highly persistent. They build a New Keynesian
model where agents learn about the true persistence of commodity prices, and show impulse re-
sponses to persistent commodity price shocks under diﬀerent ﬁscal rules — although they don’t
calculate the welfare consequences of those diﬀerent rules.
   Naturally, there are a number of important real world issues we have abstracted from — such
as irreversible public investment and political constraints — which are discussed in the conclusion.
Nonetheless, our paper does clarify that if a structural surplus rule is optimal, it should be justiﬁed
along those lines, rather than in order to smooth consumption of constrained households.
   Structure of the paper Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we solve for the optimal
simple rule analytically in a model with only hand-to-mouth (liquidity constrained) households.
In Section 3 we present our main quantitative model, which includes two types of households but
where output and commodity prices are exogenous. In Section 4 we present the main numerical
results in terms of the welfare loss under diﬀerent popular ﬁscal rules, and also the optimal ﬁscal
rule. We then present three extensions to the baseline model. In Section 5 we show that the
linear model of Section 4 comes close to replicating the optimal policy in the non-linear model of
8Other  researchers have modeled government spending as not valued by households, such as Garcia-Cicco and
Kawamura (2015). BJS2013 and Bems and de Carvalo Filho (2011) consider the welfare gains of hedging and the
role of precautionary savings in models where commodity exporters face persistent commodity price shocks, but
neither paper discusses ﬁscal rules.
                                         OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                   6

precautionary savings used by Jeanne and Sandri (2016) with a higher debt-elastic interest spread.
In Section 6, we generalize the results of the model by allowing commodity price shocks to spill
over to non-resource GDP, which generally makes the response to commodity price shocks even
more procyclical. In Section 7, we endogenize output in a Real Business Cycle (RBC) model which
generally yields similar results (RBC model details in the Appendix). Section 8 concludes.

                                            2. Analytical Model

  A common justiﬁcation for saving commodity windfalls in sovereign wealth funds is a desire to
smooth consumption. The idea is that households are risk averse, and so prefer a steady stream of
consumption to a volatile one. If households are not able to borrow or lend for themselves — for
example due to credit constraints, a lack of savings instruments or behavioral factors — then the
government has a role to smooth commodity revenues on their behalf. In this section we focus on
this mechanism in a model simple enough to solve analytically.
  In order to do that, we assume that the only agent is a household who consumes his income
hand-to-mouth each period, and that utility is quadratic (in the rest of the paper we assume more
standard constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility).9 The government taxes non-resource
output τY Yt , can save in or spend from a sovereign wealth fund At (if At < 0 then this is government
debt) and receives a fraction τp of commodity revenues QPt (for the rest of the paper we assume
that τp = 1 so the government receives all commodity revenues, as is standard in the literature).
Commodity output is ﬁxed at Q, but commodity prices Pt vary. The household’s income each
period consists of transfers, before tax non-resource GDP (1 − τY )Yt and a fraction (1 − τp ) of
commodity revenues (1 − τp = 0 in the rest of the paper). The government then chooses a transfer
policy (equivalent to choosing consumption) to maximize the household’s utility. More formally,
the problem is:

                                                           ∞
(2.1)                                         max{c } E0         β t U (ct )
                                                           t=0

   such that:
   [HH’s budget constraint] ct = (1 − τY )Yt + (1 − τp )QPt + T rt
   [Government’s budget constraint] At = (1 + r)At−1 + τY Yt + τp Pt Q − T rt
   [Exogenous shocks] Pt − P                 ¯ ) + eP t and Yt − Y
                              ¯ = ρP (Pt−1 − P                      ¯ = ρY (Yt−1 − Y ¯ ) + eY t
   where u(ct ) = −(ct − γ )2 and β = (1 + r)−1 . The Euler equation implies ct = Et ct+1 , and
combined with the transversality condition, and some algebra yields the consumption function for
households. This can be rearranged to give the government transfer rule where transfers respond
(i) the deviation of the sovereign wealth fund from its long run level (At−1 − A), (ii) the deviation of
commodity prices from their long run level (Pt − P ) and (iii) the deviation of non-resource output
from potential Yt − Y .

9The    linear-quadratic approach is an extension of that in Basch and Engel (1993).
                                   OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                        7

   In the analytical model (with only HtM HHs) the Optimal Simple Rule (OSR) is:


   (2.2)                T rt = T r + θA (At−1 − A) + θP Q(Pt − P ) + θY Yt − Y

   where T r = τY Y + τp QP + rA and

                                          r                           r
                            θP = τp              − (1 − τp )(1 −            )
                                      1 + r − ρp                 1 + r − ρp
                                           r                            r
   (2.3)                    θY   = τY             − (1 − τY )(1 −             )
                                      1 + r − ρY                   1 + r − ρY
                            θA   = r

   Each of the ﬁscal rule coeﬃcients θP and θY in Equation 2.3 has two components: (i) how
the government spends above-average revenues (τp Q(Pt − P ) for commodities or τy (Yt − Y ) for
non-resource GDP), and (ii) the countercyclical transfers the government provides to smooth non-
transfer income on behalf of the household ((1 − τp )Q(Pt − P ) or (1 − τy )(Yt − Y )).
   For commodity revenues: If oil shocks are transitory, ρP = 0, the optimal rule involves only
spending r/(1 + r) ≈ 4% of any increase in oil revenues above trend. In contrast, as ρP → 1, the
government should transfer all of the above average oil revenues to households. With ρP = 0.96
and r = 0.04, as is close to the data (for oil), r/(1 + r − ρP ) = 0.5, so one should spend around half
of excess oil revenues each period. This is (roughly) similar to the Optimal Simple Rule in Section
4, where around 70% of commodity revenues should be spent. With ρP = 0.94 , around 40% of
excess oil revenues should be spent. If τp < 1, the government also wants to provide countercyclical
transfers to help the HtM HH smooth their 1 − τp share of non-commodity income. We remove
that channel by assuming τp = 1 (as is common in the literature), such that θp = r/(1 + r − ρp ).
   For output, we calibrate ρY = 0 and τy = 0.15, which (with r = 4%) imply θY ≈ −0.8 (similar
to numerical results in Section 4). This suggests that the government should increase transfers by
80% of any fall in GDP during a recession, a strongly countercyclical response. One can decompose
this into the two components above. r/(1 + r − ρY ) ≈ 0.04 so the government should save almost
all above-average non-commodity revenues. However 1 − r/(1 + r − ρY ) ≈ 0.96 which means that
the government should respond counter-cyclically to non-resource GDP shocks to help the HtM
HH smooth its own income, which is the main reason for the counter-cyclical ﬁscal response with
respect to non-resource GDP.
   Finally, the government should only spend the interest on any extra assets in the sovereign wealth
fund (above the target level of the SWF A  ¯). This is quite diﬀerent from the rule in the quantitative
model in the next section, where the optimal rule requires spending more than r = 4% of the SWF
value for stability. With θA = r, the value of the sovereign wealth fund exhibits almost a unit
root. Not only does this mean that value of the SWF will eventually be exhausted (something we
ignore here without government borrowing constraints), it also means consumption will exhibit a
unit root and its variance will become very large. We revisit these issues in the next section.
                                        OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                 8

                              3. Model (Description and Calibration)

   In this section we build a simple exogenous-income model, which can be used to evaluate the
quantitative welfare losses of alternative popular ﬁscal rules (e.g. balanced budget rule, structural
surplus rules), and to calculate the optimal simple rule. Relative to the analytical model, we
now include Ricardian households (who can borrow and save), change the utility function to the
constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) class common in the literature, and add a debt-elastic
interest spread. The results are robust to endogenizing output in a Real Business Cycle model,
discussed in Section 7, as well as other extensions.

3.1. Model Overview. Consider a small open economy disaggregated into resource and non-
resource sectors. The sectoral decomposition is a key feature of the model because it allows us
to account for the characteristics of the business cycle that are particular to each sector. For
simplicity, we assume that production in each sector is exogenous. Each period the resource sector
produces Q units of a commodity good that is not consumed domestically and only provides an
additional source of income from export sales that accrues entirely to the government. The inter-
national price of the commodity follows an auto-regressive process in logs with persistence ρp and
error standard deviation σp .10 Production in the non-resource sector follows an auto-regressive
process with persistence ρy and error standard deviation σy and can be either consumed domes-
tically or traded internationally at constant price of one dollar. For now, commodity prices and
output are independent, but we relax this assumption in Section 6. Time is measured in years.
   Another key feature of this economy is that it is populated by two types of households. Ricardian
households have full access to an international bond market, while liquidity-constrained (Hand-
to-Mouth) households consume their after-tax income each period. The Ricardian/non-Ricardian
framework generates a non-trivial role for ﬁscal policy and introduces household heterogeneity that
will allow welfare evaluation from the perspective of two diﬀerent households. In the calibration
we assume that population, income and social welfare function weights of each household type ω
are one-half.

3.1.1. Households. The fraction ω of Hand-to-Mouth households are denoted by the upper index
( ) and the fraction 1 − ω of Ricardian households is denoted by ( ). They value consumption
paths according to Equation (3.1). There is no labor, leisure or public goods.

                                               ∞            i1−σ
                                                         t Ct
(3.1)                                   Ui =         β                  i∈{, }
                                               t=0
                                                          1−σ

   where Cti is per household consumption in period t, β is the inter-temporal discount factor and σ
is the coeﬃcient of risk aversion. Because the Ricardian household has access to the international
bond market, it chooses consumption and bond holdings to maximize Equation (3.1) subject to
the budget constraint:
10The   standard deviation of log commodity prices is σP /         1 − ρ2
                                                                        P
                                       OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                               9




(3.2)                   Ct = Rt−1 Bt−1 + (1 − ω )−1 (1 − ωy )(1 − τ )Yt + T rt − Bt

  where Bt is the stock of international bonds held by the Ricardian household (private assets)
at the end of period t, Rt is the domestic gross rate of return, T rt are government transfers per
Ricardian household, Yt is the exogenous non-resource income and τ is the income tax rate. Utility
maximization yields the following ﬁrst-order condition for the Ricardian HH:


(3.3)                                                         −σ
                                              Ct−σ = Et Rt βCt+1

   Since the HtM household does not participate in the international bond market, per HtM house-
hold consumption in period t is restricted to the share ωy of the after-tax non-resource income,
(1 − τ )Yt , plus per HtM household transfers from the government, T rt ,


(3.4)                                    Ct = ω −1 ωy (1 − τ )Yt + T rt

3.1.2. The Government. The government receives exogenous resource income, Pt Q (Q is the quan-
tity of resource exports, which we assume are constant), collect taxes, participates in the interna-
tional bond market and makes transfers to both households. The government’s budget constraint
is:


(3.5)                       At = Rt−1 At−1 + τ Yt + Pt Q − (1 − ω )T rt − ωT rt

   where At is the stock of international bonds held by the government (public assets) in period
t + 1 and Pt is the exogenous commodity price.11

3.1.3. Debt-Elastic Interest Rate Spread. Following Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003), we induce
stationarity in the model by assuming that the interest rate faced by domestic agents increases
with the public + private level of debt in the economy (decreases with public + private assets)

(3.6)                           Rt = R + ψe−(At +(1−ω)Bt −Ass −(1−ω)Bss ) − ψ

   where Bss and Ass are steady state private and public assets, R is the constant world interest
rate, and ψ is the debt-elasticity of the interest-rate spread.12 Although we introduce this feature
to the model for mostly technical reasons, the debt elastic interest rate can be viewed as a reduced
form way of introducing ﬁnancial frictions in the model (see Section 5).

3.1.4. Exogenous Process. Resource prices and non-resource endowments follow an autoregressive
process of the form
11Here  the public sector budget surplus is St = (Rt−1 − 1)At−1 + τ Yt + Pt Q − (1 − ω )T rt − ωT rt
12B  is measured  in per-Ricardian HH terms, whereas other variables are in aggregate terms, so we need to multiply
   t
Bt by the share of Ricardian HHs (1 − ω ).
                                       OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                              10



                                                       pρ      p
(3.7)                                           Pt = Pt−1 exp( t )
                                                        ρ
                                                        y       y
(3.8)                                           Yt = Yt− 1 exp( t )

             p                    2
             t              0   σp  σpy
  where      y   =N           ,       2
             t              0   σpy σy


3.1.5. Welfare Approximation. Assume the government assigns weight ωU to the HtM and 1 − ωU to
the Ricardian HH so that diﬀerent paths of consumption are ranked by the government according
to the following social welfare function:

                                          ∞
                                                               Ct1−σ     C 1−σ
(3.9)                           W =E           β t (1 − ωU )         + ωU t
                                         t=0
                                                               1−σ       1−σ

  Up to a second order, the problem of maximizing Equation (3.9) is equivalent to minimizing
Equation (3.10), where c       ˆt denote the proportional deviation of Ricardian and HtM con-
                        ˆt and c
sumption from their steady state values:

                                       σ
(3.10)                           L=      {(1 − Ψ) [V ar(ˆ               ct )]}
                                                        ct )] + Ψ [V ar(ˆ
                                       2
  where
                      1−σ                                          1−σ
            Css               1−ω   (1 − τ )ωy + T rss                                      ΦωU
         Φ≡                 =                                            and Ψ ≡
            Css                ω (1 − τ )(1 − ωY ) + T rss                            (1 − ωU ) + ΦωU
   One can interpret Equation 3.10 as the share of steady-state consumption that the household is
willing to give up each period to eliminate the variance of consumption over the business cycle. In
a world with complete markets, the household could sign a state-contingent contract with foreign
investors so that equilibrium consumption is constant and welfare loss is zero. However, due to the
less sophisticated ﬁnancial structure assumed in this model, income shocks will lead to consumption
volatility and welfare losses. The higher the variance of consumption, the greater the welfare loss.13


3.1.6. Fiscal Rules. The simple ﬁscal rule dictates how transfers to each type of household change
in response to observable economic variables. In particular, we allow transfers to respond to
deviations of public assets At , non-resource income Yt and the international commodity price Pt
from their respective long-term (steady state) levels. Note that transfers are written in per capita
terms, so the total proportion of assets transferred (for example) is (1 − ω )θa + ωθa

13In our baseline calibration, we assume that Css = Css (with ω = ωU = 0.5), which results in equally-weighted
variances of the two households. Alternatively, if HtM HHs had half the steady state income as Ricardian households
(with σ = 2), then Φ = 2 and Ψ = 2/3, which means the variance of HtM consumption would have twice the weight
as variance of Ricardian consumption.
                                     OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                          11




(3.11)               T rt = T rss + θa (At−1 − Ass ) + θy (Yt − Yss ) + θp Q(Pt − Pss )
(3.12)               T rt = T rss + θa (At−1 − Ass ) + θy (Yt − Yss ) + θp Q(Pt − Pss )

  We consider seven types of ﬁscal rule, which are listed below. Countercyclical Rules (CCY)
are where the government tries to smooth the business cycle by decreasing (increasing) transfers
when output is above (below) potential. In rules (4) and (5) we combine countercyclical rules with
Balanced Budget Rules (BBR) and Structural Surplus Rules (SSR), where the BBR/SSR refers to
the treatment of commodity revenues, and CCY refers to the response to domestic non-resource
income shocks.

     (1) Full HtM Stabilization is where the government completely smooths HtM’s consumption
         by setting θa = θp = 0 and θy = −(1 − τ ). Following Lemma 2 (in the appendix), given
         θa = 0, the welfare of the Ricardian HH is independent of the coeﬃcients {θa , θy , θp }.
     (2) The Balanced Budget Rule (BBR) suggests that the government should focus on min-
         imizing the volatility of public assets around its long-term level. In this setup the govern-
         ment can perfectly stabilize public assets by pursuing the following ﬁscal rule by setting
         θa = θa = β −1 − 1 + , θy = θy = τ (we sometimes assume θy = θy = 0) and θp = θp = 1.14
     (3) The Structural Surplus Rule (SSR) states that the role of government is to minimize
         the volatility of ﬁscal instruments. In this case, the government saves revenues in excess
         of its long-run level and draws down from the SWF when revenues fall below the long-run
         level. The value of the parameters that accomplish that are θa = θa = β −1 − 1 + ,
         θy = θy = 0 and θp = θp = 0.
     (4) The Hybrid BBR-CCY responds diﬀerently to commodity revenues and variations in
         non-resource GDP. Speciﬁcally the BBR-CCY spends all commodity revenues (θp = θp =
         1), but smooths non-resource income (θy = −(1 − ω )−1 (1 − τ )(1 − ωy ), θy = −ω −1 (1 − τ )ωy ).
         The response to government assets is unchanged θa = θa = β −1 − 1 +
     (5) The Hybrid SSR-CCY responds diﬀerently to commodity revenues and variations in
         non-resource GDP. Speciﬁcally the SSR-CCY saves commodity revenues (θp = θp = 0),
         but smooths non-resource income (θy = −(1 − ω )−1 (1 − τ )(1 − ωy ), θy = −ω −1 (1 − τ )ωy ).
         The response to government assets is unchanged θa = θa = β −1 − 1 +
     (6) The Optimal Simple Rule (OSR) chooses all parameters {θa , θy , θp , θa , θy , θp } optimally
         so that the loss function Equation 3.10 is minimized.
     (7) The OSR-Equal also chooses parameters to minimize the loss function Equation 3.10,
         with the restriction that the transfers are untargeted. This means that θa = θa = θa ,
         θy = θy = θy ,θp = θp = θp .


14 > 0 is required for stability purposes – see Lemma 1 in the appendix. In Table 2 we set θa = θa = 0.1 for
HtMHH, BBR, SSR, BBR-CCY and SSR-CCY (i) to make sure we are well away from the unstable region and (ii)
because that is close to the value in the optimal rules.
                                      OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                           12

3.2. Equilibrium, stability and an irrelevance result. We take a ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion
of the system of equations (3.2)-(3.12) around the steady state and consider an equilibrium driven
by the two exogenous shocks: a commodity price shock ( p   t ) and a non-resource GDP shock ( t ).
                                                                                                  y

The equations of the linear system are presented in section B.1 in the appendix.
   Lemma 1 presented in Appendix B provides two conditions for the existence and uniqueness
of an equilibrium in the exogenous-income model. To guarantee a stable path for the SWF, the
ﬁrst condition states that governments must transfer to households no less than 4% (the long-run
real interest rate) of the deviations of the value of the SWF from its target size each year (but
also no more than 104%). The second condition removes the unit root in the consumption of the
Ricardian households by imposing a debt-elastic interest rate spread in the model (ψ > 0), as in
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003).
   Lemma 2, also in Appendix B, presents a version of the well-known Ricardian equivalence result
in Barro (1974) adapted to our heterogeneous agent framework. It says that if the government
commits to a transfers rule to the hand-to-mouth household that does not depend on the size of the
SWF (θa = 0), then the equilibrium path of consumption of the Ricardian household is completely
independent of the transfer rule coeﬃcients for the Ricardian HH {θa , θy , θp }. The reason is that
transfers to the Ricardian household do not alter the discounted ﬂow of expected after-tax income
of the Ricardian household when θa = 0.

3.3. Calibration. General Parameters
   Many of the most important parameters are not country speciﬁc, and so we calibrate these to
international data or take them from the literature. The most important are the persistence of
commodity price shocks, which we calibrate to a weighted average of oil prices and gas prices taken
from BJS2013. The overall persistence (ρ = 0.93) is a weighted average of oil prices (ρ = 0.94) and
gas prices (ρ = 0.89) as many oil exporters also produce gas.15 We set β = 0.96 so that long-run
annual real rate of interest is 4%. The coeﬃcient of risk aversion σ = 2, which is a standard
parameter in the literature. We follow Galí et al (2007) to set ω = ωy = ωU = 0.5 (50% of the
population is HtM). For simplicity we set Bss = 0 so that steady-state consumption is equal across
households.
   We set the benchmark debt-elastic interest spread to be ψ = 0.01, which implies that a 100% of
GDP increase in debt (or reduction in assets) increases interest rates by 1%. Schmitt-Grohe and
Uribe (2003) set ψ = 0.001 to match volatility of the observed current-account-to-GDP ratio for
Canada. Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2016) argue that ψ should be set to match the autocorrelation
of the trade-balance-to-GDP ratio, and they estimate ψ = 1 for Argentina. We take ψ = 0.01 as
compromise between these two approaches. In Section 5, we use an alternative calibration of the
exogenous income model with ψ = 0.45 and ﬁnd broadly similar results.
   Country-speciﬁc calibration to Algeria and Trinidad & Tobago (TTO)

15The  actual weights are a combination of country-speciﬁc persistence for Trinidad & Tobago (TTO) and Algeria,
discussed below.
                                           OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                                        13

   For country-speciﬁc parameters, we chose to calibrate to Algeria and Trinidad & Tobago (TTO).
This is mostly because Algeria is close to a “typical” oil producer, and TTO is close to a “typi-
cal” gas exporter — many countries export both — as measured by the size of resource exports
relative to non-resource GDP. Speciﬁcally, BJS2013 (Table 1) lists the 2002-07 average export
revenues/non-resource GDP for 21 petroleum exporting countries which have petroleum export
revenues/non-resource GDP above 10% — running from Sudan (12%) to Saudi Arabia (82%).
The cross-country average is 38%, which is fairly close to Algeria’s 33% oil revenues and so it
might be regarded as “typical”. BJS2013 also list ﬁve countries with natural gas exports above
10% of non-resource GDP, and TTO’s 20% is very close to the 21% average. For the calibra-
tion of the model, we also include TTO’s oil exports (13% non-resource GDP) which bring total
TTO resource exports to 33% non-resource GDP. As such we calibrate Q = 1/3 (and Yss = 1,
Pss = 1) so total natural resource exports are 1/3 of non-resource GDP (QP/Y = 1/3) to reﬂect
the relative size of resource exports to non-resource GDP in Algeria and TTO.16 However, we also
chose these two countries based on a desire for geographic diversity (Middle East/North Africa for
Algeria, Latin America/Caribbean for TTO), and diversity of country size (TTO has about 1.3m
people with Algeria having 40 million). Finally, we also excluded a number of other countries with
idiosyncratic features that would make optimal simple rules diﬃcult to calculate, such as large
numbers of migrant workers or political instability.17

         Table 1. Exogenous-Income Model Calibration to Algeria and Trinidad & Tobago
Param.    Value   Description                                    Algeria TTO Target/Source
β         0.96    Discount Factor                                    -       -    s.s. 4% annual real interest rate
σ         2       Coeﬃcient of risk aversion                         -       -    Common value in literature
ω         0.5     HtM HH share                                       -       -    Galí et al (2007)
Yss       1       SS non-resource GDP.                               -       -    Normalization
Pss Q     0.33    SS resource GDP                                  0.33    0.33 resource GDP / non-resource GDP (BJS2013)
Ass       0.3     S.s. SWF                                         0.33    0.28 SWF / non-resource GDP (SWF institute)
Bss       0       S.s. private assets                                -       -    Symmetric s.s. consumption
ψ         0.01    Debt-elasticity of interest spread                 -       -    Schmitt-Grohe & Uribe (2003,2016) (see text)
τ         0.15    Income tax rate                                  0.16    0.15 Tax revenue / non-resource GDP (IMF)
ρy        0       Persistence of non-resource income shocks        Insig   0.3* Estimate of ρ based on HP Filtered data.**
ρp        0.93    Persistence of commodity export prices           0.94    0.91 TTO: weighted ave of ρoil = 0.94 and ρgas = 0.89
                                                                                  Algeria: ρoil = 0.94. (from BJS2013)
σy        4%      Std. deviation of non-resource income             4%      2% SD of error from AR(1) reg on ﬁltered data**
σp        24%     Std. deviation of resource prices                23%     26% Average of SD export prices (BJS2013)
Notes: * In part due to oil prices, see Section 6 on “correlated shocks” **Regression of lnXt = α + ρlnXt−1 + et


   Despite their other diﬀerences, in most cases Algeria and TTO have very similar characteristics
relevant for the model (in the cases where parameters diﬀer, we usually take the average). We
calibrate the tax rate τ = 0.15 as non-resource taxes are 15% of GDP in Trinidad and Tobago
(IMF 2014 Article IV) and 16% of GDP for Algeria (IMF 2016 Article IV). Algeria and Trinidad
& Tobago also have very similar sized SWFs. The Algerian SWF represents a share of 33% of the
16Note  that Algeria also exports natural gas, though these are not included in the calibration. In general, the results
of the paper are fairly insensitive to the exact size of resource exports around a reasonable baseline.
17For example, Gulf Co-operation Countries (GCC) have a high share of migrant workers. This could mean that in
times of low oil prices, governments reduce migration — a channel of adjustment not available to other countries
— which might aﬀect the optimal ﬁscal rule.
                                   OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                      14

Algerian non-resource GDP and Trinidad & Tobago’s SWF is about 28% non-resource GDP (data
from the SWF Institute), so we set Ass = 0.3 as an intermediate value. We assume steady state
transfers are set to pay out all steady state revenues. The persistence and volatility of non-resource
GDP is taken from estimating an AR(1) process on HP-ﬁltered log real per capita GDP (from the
World Development Indicators). While it is true that HP ﬁltering removes much of the persistence
in log GDP by constructtion, this is necessary given log GDP per capita is close to a random walk,
and this is a standard procedure in the literature.


                                  4. Main Numerical Results

   Table 2 summarizes the main results for optimal and classical rules.
   HtM Stabilization: smoothing vs insurance In the ﬁrst column of Table 2, the government
follows a rule which provides full insurance for the HtM household against non-resource and com-
modity price shocks. As a result, HtM household consumption remains constant at its steady state
level (a welfare loss of zero for that HH), which is the same result we would get if the household had
access to state-contingent Arrow-Debreu securities. Given the HtM HHs lack access to ﬁnancial
markets, one might think this policy is similar to government borrowing/saving on behalf of the
HtM household as it “ﬁxes” market incompleteness.
   However, from an aggregate perspective this rule is very ineﬃcient because it concentrates risk
with the Ricardian HH rather than sharing risk across households. In fact, the HtM household
full stabilization rule has the worst aggregate welfare performance among the 7 rules considered
in this section (a 4.9% of SS consumption welfare loss, each period ). The full HtM stabilization
rule leads to a very large consumption variance for the Ricardian HH (SD of 31% annually). This
is the diﬀerence between smoothing vs insurance — the Ricardian HH and government have the
ﬁnancial technology to smooth out anticipated changes in the time path of income, but persistent
commodity price shocks also lead to large changes in the present value of future income, which is
uninsurable for both Ricardian HHs and the government. Note that because θa = 0, our Ricardian
Equivalence result (Lemma 2) applies and the government and Ricardian HH act like one entity
(we get the same allocation for any feasible combination of {θa , θy , θp }).
   BBR outperforms SSR Columns 2 and 3 of Table 2 show an interesting and unexpected result:
the BBR outperforms SSR. From the results of the literature summarized in the introduction, one
would expect the opposite. Moreover, the diﬀerence in welfare is quite sizable: the welfare loss is
13% lower under BBR than under SSR. As argued in Section 2, when shocks are persistent, the
SSR over-saves windfall revenues (and overspends when commodity prices are low), which means
that in the short term, consumption of the HtM HH under-responds to changes in commodity
prices.
   A related problem is that SSR leads to a very large standard deviation of assets, both public
and private. In our model, the main problem this creates is that the rate of return earned on
the SWF assets will decrease as the SWF increases in size (“beating the market” is hard for large
funds), or alternatively the interest rate increases when the SWF is small (ﬁxed management
                                       OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                              15

                   Table 2. Welfare Performance of Optimal and Classical Rules.

           ψ = 0.01          (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)             (5)          (6)       (7)
           ρP = 0.93       HtMHH       BBR      SSR     BBR CCY         SSR CCY        OSR     OSR Equal
               θa             0.10      0.10    0.10         0.10          0.10         0.08        0.09
               θy            -0.53      0.15    0.00        -0.85          -0.85       -0.80       -0.77
               θp             1.72      1.00    0.00         1.00          0.00         0.70        0.68
               θa             0.00      0.10    0.10         0.10          0.10         0.09        0.09
               θy            -0.85      0.15    0.00        -0.85          -0.85       -0.80       -0.77
               θp             0.00      1.00    0.00         1.00          0.00         0.70        0.68
             sd(ˆc)           0.31      0.16    0.16         0.16          0.16         0.15        0.15
             sd(ˆ
                c )           0.00      0.16    0.18         0.16          0.18         0.16        0.15
             sd(˜a)           0.93      0.03    2.46         0.12          2.47         0.87        0.91
              sd(˜
                 b)           1.85      1.57    2.39         1.57          2.39         0.22        0.17
        Loss (% of Css )     4.87       2.58    2.96        2.54           2.93        2.38        2.38



costs become larger, there become worries about future solvency) — thus reducing the income
available for consumption. In the real world, it would also mean the SWF would be exhausted,
or the government/agents would eventually reach their debt limit, though with a linear model the
occasionally binding constraints are excluded from our analysis.18
   The importance of persistence The reason the BBR outperforms the SSR is that the oil
price shocks are very persistent. This means that current income is very close to permanent income
and so a BBR where households just consume current income is close to optimal. In Figure 2, we
plot the welfare loss of the SSR and BBR against the persistence of the commodity shock. As the
persistence of the shock increases, so does its standard deviation (which is equal to σp / 1 − ρ2p ).
To isolate the eﬀect of persistence on welfare, we decrease σp as ρP increases to keep the total SD
constant. (In Figure 8 in Appendix B we repeat this exercise with constant σp .) In the upper
LHS of Figure 2 one can see that for ρP < 0.90 the SSR is better — which is the result in the
literature. However, for ρP > 0.90, which is the empirically relevant region for many commodity
prices like oil, a BBR is preferred. The change in ranking of BBR and SSR is due entirely to the
HtM HH (bottom LHS), who prefers a BBR for ρP > 0.90 (but SSR for ρP < 0.90) because for
persistent shocks current income closely resembles permanent income. One can see that the HtM
HH consumption SD is constant for the BBR (as variance of consumption equals that of income,
which is constant by construction). Ricardian HHs are indiﬀerent between the two rules because
they can smooth income themselves, and so “undo” the eﬀects of a sub-optimal ﬁscal rule. Note,
however, that the Ricardian HH prefers less persistent shocks because they are easier to smooth.


18The standard deviation of a and b are relative to non-resource GDP, and are very large. However this large
standard deviation comes from high persistence, rather than from large year-to-year variation. In fact, the “error”
component of the standard deviation is only around 0.24, but because assets are very persistent, their variance is
high. This suggests that it would probably take some years of persistently negative shocks for debt limits to be
reached.
                                                                                                OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                                                                               16


                                                                                 Welfare Loss                                                                              Consumption of the Ricardain HH
                                                                6                                                                                          0.3



                                % of steady state consumption
                                                                        BBR
                                                                5       SSR                                                                     0.25




                                                                                                                         annual std deviation
                                                                4                                                                                          0.2

                                                                3                                                                               0.15

                                                                2                                                                                          0.1

                                                                1                                                                               0.05

                                                                0                                                                                                      0
                                                                               0.45                           0.9                                                                   0.45                           0.95
                                                                      annual persistence of oil-price shock
                                                                                                                                                                           annual persistence of oil-price shock
                                                                    Consumption of the Hand-to-Mouth HH                                                                               Public Assets
                                                0.3                                                                                                                    4

                                0.25
         annual std deviation




                                                                                                                                                annual std deviation
                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                0.2

                                0.15                                                                                                                                   2

                                                0.1
                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                0.05

                                                                0                                                                                                      0
                                                                               0.45                           0.9 0.95                                                              0.45                           0.95
                                                                      annual persistence of oil-price shock                                                                annual persistence of oil-price shock




         Figure 2. Welfare loss and shock persistence with BBR and SSR: baseline
         calibration and constant variance of commodity price shocks.


   Countercyclical Transfers Kumhof and Laxton (2013) ﬁnd that countercyclical ﬁscal policy
— where a fall in output leads to an increase in transfers — leads to a substantial increase in
welfare. Here we add counter-cyclical transfers to both BBR and SSR in Column 4 and 5 of Table
2, and ﬁnd only a small improvement in welfare (by 0.03-0.05).19 The reason is that shocks to
non-resource GDP are relatively small and not very persistent, and so even with a sub-optimal
policy they generate little welfare loss. Countercyclical transfers are optimal because the temporary
nature of the non-resource shocks means that they should be smoothed by HtM HHs.20
   Optimal Simple Rules (OSR) The optimal simple rule is shown in Column 6 of Table 2, which
is the rule that chooses all six parameters {θa , θy , θp , θa , θy , θp } to minimize the weighted average
consumption variances in the loss function (Equation 3.10). One can see that the coeﬃcients are
very similar to those in the BBR-CCY rule — especially for HtM HHs where the details of the rule
have the most eﬀect. The optimal rule suggests that a 10% increase in oil revenues will lead to a
7% increase in transfers to HtM HHs, and so in a sense is a compromise between a BBR and a SSR.
The optimal rule also means that temporary non-resource income shocks are almost completely
insured for HtM HHs, and that an increase in SWF assets leads to an increase in transfers to HtM
HHs by more than the interest earned on those extra assets. For Ricardian HHs, the coeﬃcients

19That  is, commodity revenues are spent/saved according to the BBR/SSR, but shocks to non-resource GDP are
smoothed with counter-cyclical transfers.
20The relationship between the persistence of the commodity shock and the ranking SSR-CCY vs BBR-CCY are
almost identical to that of SSR vs BBR (not reported).
                                                                                OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                                                                                           17


                                                                 baseline                                                   baseline                                                           baseline
                                                                                                              2.5




                           Welfare loss % of C ss




                                                                                    Welfare loss % of C ss




                                                                                                                                                      Welfare loss % of C ss
                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                    2.7                                                      2.48

                                                                                                             2.46
                                                    2.6                                                                                                                        2.8
                                                                                                             2.44

                                                    2.5                                                      2.42                                                              2.6

                                                                                                              2.4
                                                    2.4                                                                                                                        2.4
                                                          0.1   0.2     0.3   0.4                                   -1   -0.5      0     0.5                                         0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8
                                                                       θa                                                        θy                                                                  θp
                                                                      ρ p=0                                                     ρ p=0                                                           ρ p=0
                                            0.08
                                                                                                             0.16
                  Welfare loss % of C ss




                                                                                    Welfare loss % of C ss




                                                                                                                                               Welfare loss % of C ss
                                            0.07                                                             0.14                                                       0.15
                                                                                                             0.12
                                            0.06
                                                                                                              0.1
                                                                                                                                                                               0.1
                                            0.05                                                             0.08
                                                                                                             0.06
                                            0.04                                                                                                                        0.05
                                                                                                             0.04
                                                          0.1   0.2     0.3   0.4                                   -1   -0.5     0     0.5                                          0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8
                                                                       θa                                                        θy                                                                  θp



        Figure 3. Welfare loss around the neighborhood of the OSR-Equal: ver-
        tical line indicates OSR Equal. Top row: Baseline Calibration. Bottom Row: Tran-
        sitory commodity price shocks (ρp = 0).

are relatively similar to those of HtM HHs. Figure 9 in section B.3 shows how the welfare loss
changes as we change the ﬁscal rule coeﬃcients one at a time around the OSR.
   Equal Allocation OSR In Column 7 of Table 2, we also calculate the optimal ﬁscal coeﬃcient
assuming that the government cannot target transfers separately at HtM and Ricardian HHs (i.e.
θa = θa , θy = θy , θp = θp ), so the ﬁscal authority just has to choose a transfer-based rule for
all households {θa , θy , θp }(without primes). Despite this substantial restriction, the OSR-equal
delivers almost the exact same welfare as the fully OSR. The reason is that the unrestricted OSR
coeﬃcients discussed above are quite similar for HtM and Ricardian HHs. Although Lemma 2
doesn’t hold exactly (as θa = 0), welfare is generally less sensitive to variation in transfers to
Ricardian HHs than to the HtM HHs. The policy implication is that for stabilization purposes,
it doesn’t matter if the government can target transfers at the HtM HH — they should just set
the ﬁscal rule that is relatively optimal for HtM HHs, and this will be close to optimal for the
Ricardian HHs as well.21
   In the top row of Figure 3 one can see how the welfare loss changes in the neighborhood of
the OSR-Equal rule. Most important, we ﬁnd that the welfare loss increases substantially as the
government saves more commodity revenue (i.e. θp < 0.68). For θa , the welfare loss increases
sharply below the optimal value of θa = 0.09, because this causes SWF assets to become highly
volatile. As above, the welfare loss increases slowly as the response to non-resource income shocks
become more pro-cyclical above the optimum of around θy = −0.8.

21In additional results (not reported) we show that if the government is restricted to equal transfers, the ﬁscal rule
that maximizes the welfare of the HtM HH is almost identical to the ﬁscal rule that maximizes total welfare.
                                  OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                     18

   In the bottom row of Figure 3, we show that if ρp = 0 (commodity revenues are not persistent)
general welfare losses are much lower, and even very suboptimal procyclical policies (spending
all of resource revenues) generate relatively minor welfare loses of around 0.2% of steady state
consumption. This leads us to conclude that the payoﬀs for making policy mistakes are asymmetric :
if commodity price shocks are transitory, setting the ﬁscal rule as if they are permanent only leads
to an additional welfare loss of 0.17% of steady state consumption. In contrast, if one sets optimal
policy for a transitory shock when shocks are actually permanent, welfare losses are over 1% of
steady state consumption (in the baseline calibration).
   The optimal rule for shocks of diﬀerent persistence Figure 4 shows how the untargeted
optimal rule (OSR-equal) changes as the persistence of the commodity price shock increases. θp
increases non-linearly with the persistence of the commodity price shocks. When the shock is
very persistent, ρp = 0.95, the optimal rule prescribes that governments should spent 80 cents
in the dollar of windfall commodity revenues in times of high prices, but only 8 cents when the
shock is purely transitory, ρp = 0. An implication is that seemingly similar commodities can have
quite diﬀerent optimal ﬁscal rules. For example, oil is one of the most commodities with the most
persistent price shocks, and so the optimal rule involves spending around three quarters of excess
oil revenues. However, for gas and copper the slightly less persistent price process involves the
government should only spend half of above average commodity revenues. For sugar, Arabica
coﬀee and bananas, the government should spend around a a quarter to a third of average average
commodity revenues. See Appendix Table 7 for a list of commodities, the persistence of their
prices and the implied value of ﬁscal rule coeﬃcient θp .
   As in the analytical model of section 2, the persistence of the commodity price shocks does not
aﬀect θa and θy . The government should spend annually 9% of the assets above the long-run target
for the SWF and insure households of most (θy = −0.79) of the variation in non-resource income.
                                                                            OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                                                  19



                                            1
                                                 θa        θy   θp

                                          0.8


                                          0.6


                                          0.4
            Optimal change in transfers




                                          0.2


                                            0


                                          -0.2


                                          -0.4


                                          -0.6


                                          -0.8


                                            -1
                                                                        5




                                                                                                 r)




                                                                                                                                                            il)
                                                                                                          .)


                                                                                                                    s)
                                             0




                                                      25




                                                                                                                                       )




                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                 r)
                                                                                                                                    oy
                                                                     0.




                                                                                                                                                                     9
                                                                                                        ab
                                                                                                 a




                                                                                                                                                  e




                                                                                                                                                           (o
                                                                                                                   a
                                                  0.




                                                                                                                                                                  0.
                                                                                              ug




                                                                                                                                               pp
                                                                                                                an




                                                                                                                                  (s
                                                                                                      ar




                                                                                                                                                      94
                                                                                           (s




                                                                                                                                            co
                                                                                                               an




                                                                                                                             87
                                                                                                     e




                                                                                                                                                      0.
                                                                                          74


                                                                                                 fe


                                                                                                             (b




                                                                                                                            0.



                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                         as
                                                                                                 of
                                                                                       0.




                                                                                                            8




                                                                                                                                       (g
                                                                                               (c


                                                                                                         0.
                                                                                            77




                                                                                                                                  89
                                                                                         0.




                                                                                                                                  0.
                                                                                Annual persitence of the commodity price ( ρp )




Notes: change in untargeted government transfers to HHs given an one-dollar increase in (i) commodity revenues (green
line, θp ), (ii) non-resource GDP (blue line θy ), and (iii) government assets (red line, θA ) as a function of the persistence of
commodity prices. See Appendix Table 7 for estimates of persistence of commodities and data sources. To isolate the eﬀect
of the shock persistence, we adjust σp as ρp increases so that the total variance of the commodity price, σp /(1 − ρp ), is kept
constant.

         Figure 4. Untargeted Optimal Simple Rule in the Baseline Calibration.


      5. Extension 1: Debt Elastic Interest Spread and Precautionary Savings

   The debt-elastic interest spread (ψ ) is needed to make the model stationary, but also can provide
a reduced-form way for our simple linear model to capture non-linear precautionary savings (as
in Jeanne and Sandri 2016) and/or ﬁnancial frictions which generate a realistic autocorrelation of
the trade balance (Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe 2016). In our baseline simulations above we calibrate
ψ = 0.01, which suggests that a 100% of GDP increase in SWF assets (debts) leads to a 1%
decrease (increase) in interest rates. In general we need a higher debt elasticity spread to capture
ﬁnancial frictions or precautionary savings, but let’s ﬁrst consider the eﬀect of a lower value of the
debt-elastic interest spread.
   A lower debt-elastic interest spread reduces the penalty of deviating from target assets as a share
of GDP. As SSRs require large building up and drawing down of assets it also makes SSRs slightly
more attractive. We can reduce the debt-elastic interest spread to ψ = 0.001 (the value used in
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe 2003), which means that a 100% of non-resource GDP increase in SWF
assets (debts) leads to a 0.1% decrease (increase) in interest rates. With ψ = 0.001, the optimal
policy involves drawing down (or building up) the SWF assets at half the rate of the baseline
                                  OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                     20

calibration, i.e. the optimal θa = 0.05 (vs 0.09 the baseline OSR equal), though optimal θp and
θy are mostly unchanged. BBR is still preferred to SSR, but the welfare loss diﬀerence is much
smaller (around 1%).
   Precautionary savings One caveat to the class of linear models considered in the previous
sections is that they abstract from precautionary motives to save. In a model with precautionary
savings and borrowing constraints, the government has an additional incentive to save in order
to stay away from their borrowing limit and avoid drastic cuts in spending when a large shock
causes the borrowing constraint to bind. As a result, there is a worry that linear models without
precautionary savings might overestimate the optimal pro-cyclicality of ﬁscal policy. However, we
show that the linear exogenous-income model of section 4 actually does a good job in capturing
the main features of Jeanne and Sandri’s (2016) non-linear model of precautionary savings and, if
anything, underestimates (rather than overestimates) the optimal pro-cyclicality of ﬁscal policy.
   Jeanne and Sandri (2016) (JS2016 hereafter) analyze the optimal management of reserves using
an intertemporal fully optimal (non-linear) model of an open economy where a representative
household consumes non-tradable goods and imported goods. The household can borrow from and
lend to the government but does not have access to international ﬁnancial markets. The government
holds reserves (foreign assets equivalent to SWFs) to smooth the household’s consumption path of
imported goods. The government’s problem involves trading oﬀ the opportunity cost of holding
reserves (or carry cost) vs the risk of costly contractions in imports when negative external shocks
cause debt constraints to bind. In the benchmark calibration they ﬁnd that an optimal simple
linear rule (similar to the one in this paper) can deliver more than 90% of the welfare gains from
optimal non-linear reserve management. With their calibration to a lower level of shock persistence,
the linear rule prescribes that the government should spend 24% of the reserves above the optimal
level and 65% of export revenues above the estimated long-run level.
                                                      OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                                              21


          Table 3. The Role of Precautionary Savings: Calibration and OSR in Linear and Non-
          Linear Models.
                                                                               symbol        Exogenous Income Model Jeanne and Sandri (2016)
                                                                                              (Linear Model of Section 4) (Global Fully Optimal)
Panel A: Calibration
Coeﬃcient of risk aversion                                                         σ                      2                               2
Elasticity of substitution (imports/nontradables)                                  η                      ∞                               1
Annual persistence of real interest rates                                          ρr                     0                             0.19
Annual std. dev of real interest shocks                                            σr                      0                            0.13
Annual persistence of commodity revenues                                           ρp                    0.78                           0.78
Annual std. dev of commodity revenues shocks                                       σp                   16%                             16%
Tax rate                                                                            τ                    0%                              0%
Intertemporal discount factor                                                      β                    0.951                           0.99
Long-run growth rate                                                               G                     0%                             4.6%
Long-run transfers (share of annual non-res GDP)*                                 T rss                 33%                               –
Debt-elasticity of country premia**                                                 ψ                    0.45                             –

Panel B: Calibration Targets
Long-run real interest rate                                                       rss                    5.1%                           5.1%
1st order autocorrelation of assets (public + private)                         ρabt ,abt−1               0.81                            0.8
Long-run SWF/Reserves (share of annual imports)                                Ass /Mss                  22%                            22%

Panel C: Untargeted Moments and OSR
1st order autocorrelation of trade balance-to-output ratio                        ρtb                  0.55***                            –
Optimal change in transfers given a $1 increase in SWF                            θa                    0.33                            0.24
Optimal change in transfers given a $1 increase in commodity revenues             θp                    0.67                            0.65
*Calibrated to match the estimated optimal long-run target of reserves in JS2016.
**Calibrated to match the 1st order autocorrelation of foreign reserves in JS2016.
*** Our estimates of the 1st autocorrelation of the trade balance-to-output ratio for Algeria and T&T are 0.52 and 0.56 respectively.



   Comparing the exogenous income model with JS2016. In this section, we increase the
debt-elastic spread ψ until our model is able to replicate the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of net
assets/reserves (public+private) in JS2016 with the OSR-Equal ﬁscal rule with the same calibra-
tion. We then check if the linear model of section 4 is biased towards more procyclical rules by
comparing our rule with that in JS2016, and re-generating Table 2 with the higher value of ψ . But
before we do this we need to recalibrate the predetermined parameters of our model so that they
are in line with JS2016.
   Panel A of Table 3 shows the calibration of key parameters in JS2016 and the new calibration
(aimed to “mimic” JS2016) of the linear exogenous income model of section 4.22 Note that the
estimated persistence of the value of exports (ρp = 0.78) is signiﬁcantly lower than our baseline
estimate for Algeria and Trinidad & Tobago (ρp = 0.93). We set τ = 0 since there are no taxes
in JS2016. We lowered the intertemporal discount factor (β = 0.95) and steady-state transfers
(T rss = 0.33) to match the long-run interest rate (rss = 5.1%) and the optimal level of reserves
(Ass /Mss = .22 ∼ 2.2 months of imports) in JS2016, respectively (shown in Table 3 Panel B).23
22JS2016  use annual data from a group of 24 developing countries (sample 1960 to 2014) provided by the World
Bank’s World Development Indicators to calibrate the path of detrended non-tradable output, value of exports and
the country’s interest rate.
23Under the new calibration (aside from discrepancies generated by the linearity assumption) there are two main
diﬀerences between the models: the elasticity of substitution between non-tradable and imported goods and the
structure of the country’s interest rates. In the exogenous income model, we implicitly assume that imported goods
and non-tradable goods are perfect substitutes η = ∞. Second, the country’s interest rate path is assumed to follow
an AR(1) process in JS2016. In our model, the interest rate depends on the country’s net debt, and its persistence
                                      OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                           22




       Figure 5. Panel A (LHS): Autocorrelation of the trade balance-to-output ratio
       and total assets vs debt elastic interest rate (ψ ). Panel B (RHS): OSR-Equal coef-
       ﬁcients on commodity revenues θP and government asset θA vs debt-elastic interest
       rate (ψ ) (and comparison with JS2016)

   With this new calibration, we have to set ψ = 0.45 to match the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of
total assets of ρA = 0.8 in JS2016. As the debt-elastic interest spread increases, assets become less
persistent (Figure 5 Panel A) because there is a strong incentive to avoid moving assets away from
their steady state value. This is reﬂected in an increasing θA (Figure 5 Panel B), which means the
government increases (decreases) transfers more quickly as assets are above (below) their steady
state level. This value of ψ is very large — 45 times larger than the baseline value of 0.01 and
implies that a 10% of GDP increase in debt (or reduction in assets) increases interest rates by
4.5ppts.
   With ψ = 0.45 and OSR-Equal, our model matches very closely the optimal degree of pro-
cyclical spending of commodity revenues in JS2016 and the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of the trade
balance-to-output ratio in the data (see Panel C of Table 3). This is remarkable given neither of
these were calibration targets. Speciﬁcally, our model predicts that the government should spend
θp = 0.67 of export revenues above the long-run level — very close to the value in JS2016 — and
33% of accumulated assets, slightly more procyclical than JS2016’s estimate of 24%. A higher
debt-elastic interest spread increases the degree of pro-cyclicality of θP because saving commodity
revenues now leads to more unfavorable movements in interest rates. Moreover, the model pre-
dicts a ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of trade balance-to-output ratio of ρT B = 0.55 that is in line
with the empirical evidence for many countries — we estimate 0.52 for Algeria, 0.55 for Trinidad
and variance are endogenously determined. While relevant variables in JS2016 are expressed in terms of imported
goods, this is comparable with our model because we assume all goods are perfectly substitutable.
                                         OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                            23

and Tobago and Garcia-Cicco et al (2010) estimate 0.58 for Argentina and 0.62 for Mexico (Figure
3 Panel A).
   Table 4 shows the welfare performance of optimal and classical rules when we use the higher
debt-elastic interest spread consistent with JS2016 (ψ = 0.45), but applied to the baseline cali-
bration which has higher commodity price persistence (ρp = 0.93). Column 6 shows that adding
a debt-elastic interest rate spread makes the OSR-Equal signiﬁcantly more procyclical than the
baseline case with low ψ . Most important, the government spends 77% of above-average com-
modity revenues here against 68% in the baseline in Table 2. Because more higher debt-elastic
of interest rates make deviations of public assets from their long-run level more costly, the speed
of convergence of public assets towards the target is much faster relative to the baseline case
(θa = 0.31 vs θa = 0.09 in the baseline). Column 5 also shows that the targeted optimal simple
rule is more procyclical relative to the baseline calibration and columns 1-4 show that the welfare
gains of adopting a BBR (relative to SSR) increase with ψ .
   In sum, we ﬁnd that (i) the linear model of Section 4 with a reduced-form ﬁnancial friction is
able to capture much of the dynamics of more complicated non-linear models, and (ii) if anything
our baseline simple linear model slightly understates the optimal pro-cyclicality of ﬁscal rules.


                   Table 4. Fiscal Rule with ψ to capture precautionary savings.
               ψ = 0.45           (1)       (2)      (3)            (4)          (5)        (6)
               ρP = 0.93         BBR       SSR    BBR CCY        SSR CCY        OSR      OSR Equal
                   θa             0.10     0.10       0.10           0.10       0.46        0.31
                   θy             0.15     0.00       -0.85          -0.85      -0.60       -0.60
                   θp             1.00     0.00       1.00           0.00       0.61        0.77
                   θa             0.10     0.10       0.10           0.10       0.26        0.31
                   θy             0.15     0.00       -0.85          -0.85      -0.60       -0.60
                   θp             1.00     0.00       1.00           0.00       0.74        0.77
                 sd(ˆc)           0.16     0.22       0.16           0.22       0.16        0.16
                    c )
                 sd(ˆ             0.16     0.18       0.16           0.18       0.15        0.16
                 sd(˜a)           0.07     2.37       0.12           2.37       0.19        0.15
                  sd(˜
                     b)           0.20     4.61       0.25           4.61       0.27        0.20
            Loss (% of Css )      2.54     4.02       2.51           4.01       2.48        2.48

     6. Extension 2: Spillovers from Commodity Prices to non-resource GDP

  In commodity exporting countries, changes in commodity prices often have a large impact on
GDP. In both Trinidad & Tobago and Algeria, real GDP per capita rose as oil prices increased
in the 1970s and early 1980s, fell during the period of low oil prices from the mid-1980s, and
then growth returned as oil prices increased from around 2000 (Figure 6).24 After detrending both
series, the correlation between log real GDP and log real oil prices is around 0.5 for Trinidad &
24Ideally one would like to use non-resource GDP per capita, rather than GDP per capita, which of course includes
oil and gas production. As GDP is in real terms, there should not be any mechanical eﬀect of commodity prices on
output. Moreover, oil and gas production are known to be fairly inelastic to oil price movements in the short term,
given the large ﬁxed costs of oil and gas production.
                                      OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                           24




                             Figure 6. Spillovers from Oil Prices to GDP

Tobago and 0.7 for Algeria. A simple regression of log real GDP per capita on log real oil prices
and a time trend yields a coeﬃcient of around βY P = 0.2 on oil prices, and is highly statistically
signiﬁcant. This suggests that in each of Trinidad & Tobago and Algeria, a 1% increase in real oil
prices increases the level of GDP per capita by about 0.2%. As both countries are a fairly small
share of global oil production, it is unlikely that causality runs from GDP shocks to oil prices.
   We implement this spillover from oil prices to GDP in the exogenous income model in the
simplest way: by assuming by that non-resource GDP increases by 0.2% when oil prices increase
by 1%. We keep pure non-resource shocks as iid (ρY = 0), though non-resource GDP inherits
much of the persistence of oil prices.25 Note, however, that because the oil price shocks are much
larger, they completely swamp variation in non-resource GDP with our default calibration of σy ,
leading to a 95% correlation between output and oil prices (which is much higher than in the data).
To reduce this correlation to around 50% (the value in the data), we also consider an alternative
calibration with σy = 0.22.
   From the analytical model, we know that as shock persistence increases (ρY → 1) the ﬁs-
cal response to non-resource GDP shocks should become more pro-cyclical (less countercyclical)
(Equation 2.3, θY → τ ). Indeed, keeping other ﬁscal rule components ﬁxed at their values in
the baseline model from the previous section, an increase in θY tends to improve welfare in the
model with spillovers. However, as the increased persistence of non-resource GDP can be traced
to commodity price shocks, the optimal policy is able to address its welfare eﬀects through an
increase in θp , without changing θY . That is, when non-resource GDP responds to commodity
shocks, it makes the optimal response of ﬁscal policy to commodity shocks even more pro-cyclical.
This leaves θY to respond counter-cyclically to the temporary non-resource GDP shocks as before.
   To this, Panels B and C of Table 5 reports untargeted OSRs and constrained-optimal simple rules
— where θy = −0.5 is ﬁxed but the other coeﬃcients are chosen optimally— for two alternative
25We calibrate non-resource GDP shocks to be transitory in Section 1 based on HP-ﬁltered data (which removes
much of the persistence mechanically). Without HP ﬁltering, GDP per capita is highly persist in both Trinidad &
Tobago and Algeria.
                                       OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                               25

calibrations. Columns 6 and 8 show that the fully optimal response to more persistent non-resource
GDP shocks is to increase the pro-cyclicality of the response to commodity shocks (↑ θP ), and keep
other aspects of the ﬁscal rule unchanged (θa = 0.09 and θy = −0.8) relative to the uncorrelated
baseline in Table 2. Speciﬁcally, the optimal response to commodity price shock increases from
θp = 0.68 in the baseline above to around θp = 1.05 when commodity shocks spill over to the
non-resource economy.26
   A caveat is that an optimal counter-cyclical response to non-resource GDP is only important if
σy is not too small. Otherwise, the household is close to indiﬀerent along a locus of points with a
higher θY and lower θP which generate the same ﬁscal response to commodity price shocks. For
our default βY P = 0.2, Figure 10 (in Appendix C), shows that the locus of points forms the line
θP = intercept − 0.6 × θY , where an increase in commodity price persistence increases the intercept.
In Column 7 of Table 5, we show this numerically, by ﬁxing the coeﬃcient θY = −0.5 and choosing
the other ﬁscal rule coeﬃcients optimally (with a low σY ). This results in a fall in θp from 1.05 to
0.88, but there is no change in the welfare loss (6.09% of steady state consumption). In Column 9
of the same table we repeat the exercise (ﬁxed θY = −0.5 with optimal θP and θA ) with a higher
standard deviation of non-resource GDP shocks (σy = 0.22) and ﬁnd the same fall in θp from 1.05
to 0.88, but a higher welfare loss of 0.11% (from 6.31% to 6.42%), as responding counter-cyclically
to non-resource GDP shocks is now quantitatively important.
   Adding spillovers from commodity prices to non-resource GDP only has a small eﬀect on the
performance of classical rules (Panel A, of Table 5 with σy = 0.04). Speciﬁcally, we still ﬁnd that
balanced budget rules are at least as good as structural surplus rules — in contrast to the literature
where the SSRs is strictly preferred — and that BBR-CCY is close to optimal. Here the BBR
and SSR generate a very similar welfare loss, whereas in Section 4 BBRs are strictly preferred.27
One can see that the BBR is too pro-cyclical (when θy = 0, θp should be around 0.6), and as such
introducing a countercyclical response to non-resource shocks substantially reduces welfare losses
(close to the loss achieved by OSR-Equal). In contrast, SSRs are not pro-cyclical enough and
so reducing θY increases welfare losses substantially, leading to a very large welfare gap between
between BBR-CCY and SSR-CCY.28




26Comparing    Table 5 Columns 6 and 8, note that the OSR-Equal does not depend on σy . This is because θy
responds only to non-resource GDP shocks (with θP targeting commodity price shocks and their spillovers), and
hence the optimal coeﬃcient only depends on persistence, not volatility.
27Speciﬁcally, BBRs are marginally preferred to SSRs excluding tax revenues (Column 2, a diﬀerence of 0.08%),
BBRs generate slightly higher welfare loss than SSRs including tax revenues (Column 1, a gap of 0.05%). We view
these diﬀerences as small enough that the household is eﬀectively indiﬀerent across the rules, especially given that
the welfare loss calculation is a second order approximation (rather than being exact).
28The gap is much larger than before because non-resource GDP is much more volatile.
                                              OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                                              26


         Table 5. Welfare Properties of Optimal Rules - Spillovers from Commodity Prices
         to Non-Resource GDP.
βY P = 0.2                (A) Classical Rules (σy = 0.04)                     (B) OSR-Equal (σy = 0.04)         (C) OSR-Equal (σy = 0.22)
ψ = 0.01   (1) BBR (2) BBR# (3) SSR (4) BBR-CCY (5) SSR-CCY (6) Optimal (7) θy =-0.5 ﬁxed (8) Optimal (9) θy =-0.5 ﬁxed
θa            0.10      0.10       0.10           0.10             0.10           0.09            0.09            0.09         0.09
θy            0.15       0         0.00          -0.85            -0.85          -0.80            -0.50           -0.77        -0.50
θp            1.00      1.00       0.00           1.00             0.00           1.06            0.88            1.04         0.88
sd(ˆ c)       0.25      0.25       0.25           0.25             0.25           0.25            0.25            0.25         0.25
sd(ˆ c )      0.26      0.26       0.26           0.25             0.29           0.25            0.25            0.25         0.25
sd(˜ a)       0.05      0.19       2.67           1.46             3.94           1.45            1.44            1.59         1.52
sd(˜ b)       2.51      2.15       1.81           0.14             3.82           0.28            0.28            0.33         0.31
Loss          6.54      6.41       6.49           6.10             7.49           6.09            6.09            6.31         6.42
ρyp                                     0.96                                                0.96                         0.50
ρyt ,yt−1                               0.85                                                0.85                         0.23
# Balance Budget Rule which doesn’t respond to tax revenues. Fiscal rule coeﬃcients are the same for both households.



                               7. Extension 3: Real Business Cycle model

   In the models of Sections 4-6 we assumed that non-resource GDP is exogenous. In this section,
we set up a small open economy (SOE) real business cycle (RBC) model and show that our main
results are robust in a model with endogenous output in the non-resource sector.
   Model Overview. The SOE RBC model maintains the basic structure of the exogenous-income
model of the Section 4 — two types of households, exogenous commodity income, a debt-elastic
interest rate spread and ﬁscal rules based on transfers to HHs — but introduces endogenous
capital accumulation, labor supply and production in the non-resource sector of the economy.
Output in this sector is produced by competitive ﬁrms by combining labor hired from both types
of households and capital rented from the Ricardian HH (HtM HHs don’t own capital) using a
Cobb-Douglas production technology. Volatility in non-resource GDP is driven by temporary TFP
shocks (ρz = 0). As is standard in the SOE literature, we assume GHH preferences which imply
that labor supply is unaﬀected by variations in household wealth.29 The capital share of income is
α = 1/3, and the Frisch elasticity of labor supply is (η − 1)−1 = 2.2 (see Appendix D.1 for further
details on the calibration and a description of the RBC model).
   There are two main changes in the RBC model relative to the exogenous income model: the
endogeneity of labor and the endogeneity of capital. To isolate each of these eﬀects we ﬁrst add
endogenous labor in Panel A of Table 6 keeping the capital stock ﬁxed at its steady state level (by
assuming very high capital adjustment costs). Then in Panel B, we allow both labor and capital
to vary. For all the results in Table 6 we also ﬁx θA = 0.1, which simpliﬁes the exposition but
usually has little eﬀect on welfare (see the end of this section for a further discussion).
   Endogenous labor supply (and ﬁxed capital) The RBC model with ﬁxed capital has very
similar optimal rules as the exogenous income model without spillovers, allowing for some scaling
of the coeﬃcient on non-resource GDP. In Table 6, Panel A Column 1 we present OSR-Equal,
when instead of responding to non-resource GDP, the ﬁscal rule responds to the fundamental TFP
29This is an important assumption. With standard (separable) preferences, an increase in commodity prices would
cause households to want to consume more leisure, reducing labor supply and GDP. This would be contrary to
the evidence presented above that GDP and commodity prices are generally positively correlated for commodity
exporters.
                                                      OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                                                       27

shock Z . One can see that these results are almost identical to the baseline exogenous income
results in Table 2 without spillovers. The optimal rule involves spending 68% of non-resource GDP
shocks (the same as in Table 2), and transfers are strongly countercyclical with respect to TFP,
where the coeﬃcient on TFP is θZ = −0.9. With ﬁxed capital, non-resource GDP is perfectly
correlated with TFP, and uncorrelated with commodity price shocks. When the countercyclical
term is expressed in terms of non-resource GDP, we get an identical allocation and value for θP ,
but with θY = −0.5 (relative to −0.8 in Table 2).
   The diﬀerence in the value of θZ and θY from the baseline model is due to (i) the distribution of
income across households; and, (ii) the fact that endogenous labor supply ampliﬁes TFP shocks.
First, note that even though the capital stock is ﬁxed, a fraction α of any change in GDP accrues
to capital owners (the Ricardian HHs). Hence a 1% decrease in non-resource GDP reduces the
after-tax incomes of the HtM HHs by (1 − α)(1 − τ ) = (1 − 1/3)(1 − 0.15) = 0.57 , which is 2/3 of
the fall in income of 0.85 in the exogenous income model in Table 2. This explains why instead of
getting a coeﬃcient on θY = −0.8 in Table 2, we get a coeﬃcient of θY = −0.5 here (which is 2/3
as large). Second, a 1% TFP shock will increase labor supply by (η − 1 + α)−1 (which is equal to
1.26% with our calibration) leading to an increase in GDP of η/(η − 1 + α) which is 1.85% with
our calibration. Hence, the ﬁscal response to a TFP shock (θZ ) needs to be 1.85 times as large as
the ﬁscal response to deviations in non-resource GDP (θy ) to generate the same sized transfer.30
One can see that as in the main exogenous income model, the BBR is preferred to the SSR, and
both rules improve marginally when they respond counter-cyclically to non-resource GDP/TFP
shocks (Table 6 Panel A, Columns 3-6).


                   Table 6. Welfare Properties of Optimal and Simple Rules - RBC Model
   ψ = 0.01,             Panel A. Fixed Capital (variable labor supply) (θa = 0.1 ﬁxed)        Panel B. Variable Capital & Labor Supply (θa = 0.1 ﬁxed)
   ρP = 0.93       (1) OSR EQ (2) OSR EQ (3) BBR (4) SSR (5) BBR-CCY (6) SSR-CCY (1) OSR EQ (2) OSR EQ (3) BBR (4) SSR (5) BBR-CCZ (6) SSR-CCZ
       θZ              −0.9            -             0            θZ = −1.05 or θy = −0.57 -0.83           -             0            -1.03          -1.03
        θy                -         −0.5             0            θZ = −1.05 or θy = −0.57   -          -0.05            0              -               -
       θp              0.68          0.68        1        0           1               0    1.01          1.01       1         0         1               0
     sd(ˆ c)           0.170        0.170     0.172     0.177       0.172           0.177  0.19         0.191      0.19     0.20      0.19            0.20
     sd(ˆ c )          0.195        0.195     0.205     0.233       0.204           0.232  0.23          0.23      0.22     0.31      0.22            0.31
      sd(ˆ l)          0.016        0.016     0.016     0.016       0.016           0.016  0.05          0.05      0.05     0.08      0.05           0.078
     sd(˜ a)            0.84        0.84      0.032     2.468       0.058           2.469  0.06          0.10      0.11     2.66      0.12            2.66
      sd(˜ b)           0.20        0.20      1.395     2.657       1.393           2.657  1.15          1.07      1.07     3.24      1.07            3.24
     sd(k )              0            0          0        0           0               0    0.20          0.20      0.20     0.34      0.20            0.34
Loss (% of Css )        5.72        5.72      6.105     7.342       6.093           7.330  7.60          7.61      7.61     11.98     7.60           11.97
     ρyt ,yt−1           0            0          0        0           0               0    0.99          0.99      0.99     0.995     0.990          0.995
       ρy,p              0            0          0        0           0               0    0.44          0.44      0.45     0.58      0.44            0.58




  Variable Capital and Endogenous Correlation Between Non-Resource GDP and
Commodity Prices. When capital is allowed to vary, the RBC model performs similarly to
the exogenous income model with spillovers (in Section 6), though with a more subtle form of
counter-cyclical response to transitory non-resource GDP/TFP shocks. Capital accumulation also
ampliﬁes the persistence of the commodity price shock, which makes variation in non-resource
GDP highly persistent and means it is optimal to spend all of the commodity windfall (θp = 1).

30As such, the coeﬃcients on the HtM HH rule (which perfectly smooths HtM consumption) are θy = −0.57 and
θZ = −1.05 respectively (1.85 times as large).
                                      OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                             28

   As shown in Figure 7, the endogenous spillover from commodity price shocks to non-resource
GDP is driven by the debt-elasticity of interest rates. A positive shock to commodity prices leads
to an increase of aggregate (public+private) assets in general and consequently to a fall in interest
rates in the home country (due to debt-elastic interest rates). Lower returns on international bonds
provide the Ricardian household with an incentive to invest in physical capital which generates an
output boom in the non-resource sector. The correlation is generally higher for SSR than BBR,
as there is a greater accumulation of assets, and increases with ψ . In the baseline calibration
(ψ = 0.01) the correlation between non-resource GDP and commodity prices is ρy,p = 0.45 under
BBR and ρy,p = 0.58 under SSR, which is similar to a correlation of 0.5 for Trinidad & Tobago
and 0.7 for Algeria in the data (Section 6). Figure 11 in the Appendix highlights this mechanism
by showing the impulse response of key variables to a commodity price shock in the RBC model.
   Panel B of Table 6 shows that the results of the exogenous income model with spillovers are
quantitatively robust in full RBC model with variable capital, conditional on the ﬁscal rule re-
sponding to TFP (rather than non-resource GDP). The ﬁrst column of Panel B shows that the
optimal rule in the RBC model is extremely close to the optimal rule in columns 6 and 8 of Table
5: the government should spend all of their commodity revenue (θp ≈ 1) and respond counter-
cyclically to temporary TFP shocks with a coeﬃcient of θZ ≈ −0.8. This is almost identical to the
BBR-CCZ rule, which is preferred to SSR-CCZ (BBR-CCY is also close to optimal in Table 5 and
is preferred to SSR-CCY). In the full RBC model, the household strongly prefers the BBR to SSR
with respect to commodity revenues (the welfare loss is around more than 50% larger with SSR
than BBR). This is what we would expect given the high persistence of commodity prices, but
Figure 12 in the Appendix shows that the cut-oﬀ above which the BBR is preferred is much lower
in the RBC model (ρp > 0.74 in the RBC model, relative to ρp > 0.9 in the exogenous-income
model), perhaps due to extra persistence of non-resource GDP through capital accumulation.31
   When the ﬁscal rule is expressed in terms of endogenous non-resource GDP rather than TFP
(Table 6, Panel B, Column 2), the optimal θP ≈ 1 is unchanged, but the response to non-resource
GDP is almost acyclical (θy = −0.05), and the welfare loss is slightly larger than for the optimal rule
in terms of TFP. Capital accumulation — due to changes in interest rates, and assets and ultimately
commodity prices — means that non-resource GDP is no longer as highly correlated with temporary
non-resource TFP shocks (the correlation is now around 0.25). In addition, because endogenous
capital accumulation makes non-resource GDP is even more persistent than commodity prices,
the government cannot just increase pro-cyclicality of the response to commodity shocks and then
respond counter-cyclically to non-resource GDP (as in the exogenous income with spillovers).32
This suggests that policymakers need to be careful to respond to the fundamental shocks aﬀecting
the economy, rather than noisy proxies like non-resource GDP.
31One  diﬀerence between models is that in the exogenous spillovers model, HHs are close to indiﬀerent between
BBR and SSR (rather than strongly preferring BBR as they do in the RBC model). This could be because in the
RBC model, the SSR increases spillovers from commodity prices to non-resource GDP — which then makes the
economy more persistent and hence the SSR worse.
32This is, even after removing the eﬀect of commodity prices, non-resource GDP is not that highly correlated with
TFP shocks in the RBC model with variable capital.
                                                                                        OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                            29

  Optimal spending of SWF assets (θA ) For most of this section, we ﬁxed θA = 0.1, which
has almost no eﬀect on the results with ﬁxed capital (Panel A of Table 6) or when the ﬁscal
rule responds to TFP shocks.33 However, in the full RBC model (ﬂexible capital) and when the
ﬁscal rule is in terms of deviations in non-resource GDP, the optimal rule suggests the government
should spend more than a third of SWF assets each year (θA = 0.36), mainly to keep public assets
and interest rates near their steady state level (not reported). With less variation in public assets
and interest rates, non-resource GDP becomes is a better proxy for transitory TFP shocks, and
hence the coeﬃcient on θy becomes more countercyclical and similar to the value in the exogenous
income model.34 The optimal response to commodity price shocks remains strongly pro-cyclical
θP ≈ 1.

                                                                              1
                                                                                       BBR
                                                                                       SSR
                                                                             0.9
                            Correlation of nonres GDP and commodity prices




                                                                             0.8


                                                                             0.7


                                                                             0.6


                                                                             0.5


                                                                             0.4


                                                                             0.3


                                                                             0.2


                                                                             0.1


                                                                              0
                                                                                   0          0.01                              0.02    0.03
                                                                                              Debt-elasticity of interest rates ( ψ )




        Figure 7. Endogenous Correlation of Non-Resource GDP with Commod-
        ity Prices and the Debt-Elasticity of Interest Rates.




                                                                                             8. Conclusions

   In this paper, we re-evaluate the result that commodity exporters should save most commodity
price windfalls using several simple models where a share of the population is unable to borrow
or save, and ﬁscal policy takes the form of transfers directly to households. Unlike much of the
literature, we ﬁnd that the optimal ﬁscal rule is surprisingly procyclical, at least with respect to
commodity revenues. Speciﬁcally we ﬁnd that the optimal rule involves spending around two-thirds
(or even up to 100%) of above-average oil revenues, though only around half of above-average gas or
33Speciﬁcally  the optimal θA in these cases is 0.09 − 0.13 and the welfare loss is the same as optimal θA to three
signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
34Although θ = −0.36 is still much lower than θ = −0.8 in the exogenous income models, recall that much of this
             y                                    y
is because the HtM HH is shielded from over 40% of variations in non-resource GDP due to capital income (which
accrues to Ricardian HHs) as well as the tax system.
                                        OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                                 30

copper revenues (as those commodities have less persistent price shocks). As the rule is symmetric,
this also means cuts in transfers of the same size when commodity prices fall. The reason for the
relatively pro-cyclical rule is that many commodity price shocks are highly persistent, and this
means permanent income (which should drive consumption) is quite similar to current income. In
contrast, we ﬁnd that non-resource shocks (which are less persistent) should generally be smoothed
with counter-cyclical transfers, though transitory non-resource income shocks only drive a small
proportion of consumption volatility in the model.
   Nonetheless, our results are subject to several caveats, with the most important being that we
only look at the eﬀect of ﬁscal rules on consumption volatility.35 While consumption volatility is
an important determinant of the optimal rule in reality, it is not the only one. Chile’s original ﬁscal
rule, for example, was largely designed to smooth the volatility of ﬁscal instruments rather than
consumption, presumably because ﬁscal volatility interrupted the eﬃcient operation of government.
If public investment is funded from commodity revenues, then balanced-budget-type rules will lead
to ineﬃcient volatility in public investment: a fall in commodity revenues will leave half-ﬁnished
dams, roads and bridges. There might also be important political economy consequences of ﬁscal
volatility — for example it is generally more politically diﬃcult to cut spending than to increase it,
meaning that variable commodity revenues can lead to a “ratcheting” up of spending that quickly
becomes unsustainable. While our model (and results) include none of these forces, they do clarify
that if structural surplus ﬁscal rules are optimal, they should be justiﬁed along those lines rather
than in order to smooth consumption of liquidity constrained (HtM) HHs.


                                                   References
 [1] Barro R (1974), “Are government bonds net wealth?” Journal of Political Economy 82(6): 1095-1117.
 [2] Basch M and E Engel (1993), “Temporary Shocks and Stabilization Mechanisms: The Chilean Case”, Chapter
     2 in E. Engel and P Meller (eds). External Shocks and Stabilization Mechanisms, Inter-American Development
     Bank, Washington DC
 [3] Bems R and I de Carvalo Filho (2011), “The current account and precautionary savings for exporters of
     exhaustible resources” Journal of International Economics 84, 48-64
 [4] Borensztein E, O. Jeanne and D Sandri (2013), “Macro-hedging for commodity exporters” Journal of Develop-
     ment Economics 101, 105-116
 [5] Cashin P, H Liang and CJ McDermott (2000), “How Persistent Are Shocks to World Commodity Prices?”, IMF
     Staﬀ Papers, 47(2), 177-217
 [6] Fornero J. and M. Kirchner (2014), “Learning about commodity cycles and saving-investment Dynamics in a
     commodity-exporting economy” Central Bank of Chile Working Paper 727
 [7] Galí J, D. Lopez-Salido and J Valles (2007), “Understanding the Eﬀects of Government Spending on Consump-
     tion,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(1), pp 227-270.

35Other  caveats are on ﬁscal multipliers/spillovers and non-linearities, though we partly address these concerns in
model extensions. Speciﬁcally, while our RBC model has endogenous spillovers from commodity price shocks to
output, it also has small ﬁscal multipliers due to the lack of Keynesian channels, which might aﬀect the optimal
rule. While our model does not include non-linearities (like debt limits), we show that we can capture much of their
impact on optimal rules through a higher debt-elastic interest spread which, if anything, increases the pro-cyclicality
of the optimal rule.
                                       OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                               31

 [8] Garcia-Cicco J and E. Kawamura (2015), “Dealing with the Dutch disease: Fiscal rules and macro-prudential
     policies” Journal of International Money and Finance 55 205-239
 [9] Garcia-Cicco J, R Pancrazi, and M Uribe (2010) “Real Business Cycles in Emerging Countries?" American
     Economic Review 100, 5: 2510-2531.
[10] Gonzalez G., F. Munoz and K. Schmitt-Hebel (2013) “Optimal Dynamic Fiscal Policy with Applications to
     Chile and Norway”, Working Paper PUC-Chile.
[11] Kumhof M. and D. Laxton (2013) “Simple ﬁscal policy rules for small open economies” Journal of International
     Economics 91 113-127
[12] Jeanne O. and D Sandri (2016) “ Optimal Reserves in Financially Closed Economies”, NBER Working Paper
     22139
[13] Pieschacon A (2012) “The value of scal discipline for oil-exporting countries”, Journal of Monetary Economics
     59 250–268
[14] Schmitt-Grohe S. and M. Uribe (2003) “Closing small open economy models” Journal of International Eco-
     nomics 61(1) 163-185
[15] Schmitt-Grohe S. and M. Uribe (2017) “Open Economy Macroeconomics”, Princeton University Press

                Appendix A. The Persistence of Commodity Price Shocks

   The persistence and volatility of the price shocks are calibrated to diﬀerent commodity prices,
reported in Table 7. We estimate an AR(1) process for the natural log of real prices of beef,
coﬀee (Robusta), soy beans, bananas and coﬀee (Arabica) using annual data from World Bank’s
“Pink Sheet” on commodity prices.36 We complement our estimates with those of BJS2013 who use
commodity price data from the International Finance Statistics (IFS) to estimate the persistence of
petroleum, copper, gold and sugar. For the sake of comparison, we report the estimates in Cashin et
al (2000) (their Table 3) in the last column. They estimate the persistence of the commodity price
shocks using monthly IMF data between 1957-1998 and a median-unbiased estimator, including
a time trend. One can see that for most commodities — and especially the most persistent
commodities — our estimates of persistence are generally lower than those in Cashin et al (2000).37
This means that, if anything, our estimates of the optimal ﬁscal rule are not pro-cyclical enough.


                   Table 7. Calibration of Commodity Price Persistence (in years)
                   Persistence Half Life OSR             Source         Sample      Half Life from Cashin et al
                                                θp                                  <1 1-4 5-8 9-18          ∞
   Petroleum            0.94         11.2      0.73   IFS/BJS(2013)    1970–2008                             X
      Beef              0.90         6.6       0.56   WB PinkSheet     1960-2016               X
  Natural Gas           0.89           6       0.53   IFS/BJS(2013)    1985–2008                             X
     Copper             0.89           6       0.53   IFS/BJS(2013)    1957–2008               X
      Gold              0.89           6       0.53   IFS/BJS(2013)    1970–2008                             X
 Coﬀee (Robusta)        0.89           6       0.53   WB PinkSheet     1960-2016                             X
   Soy Beans            0.87           5       0.48   WB PinkSheet     1960-2016          X
    Bananas             0.80           3       0.35   WB PinkSheet     1960-2016    X
 Coﬀee (Arabica)        0.77          2.6      0.31   WB PinkSheet     1960-2016                     X
     Sugar              0.74          2.3      0.28   IFS/BJS(2013)        -                         X
36The  estimates in Table 7 do not include a time trend, because (if taken literally) this would imply that real log
prices would go to ∞ or zero in the (very) long run, neither of which are feasible.
37
  This is unsurprising as Cashin et al (2000) argue that least squares estimates of persistence are downward biased.
                                       OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                            32

                              Appendix B. Exogenous Income Model

B.1. Equilibrium. Let x   ˆ denote the percentage deviation of variable X from its steady state
value and x˜ denote deviation of X from its steady state as a share of non-resource GDP.38 We
take a ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion of the system of equations (3.2)-(3.12) around the benchmark
calibration steady state. c    ˆt , ˜
                          ˆt , c               ˜ t are measured in per capita terms, whereas other variables
                                         ˜ t , tr
                                    bt , tr
are aggregate. The resulting system of linear equations is:

                       ω −1 ωy (1 − τ )                    1             ˜t
(B.1)       ˆt =
            c                              ˆ
                                           yt +                          tr
                  ω −1 ωy (1 − τ ) + T rss      ω −1 ωy (1 − τ ) + T rss
(B.2)       c       ˆt+1 − σ −1 R
            ˆt = Et c            ˆt

(B.3)      bt = β −1˜
           ˜        bt−1 + (1 − ω )−1 (1 − τ )(1 − ωy )ˆ    ˜ t − [(1 − ω )−1 (1 − τ )(1 − ωy ) + T rss ]ˆ
                                                       yt + tr                                           ct
(B.4)       ˜ t = β −1 a
            a                          ˆ t−1 + τ y
                       ˜t−1 + β −1 Ass R                                ˜ t − ω tr
                                                           ˆt − (1 − ω )tr
                                                 ˆt + QPss p                    ˜t

(B.5)                  at−1 + (1 − ω )˜
            ˆ t = −βψ (˜
            R                         bt−1 )

  Transfers,

(B.6)                                  ˜ t = θa a
                                       tr                 ˆt + θp QPss p
                                                ˜t−1 + θy y            ˆt
(B.7)                                  ˜ t = θa a
                                       tr                 ˆt + θ1p QPss p
                                                ˜t−1 + θy y             ˆt

  AR(1) shock processes for commodity prices and
                                                                p
(B.8)                                          ˆt = ρp p
                                               p       ˆt−1 +   t
                                                                y
(B.9)                                          ˆt = ρy y
                                               y       ˆt−1 +   t

B.2. Condition for stability and an irrelevance result. In this section we establish two
results that help to get some intuition of how the choice of ﬁscal policy aﬀects determinacy and
uniqueness of equilibrium in the exogenous income model.

Lemma 1. Consider the model (B.1)-(B.9) and assume θa = 0. Conditions (i) and (ii) are
necessary and suﬃcient for the existence of an unique and bounded equilibrium.
  (i) β −1 − 1 < θa < β −1 + 1
                          σ (2+β −1 )
  (ii) 0 < ψ < β ((1−ω)−1 (1 −ωy )(1−τ1 )+T rss )

   Lemma 1 provides two conditions for the existence and uniqueness of a stable equilibrium in the
exogenous income model. The ﬁrst condition restricts the set of feasible transfers rules available to
the ﬁscal authority. While size of the transfer to the HtM household does not depend on the size
of the SWF (θa = 0), it is required that accumulated public assets are transferred to the Ricardian
household at a rate at least as large as the steady-state net interest rate, β −1 − 1, and no higher
than 1 + β −1 . With this condition in place, explosive paths of public assets are prevented. Note
that any set of values for θy and θp can be consistent with stable paths for the public debt and
38Steady                                       ˜t = Xt − XSS
           state non resource GDP is unity, so x
                                                                                                  OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                                                                                      33

highly counter-cyclical or pro-cyclical transfers rule are feasible policy choices for the government.
The second condition adds a debt-elastic interest rate in the model to remove the random-walk
behavior of the consumption of Ricardian household, as in Schmitt-Grohe & Uribe (2003).

Lemma 2. Consider the model (B.1)-(B.9), assume θa = 0 and ψ → 0. In a unique and stable
equilibrium, the consumption path and welfare of the Ricardian household is independent of the
transfers it receives from the government {θa , θp , θy }.

   Lemma 2 is an adaptation of the classic Ricardian equivalence result in Barro (1974) for our
heterogeneous-agent setup. Ricardian agents consume out of their permanent income, and to
the extent that lump sum transfers ﬁnanced by public debt issuance do not aﬀect the agent’s in-
tertemporal budget constraint, ﬁscal policy cannot inﬂuence equilibrium allocations in a non-trivial
fashion. The introduction of HtM households breaks the classical Ricardian equivalence (e.g. Galí
et al (2007)). In our model, transfers to one type of agent aﬀect the other through the eﬀects on
public assets (if θa > 0). However, if the government commits to a particular transfer rule to the
HtM HH which does not depend on the level of public assets (θa = 0), then transfers between the
government and the Ricardian HH do not aﬀect the intratemporal budget of the Ricardian HH
and hence the Ricardian equivalence applies again.

                                                                                          Welfare Loss                                                                              Consumption of the Ricardian HH
                                                                         6                                                                                          0.3
                                         % of steady state consumption




                                                                                 BBR
                                                                         5       SSR                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                  annual std deviation




                                                                         4                                                                                          0.2

                                                                         3                                                                               0.15

                                                                         2                                                                                          0.1

                                                                         1                                                                               0.05

                                                                         0                                                                                                      0
                                                                                        0.45                           0.9                                                                   0.45                           0.95
                                                                               annual persistence of oil-price shock                                                                annual persistence of oil-price shock

                                                                             Consumption of the Hand-to-Mouth HH                                                                               Public Assets
                                                         0.3                                                                                                                    4

                                         0.25
                  annual std deviation




                                                                                                                                                         annual std deviation




                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                         0.2

                                         0.15                                                                                                                                   2

                                                         0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                         0.05

                                                                         0                                                                                                      0
                                                                                        0.45                           0.9 0.95                                                              0.45                           0.95
                                                                               annual persistence of oil-price shock                                                                annual persistence of oil-price shock




       Figure 8. Welfare loss and shock persistence with BBR and SSR without
       adjustment of σp : This ﬁgure is a version of ﬁgure 2 in the main text without adjusting σp to keep
       total commodity shock variance constant.


B.3. Optimal Simple Rule. In Figure 9, we show how the welfare loss changes as we change
the ﬁscal rule coeﬃcients one at a time around the Optimal Simple Rule (which is indicated by a
vertical line). First, one can see that optimal simple rule is optimal, in that it leads to the lowest
welfare loss (at least locally). Most interesting is the bottom RHS plot which shows that as the
government saves more commodity revenues on behalf of the HtM HH (θP → 0), the welfare loss
                                                     OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                                       34

increases from about 2.4% of steady state consumption to almost 3%, reinforcing the point that
it is optimal for HtM HHs to spend rather than save commodity revenues when they are highly
persistent.


                               Welfare Loss                               Welfare Loss                              Welfare Loss
                    3                                              3                                   3

                   2.8                                            2.8                                 2.8
       % of C ss




                                                      % of C ss




                                                                                          % of C ss
                   2.6                                            2.6                                 2.6

                   2.4                                            2.4                                 2.4

                   2.2                                            2.2                                 2.2

                    2                                              2                                   2
                         0.1    0.2     0.3    0.4                 -1.5   -1   -0.5   0                         0    0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
                                      θ 1a                                     θ 1y                                      θ 1p

                               Welfare Loss                               Welfare Loss                              Welfare Loss
                    3                                              3                                   3

                   2.8                                            2.8                                 2.8
       % of C ss




                                                      % of C ss




                   2.6                                            2.6                     % of C ss   2.6

                   2.4                                            2.4                                 2.4

                   2.2                                            2.2                                 2.2

                    2                                              2                                   2
                          0.1    0.2     0.3   0.4                 -1.5   -1   -0.5   0                     0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
                                      θ 2a                                     θ 2y                                      θ 2p




       Figure 9. How welfare loss changes with the Optimal Simple Rule coef-
       ﬁcients (baseline calibration): vertical line indicates OSR coeﬃcient in Table 2
       which minimizes the welfare loss. Top row: ﬁscal rule coeﬃcients for Ricardian HHs.
       Bottom row: ﬁscal rule coeﬃcients for HtM HHs.

      Appendix C. Spillovers from Commodity Prices to non-resource GDP

  Figure 10 shows combinations of θY and θP that approximately maximize welfare (minimize
the welfare loss) when ρp is calibrated to match the persistence of the price shock of selected
commodities (here βY P = 0.2 and σY = 0.04). We ﬁnd that ﬁxing θA = 0.09 the welfare loss is
minimal along all points of the line θP = intercept − 0.6 × θY for all ρp . The intercept of each
indiﬀerence curve is increasing in the persistence of the commodity price shock, because more
persistent shocks requires more pro-cyclical ﬁscal policy (either in terms of θP or θY ). Also, the
red dot (θY = −0.77 and θP = 0.68) and the black dot (θY = −0.77 and θP = 1.03) display the
                                                                                                                              OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                                                                    35

OSR equal in the baseline calibration and in the calibration with correlated shocks, respectively.
One can see that the optimal response to commodity price shocks becomes much more pro-cyclical
when shocks are correlated.


                optimal change in transfers given a 1-dollar increase in commodity prices (θ p )
                                                                                                                                                                                              oil ( ρ p=.94), Loss = 6,3% of C ss
                                                                                                   1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                              baseline ( ρ p=.93), Loss = 6,1% of C ss
                                                                                                   1.1                                                                                        copper ( ρ p=.89), Loss = 5,1% of C ss
                                                                                                                                θ spillover
                                                                                                                                  p                                                           banana ( ρ p=.8), Loss = 3,4% of C ss
                                                                                                    1                                                                                         sugar ( ρ p=.74), Loss = 2,8% of C ss

                                                                                                   0.9

                                                                                                   0.8

                                                                                                   0.7
                                                                                                                                θ baseline
                                                                                                                                  p
                                                                                                   0.6

                                                                                                   0.5

                                                                                                   0.4

                                                                                                   0.3

                                                                                                   0.2

                                                                                                   0.1

                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                     -1        -0.9       θ baseline     -0.7    -0.6         -0.5        -0.4         -0.3             -0.2             -0.1            0
                                                                                                                            y
                                                                                                                        optimal change in transfers given a 1-dollar increase in non-resource GDP ( θ y)



        Figure 10. Indiﬀerence Curves between θY and θP , in the Exogenous In-
        come Model with Spillovers (baseline calibrationβY P = 0.2 and σy = 0.04 ):
        combinations of θY and θP along the line θP = intercept − 0.6 × θY minimize the
        welfare loss. The optimal value of θA is 0.09.


                                                                                                               Appendix D. Real Business Cycle Model

D.1. RBC Model Description. The RBC model is based on the exogenous income model of
Section 3 augmented to introduce endogenous production in the non-resource sector of the econ-
omy. To be brief, we will only discuss the main diﬀerences between the RBC model and the
exogenous-income model.
   First, preferences are diﬀerent: here we use Greenwood–Hercowitz–Huﬀman (1988) (GHH here-
after) preferences to remove wealth eﬀects on labor supply (common in small open economy RBC
models). Each type of household chooses labor supply and consumption to maximize utility subject
to a budget constraint,

                                                                                                               ∞
                                                                                                                       1
(D.1)                                                                                                     E0              [Cti − η −1 (Li η 1−γ
                                                                                                                                        t) ]    −1                                            for i ∈ { , }
                                                                                                               t=0
                                                                                                                      1−γ

   where (η − 1)−1 is the Frisch elasticity of labor supply and γ the coeﬃcient of risk aversion
(equivalent to σ in the exogenous income model in the main text).
   The Ricardian household can smooth consumption by accumulating two types of assets: physical
capital and one-period bonds traded internationally at interest rate Rt . Physical capital accumu-
lation is subject to a depreciation rate and adjustment costs according to equation (D.2),
                                       OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                           36



                                                     φ
(D.2)                                                  (Kt − Kt−1 )2
                                  Kt = (1 − δ )Kt−1 + It −
                                                     2
  the Ricardian household’s budget constraint is given by,


(D.3)        Ct = Rt−1 Bt−1 − Bt + (1 − ω )−1 (Rt
                                                k
                                                  − 1)Kt−1 − (1 − ω )−1 It + Wt Lt + T rt

  where Ct is per Ricardian household consumption, Bt is per Ricardian household stock of bonds,
Wt is the wage rate and T rt is per Ricardian government transfers and Rk is the rate of return
on capital. The Ricardian household maximizes Equation (D.1) subject to (D.3) and (D.2). The
ﬁrst-order conditions of this problem are,


         −1
(D.4) Lη
       t    = Wt
                         −γ                               −γ
(D.5)    Ct − η −1 Ltη        = βRt Et Ct+1 − η −1 Ltη
                                                     +1
                                              −γ                             −γ
(D.6) [1 + φ(Kt − Kt−1 )] Ct − η −1 Ltη            = β Et Ct+1 − η −1 Ltη
                                                                        +1
                                                                                   k
                                                                                  Rt+1 − δ − φ(Kt+1 − Kt )

  where we dropped the upper index ( ) from (D.4) because labor supply is the same across
households in equilibrium. The Hand-to-Mouth household has no access to any sort of ﬁnancial
instrument and hence is subject to the period-by-period budget constraint,


(D.7)                                         Ct = Wt Lt + T rt

  where T rt is per HtM household government transfers.
  Non-resource goods are produced competitively using labor and capital. Firms maximize proﬁts
choosing labor and capital inputs subject to a Cobb-Douglas production function,


                                                              1−α
(D.8)                                         Yt = Zt Ktα
                                                        −1 Lt

  where Total Factor Productivity, Zt , follows an AR(1) process with persistence ρz and standard
deviation σz . Note that Kt−1 is a predetermined variable at time period t. Proﬁt maximization
yields the ﬁrst-order conditions,

                                                               Yt
(D.9)                                      Wt = (1 − τ )(1 − α)
                                                               Lt
                                            k                  Y t
(D.10)                                     Rt − 1 = (1 − τ )α
                                                              Kt−1
  where τ is a sales tax rate levied on ﬁrms. As in exogenous income model, all income from
commodity exports accrues to the government. The government’s budget constraint is:

(D.11)                        At = Rt−1 At−1 + QPt + τ Yt − ωT rt − (1 − ω )T rt
                                   OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                       37

  and the debt-elastic interest-rate spread is


                                  w
                            Rt = Rt + ψ (e−(1−ω)Bt +At −(1−ω)Bss −Ass ) − 1)

  It is useful to deﬁne GDP, trade balance and the current account,


(D.12)                     GDPt = QPt + Yt
(D.13)                     T Bt = Yt + QPt − (1 − ω )Ct − ωCt − It
(D.14)                     CAt = T Bt + (Rt−1 − 1)((1 − ω )Bt−1 + At−1 )

  Up to a second order, welfare losses using the GHH utility function can be approximated by ζ .

     γ                                                     1 η              lη Ul
ζ = − (Css − η −1 lss )−1 Css {(1 − ω )V(ˆ          ct )} + (γlss
                                         ct ) + ω V(ˆ             + (η − 1)) ss {(1 − ω )V(lt ) + ω V(lt )}
     2                                                     2                 Css
D.2. RBC Calibration. We follow Schmitt-Grohe & Uribe (2003) in calibrating η , γ , δ , φ, ρz
and σz . We choose ψ = 0.01 and other parameters from the exogenous income model in the body
                                                            PC              PC
of the text. Table 8 summarizes the calibration. Note that C1,ss = 1.2292, C2,ss = 1.0625, Yss = 1,
YR = 1/3, KSS = 2.



                       Table 8. Additional Parameters in the RBC model
Param. Value Description                     Target/Source
η        1.45    Labor supply elasticity     Schmitt-Grohe & Uribe (2003) (Frisch= (η − 1)−1 = 2.22)
γ        2       Coeﬃcient of risk aversion Common value in literature
α        1/3     Capital Share GDP           Schmitt-Grohe & Uribe (2003)
δ        0.1     Depreciation rate           SS I/Y; Schmitt-Grohe & Uribe (2003)
φ        0.028 Capital adjustment cost       SD of investment; Schmitt-Grohe & Uribe (2003)
ρz       0       Persistence of TFP          Consistency with exogenous income model
σz       0.013 SD resource GDP               Schmitt-Grohe & Uribe (2003)
Notes: Other parameters the same as in the exogenous income model (Table 1)



D.3. IRF in the RBC model. Figure 11 shows how a commodity price shock in the RBC model
increases in aggregate (public+private) assets and reduces interest rates (due to the debt-elastic
spread) which then boosts capital accumulation and output non-resource sector.



D.4. The Importance of Persistence in the RBC model. Figure 12 plots the welfare loss of
the SSR and BBR changing the persistence of commodity price shock (adjusting the variance of the
                                                                                          2
shock as the persistence increases so the the variance of the commodity price (V (ˆ
                                                                                  pt ) = σp /(1 − ρ2
                                                                                                   p ))
is kept constant). Note that the cutoﬀ 0.74 where BBR is better than SSR has moved to the left
in comparison with the exogenous income model (0.9).
                                                                                          OPTIMAL SIMPLE FISCAL RULES                                                                                                                                                38



                                                                       commodity price                                                                                                                            public assets
                                               0.3                                                                                                                         0.5




                                                                                                                                          % nonres.gdp
                                                                     BBRCY                 SSRCY                    OSR




                  % s.s. dev
                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                               0.1

                                                0                                                                                                               -0.5
                                                      2          4          6         8         10          12          14                                                                  2          4          6        8          10   12            14
                                                                                 years                                                                                                                                years
                                                                            private assets                                                                                                       -3               interest rate
                                                                                                                                                                                           ×10
                                               0.5                                                                                                                                   2
              % nonres.gdp




                                                                                                                                                    % s.s. dev
                                                0                                                                                                                                    0

                                   -0.5                                                                                                                                              -2

                                                -1                                                                                                                                   -4
                                                      2          4          6         8         10          12          14                                                                  2          4          6        8          10   12            14
                                                                             years                                                                                                                                   years
                                                          -3         rental rate of capital                                                                                                                       capital stock
                                                1 ×10                                                                                                                      0.1




                                                                                                                                    % nonres.gdp
                        % s.s. dev




                                                0                                                                                                         0.05

                                                -1                                                                                                                                   0

                                                -2                                                                                                 -0.05
                                                      2          4          6         8         10          12          14                                                                  2          4          6        8          10   12            14
                                                                                years                                                                                                                              years
                                                                            hours worked                                                                                                                     non-resource GDP
                              0.02                                                                                                                        0.04
         % s.s. dev




                                                                                                                                    % s.s. dev
                              0.01                                                                                                                        0.02

                                                0                                                                                                                                    0

                       -0.01                                                                                                                       -0.02
                                                      2          4          6         8         10          12          14                                                                  2          4          6        8          10   12            14
                                                                                   years                                                                                                                                 years




Figure 11. Endogenous Feedback from Commodity Prices to Non-
Resource GDP: Impulse response function of key variables to an one standard-deviation (24%)
shock of commodity prices in the baseline calibration of the RBC model.


                                                                                 Welfare Loss                                                                                                           Consumption of the Ricardian HH
                                                               BBR
                                      0.018                    SSR
                                                                                                                                                                             0.07
                                                                                                                                                    annual std deviation




                                      0.016
                                      0.014                                                                                                                                  0.06
                % of C ss




                                      0.012
                                               0.01                                                                                                                          0.05
                                      0.008
                                      0.006                                                                                                                                  0.04

                                      0.004
                                                                                                                                                                             0.03
                                                          0.18                                   0.74            0.88        0.98                                                               0.18       0.38                                   0.88        0.98
                                                                 persistence of oil-price shock (annual)                                                                                               persistence of oil-price shock (annual)

                                                                     Consumption of the HtM HH                                                                                                                        Public Assets
                                                                                                                                                                                     1.2
                                               0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                        annual std deviation




                                                                                                                                                              annual std deviation




                                                0.1                                                                                                                                  0.8

                                               0.08                                                                                                                                  0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                               0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2

                                               0.04
                                                          0.18       0.38                            0.78        0.88        0.98                                                               0.18       0.38                                  0.88         0.98
                                                                 persistence of oil-price shock (annual)                                                                                               persistence of oil-price shock (annual)




Figure 12. Welfare loss and shock persistence with BBR and SSR: Benchmark
calibration of the RBC model and keeping the total variance of the commodity price shock constant
            2
(V (ˆ
    pt ) = σp /(1 − ρ2
                     p ))                                                    .
