                                                  WPS8027


Policy Research Working Paper                    8027




       Heterogeneous Technology Diffusion
          and Ricardian Trade Patterns
                               William R. Kerr




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8027


  Abstract
  Migration and trade are often linked through ethnic net-                          development of new technologies across US cities with his-
  works boosting bilateral trade. This study uses migration                         torical settlement patterns for migrants from countries. The
  to quantify the importance of Ricardian technology dif-                           instrumented elasticity of export growth on the intensive
  ferences for international trade. The framework provides                          margin with respect to the exporter’s productivity growth
  the first panel estimates connecting country-industry                             is between 1.6 and 2.4, depending upon weighting. This
  productivity and exports, and the study exploits heteroge-                        provides an important contribution to the trade literature
  neous technology diffusion from immigrant communities                             of Ricardian advantages, and it establishes a connection of
  in the United States for identification. The latter instru-                       migration to home country exports beyond bilateral networks.
  ments are developed by combining panel variation on the




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author
  may be contacted at wkerr@hbs.edu@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
Heterogeneous Technology Diffusion and Ricardian Trade Patterns
                                          William R. Kerr *†




  JEL Classification: F11, F14, F15, F22, J44, J61, L14, O31, O33, O57
  Key Words: Trade, Exports, Comparative Advantage, Technological Transfer, Patents,
  Innovation, Research and Development, Immigration, Networks
  *
    William Kerr is Dimitri V. D’Arbeloff—MBA Class of 1955 Professor of Business
  Administration, Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts, and Faculty Research Associate,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts. His email address is
  wkerr@hbs.edu.
  †
    I am grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Pol Antras, David Autor, Dany Bahar, Nick Bloom, Ricardo
  Caballero, Arnaud Costinot, Julian Di Giovanni, Robert Feenstra, Fritz Foley, Richard Freeman,
  Gordon Hansen, Sam Kortum, Ashley Lester, Matt Mitchell, Peter Morrow, Ramana Nanda,
  Giovanni Peri, Hillel Rapoport, Ariell Reshef, Tim Simcoe, Antonio Spilimbergo, Scott Stern,
  Sarah Turner, and John Van Reneen for advice on this project and to seminar participants at the
  eighth AFD-World Bank Migration and Development Conference, American Economic
  Association meetings, Clemson University, Columbia University, European Regional Science
  Association meetings, Georgetown University, Harvard University, International Monetary Fund,
  London School of Economics, MIT Economics, MIT Sloan, NBER High Skilled Immigration
  Conference, NBER Productivity, Queens University, University of California Davis, University of
  Helsinki, University of Toronto Rotman, World Bank, and Yale University for helpful comments.
  This paper is a substantial revision of chapter 2 of my Ph.D. dissertation (Kerr 2005). This research
  is supported by the National Science Foundation, MIT George Schultz Fund, HBS Research, and
  the Innovation Policy and Economy Group.
Trade among countries due to technology differences is a core principle in international
economics. Countries with heterogeneous technologies focus on producing goods in
which they have comparative advantages; subsequent exchanges afford higher standards
of living than are possible in isolation. This Ricardian finding is the first lesson in most
undergraduate courses on trade, and it undergirds many modeling frameworks on which
recent theoretical advances build (e.g., Dornbusch et al. 1977, Eaton and Kortum 2002,
Costinot et al. 2012). In response to Stanislaw Ulam’s challenge to name a true and
nontrivial theory in social sciences, Paul Samuelson chose this principle of comparative
advantage due to technology differences.
   While empirical tests date back to David Ricardo (1817), quantifying technology
differences across countries and industries is extremely difficult. Even when observable
proxies for latent technology differences are developed (e.g., labor productivity,
industrial specialization), cross-sectional analyses risk confounding heterogeneous
technologies with other country-industry determinants of trade. Panel data models can
further remove time-invariant characteristics (e.g., distances, colonial histories) and
afford explicit controls of time-varying determinants (e.g., factor accumulation, economic
development, trading blocs). Quantifying the dynamics of uneven technology
advancement across countries is an even more challenging task, however, and whether
identified relationships represent causal linkages remains a concern. These limitations are
particularly acute for developing and emerging economies. This is unfortunate as non-
OECD economies have experienced some of the more dramatic changes in technology
sets and manufacturing trade over the last thirty years, providing a useful laboratory for
quantifying Ricardian effects.
   This study contributes to the empirical trade literature on Ricardian advantages in
three ways. First, it utilizes a panel dataset that includes many countries at various
development stages (e.g., Bolivia, France, South Africa), a large group of focused
manufacturing industries, and an extended time frame. The 1975–2000 World Trade
Flows (WTF) database provides export data for each bilateral route (exporter-importer-
industry-year), and data from the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO) provide labor productivity estimates. The developed data platform includes
substantially more variation in trade and productivity differences across countries than
previously feasible.
    The second contribution is to provide panel estimates of the elasticity of export
growth with respect to productivity development. Following the theoretical work of
Costinot et al. (2012) that is discussed below, estimations include fixed effects for
importer-industry-year and exporter-importer-year. The importer-industry-year fixed
effects control, for example, for trade barriers in each importing country by industry
segment while the exporter-importer-year fixed effects control for the overall levels of
trade between countries (e.g., the gravity model), labor cost structures in the exporter, and
similar. While these controls account for overall trade and technology levels by country,
permanent differences in the levels of these variables across industries within a country
are used for identification in most applications of this approach. This paper is the first to
quantify Ricardian elasticities when further modeling cross-sectional fixed effects for
exporter-importer-industry observations. This panel approach only exploits variation
within industry-level bilateral trading routes, providing a substantially stronger empirical
test of the theory.
    The third and most important contribution is to provide instruments for the labor
productivity development in exporting countries. Instruments are essential in this setting
due to typical concerns: omitted variable biases for the labor productivity measure,
reverse causality, and the potential for significant measurement error regarding the
productivity differences across countries. The instruments exploit heterogeneous
technology diffusion from past migrant communities in the United States for
identification. These instruments are developed by combining panel variation on the
development of new technologies across US cities during the 1975–2000 period with
historical settlement patterns for migrants and their ancestors from countries that are
recorded in the 1980 Census of Populations.
    The foundation for these instruments is the modeling of Ricardian advantages through
differences across countries in their access to the US technology frontier. Recent research
emphasizes the importance of immigrants in frontier economies for the diffusion of
technologies to their home countries (e.g., Saxenian 2002, 2006, Kerr 2008). These
global connections and networks facilitate the transfer of both codified and tacit details of
new innovations, and Kerr (2008) finds foreign countries realize manufacturing gains
from stronger scientific integration, especially with respect to computer-oriented
technologies. Multiple studies document specific channels sitting behind this
heterogeneous diffusion. 1
    As invention is disproportionately concentrated in the United States, these ethnic
networks significantly influence technology opportunity sets in the short-run for
following economies. This study uses heterogeneous technology diffusion from the
United States to better quantify the importance of technology differences across countries
in explaining trade patterns. Trade between the United States and foreign countries is
excluded throughout this study due to network effects operating alongside technology
transfers. Attention is instead placed on how differential technology transfer from the
United States—particularly its industry-level variation by country—influences exports
from the foreign country to other nations. Said differently, the study quantifies the extent
to which India’s exports, for example, grow faster in industries where technology transfer
from the United States to India is particularly strong. This provides an important
complement in the migration literature to the typical focus on how ethnic networks boost
bilateral trade.
    The instrumented elasticity of export growth on the intensive margin with respect to
the exporter’s productivity growth is 2.4 in unweighted estimations. The elasticity is 1.6
when using sample weights that interact worldwide trade volumes for exporters and
importers in the focal industry. Thus, the study estimates that a 10% increase in the labor
productivity of an exporter for an industry leads to about a 20% expansion in export
volumes within that industry compared to other industries for the exporter. This
instrumented elasticity is weaker than Costinot et al.’s (2012) preferred estimate of 6.5
derived through producer price data for OECD countries in 1997, but it is quite similar to
their 2.7 elasticity with labor productivity data that are most comparable to this study.
The two analyses are also qualitatively similar in terms of their relationships to
uninstrumented elasticities. This study does not find evidence of substantial adjustments

    1. Channels for this technology transfer include communications among scientists and engineers (e.g.,
Saxenian 2002, Kerr 2008, Agrawal et al. 2011), trade flows (e.g., Rauch 2001, Rauch and Trindade 2002),
and foreign direct investment (e.g., Kugler and Rapoport 2007, Foley and Kerr 2013). The supplement
provides further references to the role of international labor mobility and other sources of heterogeneous
technology frontiers (e.g., Eaton and Kortum 1999, Keller 2002).
in the extensive margin of the group of countries to which the exporter trades. These
results are robust to sample composition adjustments and variations on estimation
techniques. Extensions quantify the extent to which heterogeneous technology transfer
can be distinguished from a Rybczynski effect operating within manufacturing, evaluate
differences in education levels or time in the United States for past migrants in instrument
design, and test the robustness to controlling for direct ethnic patenting growth by
industry in the United States.
    This study concludes that comparative advantages are an important determinant of
trade; moreover, Ricardian differences are relevant for explaining changes in trade
patterns over time. These panel exercises are closest in spirit to the industrial
specialization work of Harrigan (1997) and the structural Ricardian model of Costinot et
al. (2012). Other tests of the Ricardian model are MacDougall (1951, 1952), Stern
(1962), Golub and Hsieh (2000), Chor (2010), Morrow (2010), Fieler (2011), Bombardini
et al. (2012), Costinot and Donaldson (2012), Shikher (2012), Levchenko and Zhang
(2014), Simonovska and Waugh (2014a,b), and Caliendo and Parro (2015). Recent
related work on the industry dimension of trade includes Autor et al. (2013), Kovak
(2013), and Hakobyan and McLaren (2016). Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014) review
empirical aspects and challenges of this literature. The comparative advantages of this
work are in its substantial attention to non-OECD economies, the stricter panel
assessment using heterogeneous technology diffusion, and the instruments built off of
differential access to the US frontier. Work on migration-trade linkages dates back to
Gould (1994), Head and Reis (1998), and Rauch and Trindade (2002), with Bo and Jacks
(2012), di Giovanni et al. (2015), Bahar and Rapoport (2016), and Cohen et al. (2016)
being recent contributions that provide references to the lengthy subsequent literature.
This paper differs from these studies in its focus on technology transfer’s role for export
promotion as an independent mechanism from migrant networks. In addition to
contributing to the trade literature, the study documents for emerging economies an
economic consequence of emigration to frontier economies like the United States. 2



    2. Davis and Weinstein (2002) consider immigration to the United States, technology, and Ricardian-
based trade. Their concern, however, is with the calculation of welfare consequences for US natives as a
consequence of immigration due to shifts in trade patterns.
                                            I. ESTIMATING FRAMEWORK

This section extends the basic estimating equation from Costinot et al. (2012) to a panel
data setting. A simple application builds ethnic networks and heterogeneous technology
diffusion into this theory. The boundaries of the framework and the statistical properties
of the estimating equation are discussed. 3

                                                  Estimating Equation

Costinot et al. (2012) develop a multi-country and multi-industry Ricardian model that
has been widely studied and utilized in the trade literature. This framework builds off the
model of Eaton and Kortum (2002) to articulate appropriate estimation of Ricardian
advantages with industry-level data. The supplemental appendix shows how this model
provides a microfoundation for studying Ricardian trade through an econometric
specification of the form


ln ( x
     ij
       k
         ) =δ ij + δ jk + θ ln( z
                                ik ) + ε ijk ,            (1)

where i indexes exporters, j indexes importers, and k indexes goods. Each good k has an
infinite number of subvarieties that are being bought and sold with observed trade flows
                                                                      ij
being an aggregation of the subvarieties. In the estimating equation, x k
                                                                          represents trade

                                                                                     ik
flows from exporter i to importer j for good k that adjust for country openness, and z
represents observed labor productivity in exporter i for good k. As described in the
supplemental appendix, the theory framework requires including fixed effects for
bilateral trade routes ( δ ij ) and importer-industry fixed effects ( δ jk ) to account for

unmodeled factors like consumer preferences, country sizes, and delivery costs. Finally,
the estimated coefficient θ has a specific interpretation related to the Fréchet distribution
that underlies this model and Eaton and Kortum (2002). Specifically, a low θ suggests a
large scope for intraindustry comparative advantage, while a high θ (corresponding to

    3. Dornbusch et al. (1977), Wilson (1980), Baxter (1992), Alvarez and Lucas (2007), Costinot (2009),
and Costinot and Vogel (2015) provide further theoretical underpinnings for comparative advantage.
large observed adjustments in exports with industry-level productivity shifts) suggests a
limited scope for intraindustry comparative advantage.
     Estimates of θ in the trade literature have been derived with cross-sectional
regressions using equation (1). This study seeks identification of the θ parameter within
the Costinot et al. (2012) setting via first differencing and instrumental variables. 4 The
first step is to extend equation (1) to include time t,


ln ( x
     ijt
       k
          ) = δ ijt + δ jtk + θ ln( z k
                                    it ) + ε ijt
                                               k
                                                  .     (2)


It is important to note that this extension is being applied to the fixed effect terms. Thus,
the exporter-importer fixed effects in the cross-sectional format become exporter-
importer-year fixed effects in a panel format. It is assumed that θ does not vary by period,
although stacked versions of the Costinot et al. (2012) model could allow for this. The
empirical work below estimates equation (2) for reference, but most of the specifications
instead examine a first-differenced form,


∆ ln ( x
       ijt
         k
            )= δ ijt + δ jtk + θ∆ ln( z k
                                      it ) + ε ijt
                                                 k
                                                    ,   (3)


where the fixed effects and error term are appropriately adjusted.
     The motivation for first differencing is stronger empirical isolation of the θ
parameter. By themselves, exporter-importer-year and importer-industry-year fixed
effects in equation (2) allow identification of the θ parameter in two ways: (i)
                          k                                                k
                        it
longitudinal changes in z                                                it
                            over time; and (ii) long-term differences in z   across
industries for the exporter. In a cross-sectional estimation of equation (1), it is not
feasible to distinguish between these forms. This second effect persists when extending
the equation (2) to a panel setting because the exporter-importer-year fixed effects δijt
only account for the aggregate technology changes for exporters. First differencing best
                                                                       k
                                                                     it
isolates the particular role of longitudinal changes in productivity z   over time.


    4. Daruich et al. (2016) estimate this framework encompasses about 20% of the variation in trade
flows. Other studies seek to jointly model Ricardian advantages with other determinants of trade (e.g.,
Davis and Weinstein 2001, Morrow 2010).
    Whether estimating the θ parameter through both forms of variation is appropriate
depends upon model assumptions, beliefs about unmeasured factors, and measurement
error. It is helpful to illustrate by considering the exports of Germany in automobiles. The
study examines trade over the 1980–1999 period. Throughout this period, Germany held
strong technological advantages and labor productivity for manufacturing automobiles
relative to the rest of the world. Over the course of the period, this productivity also
changed in relative terms. If one can feasibly isolate these productivity variables, then
having both forms of variation is an advantage. A second and related issue is that first
differencing the data exacerbates the downward bias that measurement error causes for
estimates of the θ parameter. There are plenty of reasons to suspect non-trivial
measurement error in industry-level labor productivity estimates developed from
the UNIDO database.
    On the other hand, removing time-invariant differences to identify the θ parameter
can be an advantage. The basic identification constraint for the econometric analysis is
that technology levels of exporters cannot be distinguished from other unobservable
factors that also vary by exporter-industry or exporter-industry-year for the long-term
technology levels and their longitudinal changes, respectively. The first is particularly
worrisome given its general nature. First differencing is not foolproof against omitted
factors, but it does require that the changes in these factors correlate with the changes in
                                                   k
                                                 it
the focal productivity level in the exporters of z   . This latter approach of panel
estimation, while very common in microeconomic analyses, has yet to be extended to the
Ricardian literature. 5
    Beyond this discussion, a few other notes about the estimation of (3) are warranted.
The dependent variable is bilateral manufacturing exports by exporter-importer-industry-
year. The lack of trade for a large number of bilateral routes at the industry level creates


    5. Estimations of the Costinot et al. (2012) model rely on fixed effects to handle delivery costs and
other aspects of trade that are not due to the productivity of exporters. Thus, a cross-sectional estimation (1)
requires unmodeled delivery costs be only comprised of a bilateral component and an importer-industry
               k
component ( d ij   = dij ·d k
                            j ). A panel estimation (3) allows this proportionate structure to be extended to
  k
dijt = dijt ·d k      k
               jt ·d ij , where the third term represents the long-term delivery costs for the exporter to the
importer by industry.
econometric challenges with a log specification. These zero-valued exports are predicted
by the model as an exporter is rarely the lowest-cost producer for all countries in an
industry. This study approaches this problem by separately testing the intensive and
extensive margins of trade. Most of the focus is on the intensive margin of trade
expansion, where the dependent variable is the log growth in the value of bilateral
exports ∆ ln ( x
               ijt
                 k
                    ) . The intensive margin of exports captures both quantities effects and
price effects (e.g., Acemoglu and Ventura 2002, Hummels and Klenow 2005). In tests of
extensive margin of trade expansion—that is, commencing exports to new import
destinations—the dependent variable becomes a dichotomous indicator variable for
whether measurable exports exist. Differences in the sample construction for these two
tests are discussed when describing the trade dataset.
    Beyond the model’s background, the exporter-importer-year fixed effects perform
several functions. They intuitively require that Germany’s technology expansion for auto
manufacturing exceed its technology expansion for chemicals manufacturing if export
growth is stronger in autos than chemicals. Thus, these fixed effects remove aggregate
trade growth by exporter-importer pairs common across industries. These uniform
expansions could descend from factors specific to one country of the pair (e.g., economic
growth and business cycles, factor accumulations, terms of trade and price levels) or be
specific to the bilateral trading pair (e.g., trade agreements, preferences 6). This
framework is thus a powerful check against omitted variables biases, helping to isolate
the Ricardian impetus for trade from relative factor scarcities and other determinants of
trade. The fixed effects also control for the gravity covariates commonly used in
empirical trade studies. National changes in factor endowments may still influence
industries differentially due to the Rybczynski effect, which is explicitly tested for below.
The importer-industry-year fixed effects control for tariffs imposed upon an industry in
the importing country. More broadly, they also control for the aggregate growth in
worldwide trade in each industry, relative price changes, and the potential for trade due to
increasing returns to scale (e.g., Helpman and Krugman 1985, Antweiler and Trefler
2002).

    6. Hunter and Markusen (1988) and Hunter (1991) find these stimulants account for up to 20% of
world trade.
    More subtly, a key difference between multicountry Ricardian frameworks and the
classic two-country model of Dornbusch et al. (1977) is worth emphasizing. This
difference influences how the comparative static of increasing a single country-industry
                       k
                     it
technology parameter z   , ceteris paribus, is viewed. The multicountry theoretical
                                    k
                                  it
framework allows for increases in z   to reduce exports on some bilateral routes for the
exporter-industry. This effect is due to general equilibrium pressures on input costs and
extreme value distributions—while the productivity growth makes the exporter more
competitive, the rising wage rates in the country may make it less competitive for a
particular importer. This more nuanced pattern is different from the stark prediction of a
two-country model where productivity growth in an industry for a country would never
lead to declines in exports to the other country in that industry. The proper treatment
effect for productivity growth is measured across all export destinations, as in the
empirical work of this paper, and thus captures the general Ricardian pattern embedded in
the model. This treatment effect is a net effect that may include reduction of exports on
some routes. 7

                  Heterogeneous Technology Diffusion and Ricardian Trade

While the Ricardian framework assigns a causal relationship of export growth to
technology development, in practice the empirical estimation of specification (3) can be
confounded by reverse causality or omitted variables operating by exporter-industry-year
even after first differencing. Reverse causality may arise if engagement in exporting leads
to greater technology adoption, perhaps through learning-by-doing or for compliance
with an importer’s standards and regulations. An example of an exporter-industry-year
omitted factor is a change in government policies to promote a specific industry, perhaps
leading to large technology investments and the adoption of policies that favor the chosen
industry’s exports relative to other manufacturing industries. This would lead to an
upward bias in the estimated θ parameter. 8



    7. Costinot et al. (2012) provide a more detailed discussion, including the extent to which the industry
ordering of the two-country model is found in the relative ordering of exports for countries.
    8. More specifically, the innovation in industrial policy support must be non-proportional across
manufacturing industries. Long-term policies to support certain industries more than others are accounted
    Heterogeneous technology transfer from the United States provides an empirical
foothold against these complications. Consider a leader-follower model where the
technology state in exporter i and industry k is


=

z k
 it
    tk ,US ·Υ ik ·Υ it ·M it
    z                       k
                              .     (4)


tk ,US is the exogenously determined US technology frontier for each industry and year.
z
Two general shifters govern the extent to which foreign nations access this frontier. First,
Υ ik models time-invariant differences in the access to or importance of US technologies
to exporter i and industry k, potentially arising due to geographic separation (e.g., Keller
2002), heterogeneous production techniques (e.g., Davis and Weinstein 2001, Acemoglu
and Zilibotti 2001), or similar factors. The shifter Υ it models longitudinal changes in the
utilization of US technologies common to all industries within exporter i, such as changes
due to declines in communication and transportation costs, greater general scientific or
business integration, and so on. In what follows, both of these shifters could further be
made specific to an exporter-importer pair.
    By themselves, these first three terms of model (4) describe the realities of technology
diffusion but are not useful for identification when estimating specification (3). The
                    tk ,US is captured by the importer-industry-year fixed effects, the
technology frontier z

bilateral Υ ik shifter is removed in the first differencing, and the longitudinal Υ it shifter is
                                                                        k
captured in the exporter-industry-year fixed effects. The final term M it , however,
describes differential access that the migrants to the United States from exporter i provide
to the technologies used in industry k. This term models the recent empirical literature
that finds that overseas diaspora and ethnic communities aid technology transfer from
frontier countries to their home countries. If there is sufficient industry variation in this
technology transfer, after removing the many fixed effects embedded into specification
(3), then this transfer may provide an exogenous instrument to the exporter productivity



for by the first differencing. Uniform changes in support across industries are also jointly accounted for by
panel fixed effects.
            k
          it
parameter z   in a way that allows very powerful identification for the role of Ricardian
advantages in trade.
    The design of this instrument combines spatial variation in historical settlement
patterns in the United States of migrant groups from countries with spatial variation in
where new technologies emerged over the period of the study. The instrument takes the
form


                         Techck,,t A− S 
   k
M it = ∑ M %i ,c ,1980 ·      k , A− S 
                                           ,   (5)
       c∈C               Techc ,1980 
                                        


where c indexes US cities. M %i ,c ,1980 is the share of individuals tracing their ancestry to

country i—defined in more detail below and including first-generation immigrants—that
are located in city c in 1980. These shares sum to 100% across US cities. The bracketed
fraction is a technology ratio defined for an industry k. The ratio measures for each city
how much patenting grew in industry k relative to its initial level in 1980. The fraction
exceeds one when a city’s level of invention for industry k grows from the base period,
and it falls below one if the city’s invention for an industry weakens.
    The instrument thus interacts the spatial distribution across US cities of migrants from
exporter i with the city-by-city degree to which technological development for industry k
grew in locations. By summing across cities, equation (5) develops a total metric for
exporter i and industry k that can be first differenced in a log format, ∆ ln( M it
                                                                                  k
                                                                                    ) , to

instrument for ∆ ln( z k
                     it ) in equation (3). A subtle but important point is that the
instrument can only work in a first-differenced format (or equivalent panel data model
with bilateral route fixed effects). This restriction is because the expression (5) does not
have a meaningful cross-sectional level to it—for all countries and industries, the value of
   k                                                    k
M it is equal to one in 1980 by definition. As such, M it cannot predict the cross-section
                              k
of trade in 1980. However, M it does provide insight about changes in technology
opportunity sets over time that can be used for identification in estimations that consider
changes in technology and trade over time.
   Three other points about the instrument’s design are important to bring out as they
specifically relate to potential concerns about the instrument. First, the technology trend
modeled in equation (5) is at the city-industry level, not at the city level. This is vital
because the instrument interacts the US spatial ancestry distribution for a country with
these city-industry patenting trends. As the estimations include exporter-importer-year
fixed effects, any variable or instrument that would interact a city-level trend (e.g.,
population growth, housing prices, local public expenditures, etc.) with the city spatial
distribution will be completely absorbed by the exporter-importer-year fixed effects
(specifically, the exporter-year part of these fixed effects). In other words, general city-
level factors like the total patenting of a location are anticipated to impact industries for a
country in a proportionate way, and the estimations only use disproportionate variation
over industries to identify the empirical effects.
   Second, one concern would be that migrants from exporter i select cities specifically

to acquire technologies useful for their home country’s exports. This seems less

worrisome perhaps for individual migrants, but it is quite plausible when contemplating a

German automobile manufacturer opening a new facility in the United States (e.g.,

Alcacer and Chung 2007). The instrument seeks to rule out this concern by fixing the city

distribution of migrants from exporter i at their city locations in 1980. This approach

eliminates endogenous resorting, and the results below are also shown to be robust to

focusing on second-generation and earlier migrants. Additional analyses also consider

dropping industries for each country where the concerns could be most pronounced.

   A third concern is one of reverse causality. The United States relies extensively on
immigrants for its science and engineering labor force, with first-generation immigrants
accounting for about a quarter of the bachelor’s educated workforce and half of those
with PhDs. Moreover, immigrants account for the majority of the recent growth in the US
science and engineering workforce. The spatial patterns of new high-skilled immigrants
frequently build upon ethnic enclaves and impact the innovation levels in those locations
(e.g., Kerr and Lincoln 2010, Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle 2010, Peri et al. 2015). Thus, a
worry could be that the technology growth for cities in model (5) is endogenous. The
concern would be that Germany is rapidly developing innovations and new technologies
for the automobile industry, and this expansion is simultaneously leading to greater
exports from Germany and the migration of German scientists that are patenting
automobile technologies to the United States.
    This concern is addressed in several ways throughout this study, including sample
decomposition exercises, lag structure tests, and similar exercises. The most
straightforward safeguard, however, is already built into model (5). The patenting data, as
described below, allow us to separate the probable ethnicities of inventors in the United
States. By focusing on inventors of Anglo-Saxon ethnic heritage, one can remove much
of this reverse causality concern. The Anglo-Saxon group accounts for about 70% of US
inventors during the time period studied, and so this group reflects the bulk and direction
of US technological development. Extensions will further consider settings where patent
citation records suggest that the Anglo-Saxon inventors are mainly drawing on other
Anglo-Saxon inventors in their research. 9
    Addressing these concerns also provides the approach (5) with a conceptual
advantage with respect to the fixed effect estimation strategy. The first differencing in
specification (3) controls for the initial distributions M %i ,c ,1980 , and the importer-

industry-year fixed effects δ jt
                              k
                                 control for the technology growth ratio for industry k. This

separation is not perfect due to the summation over cities, but it is closely mimicked.
Thus, the identification in these estimations comes off these particular interactions. This
provides a strong lever against concerns of omitted factors or reverse causality, and the
well-measured US data can provide instruments that overcome the downward bias in
coefficients due to measurement error.




                                       II. DATA PREPARATION


     9. Very strong crowding-in or crowding-out of natives by immigrant scientists and engineers would
create a bias in the Anglo-Saxon trend itself. Kerr and Lincoln (2010) find very limited evidence of either
effect at the city level for the United States during this time period and for the time horizons considered
here (i.e., first differencing over five-year periods).
This section summarizes the key data employed in this study and their preparation, with
the supplement providing further details. Table S1a describes the 88 exporting countries
included, and table S1b provides similar statistics for the 26 industries, aggregating over
countries.

                                Labor Productivity Data

                        k
                      it
Productivity measures z   are taken from the Industrial Statistics Database of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). The UNIDO data provide an
unbalanced panel over countries, industries, and time periods, and the availability of
these data are the key determinant of this study’s sample design. Estimations consider
manufacturing industries at the three-digit level of the International Standard Industrial
Classification system (ISIC3). Data construction starts by calculating the annual labor
productivity in available industries and countries during the 1980–1999 period. These
annual measures are then collapsed into the mean labor productivity level for each five-
year period from 1980–1984 to 1995–1999. This aggregation into five-year time periods
affords a more balanced panel by abstracting away from the occasional years when an
otherwise reported country-industry is not observed. The higher aggregation is also
computationally necessary below due to the tremendous number of fixed effects
considered.
   These labor productivity measures are first differenced in log format for inclusion in
equation (3). Thus, an exporter i and industry k is included if it is observed in the UNIDO
database in two adjacent periods. Sample inclusion also requires that the country-industry
be reported in two observations at least five years apart (e.g., to prevent an included
observation only being present in 1989 and 1991). The main estimations consider the
three change periods of 1980–1984 →1985–1989, 1985–1989 →1990–1994, and 1990–
1994 →1995–1999.

                                     Export Volumes

                  ijt
Bilateral exports x k
                       are taken from the 1975–2000 World Trade Flows Database (WTF)

developed by Feenstra et al. (2005). This rich data source documents product-level values
of bilateral trade for most countries from 1980–1999. Similar to the development of the
labor productivity variables, these product flows are aggregated into five-year periods
from 1980–1984 to 1995–1999 and then first differenced in log format. Each productivity
growth observation available with the UNIDO dataset is paired with industry-level
bilateral export observations from that country. All exporting countries other than the
United States are included.
   The majority of export volumes for bilateral routes are zero-valued, which creates
challenges for the estimation of equation (3). It is also the case that the minimum
threshold of trade that can be consistently measured across countries and industries is US
$100,000 in the WTF database. While Feenstra et al. (2005) are able to incorporate
smaller trading levels for some countries, these values are ignored to maintain a
consistent threshold across observations. To accommodate these conditions, the empirical
approach separately studies the extensive and intensive margins of export expansion.
Mean export volumes are taken across exporter-importer-industry observations for five-
year time periods. For the extensive margin, entry into exports along an exporter-
importer-industry route is defined as exports greater than US $100,000.

                              US Historical Settlement Patterns

The first building block for the instrument is the historical settlement patterns of migrants
from each country M %i ,c ,1980 . These data are taken from the 1980 Census of Populations,

which is the earliest US census to collect the detailed ancestry of respondents (as
distinguished from immigration status or place of birth). The detailed ancestry codes
include 392 categories with positive responses, and this study maps these categories to
the UNIDO records. Respondents are asked primary and secondary ancestries, but the
classifications only focus on the primary field given the many missing values in the
secondary field. There are multiple ancestry groups that map to the same country, but the
mapping procedure limits each ancestry group to map to just one UNIDO country.
Categories not linked to a specific UNIDO country are dropped (e.g., Western Europe not
elsewhere classified, Ossetian). In total, 89% of the US population in 1980 is mapped.
   Metropolitan statistical areas, which will be referred to as cities for expositional ease,
are identified using the 1% Metro Sample. This dataset is a 1-in-100 random sample of
the US population in 1980 and is designed to provide accurate portraits of cities. The set
C over which M %i ,c ,1980 is calculated includes 210 cities from the 1980 census files that

are linked to the US patent data described next. The primary measures of M %i ,c ,1980

include all individuals regardless of age or education level to form M %i ,c ,1980 , only

dropping those in group quarters (e.g., military barracks) or not living in an urban area.
Extensions test variations on these themes.

                                      US Patenting Data

The second building block for the instrument is the trend in patenting for each city
Techck,,t A− S . These series are quantified through individual records of all patents granted by

the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) from January 1975 to May
2009. Each patent record provides information about the invention (e.g., technology
classification, citations of patents on which the current invention builds) and inventors
submitting the application (e.g., name, city). USPTO patents must list at least one
inventor, and multiple inventors are allowed. Approximately 7.8 million inventors are
associated with 4.5 million granted patents during this period. The online supplement
documents how the patent data are augmented in terms of city and industry definitions.
Only patents with all inventors living in the United States at the time of their patent
application are included, and multiple inventors are discounted so that each patent
receives the same weight when measuring inventor populations. Concordances link
USPTO technology classes to ISIC3 industries in which new inventions are manufactured
or used. The main estimations focus on industry-of-use, affording a composite view of
the technological opportunity developed for an industry.
   The probable ethnicities of inventors are estimated through the names listed on
patents (e.g., Kerr 2007). This procedure exploits the fact that individuals with surnames
Gupta or Desai are likely to be Indian, Wang or Ming are likely to be Chinese, and
Martinez or Rodriguez are likely to be Hispanic. The name matching work exploits two
commercial databases of ethnic first names and surnames, and the procedures have been
extensively customized for the USPTO data. The match rate is 98% for US domestic
inventors, and the process affords the distinction of nine ethnicities: Anglo-Saxon,
Chinese, European, Hispanic, Indian, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Vietnamese. Most
of the estimations in this paper only use whether inventors are of Anglo-Saxon origin, as
a means for reducing the potential of reverse causality as discussed above. The Anglo-
Saxon share of US domestic patenting declines from 73% in 1980–1984 to 66% in 1995–
1999 (table S2). This group accounts for a majority of patents in each of the six major
technology categories developed by Hall et al. (2001).
   As with the productivity and trade data, the patenting series are aggregated into five-
year blocks by city and industry. These intervals start in 1975–1979 and extend through
1995–1999, and the series are normalized by the patenting level of each city-industry in
1980–1984. These series are then united with the spatial distribution of each country’s
ancestry group using model (5) to form an aggregate for each country-industry, and the
log growth rate is then calculated across these five-year intervals. The lag of this growth
rate is used as the instrument for the productivity growth rate in an exporter-industry.
That is, the estimated growth in technology flows from Brazil’s chemical industry during
1975–1979 →1980–1984 is used as the instrument for the growth in Brazil’s labor
productivity in chemicals for the 1980–1984 →1985–1989 period. This lag structure
follows the emphasis in Kerr (2008) on the strength of ethnic networks for technology
diffusion during the first 3–6 years after a US invention is developed, and the comparison
to contemporaneous flows is shown in robustness checks. The supplement provides
additional notes on the instrument design and its connection to patent data.




                                   III. EMPIRICAL RESULTS

This combined dataset is a unique laboratory for evaluating Ricardian technology
differences in international trade. This section commences with ordinary least squares
(OLS) estimations using the UNIDO and WTF data. The instrumental variable
(IV) results are then presented.

                                   Base OLS Specifications

Table 1 provides the basic OLS estimations. Column 1 presents the “between” estimates
from specification (2) before first differencing the data; the dependent variable is the log
mean nominal value of bilateral exports for the five-year period. These estimates identify
the θ parameter through variation within bilateral trading routes and variation across
industries of an exporter. This framework parallels most Ricardian empirical studies.
Column 2 presents the “within” estimate from specification (3) that utilizes first
differencing to isolate productivity and trade growth within exporter-importer-industry
cells.
    Estimations in panel A weight bilateral routes by an interaction of total exporter and
importer trade in the industry. For example, the weight given to Germany’s exports of
automobiles to Nepal is the total export volume of Germany in the auto industry
interacted with the total imports of Nepal in the auto industry, using averages for each
component across the sample period. These weights focus attention on routes that are
likely to be more important and give a sense of the overall treatment effect from
Ricardian advantages. The weights, however, explicitly do not build upon the actual trade
volume for a route to avoid an endogenous emphasis on where trade is occurring.
Estimates in panel B are unweighted. This study reports results with both strategies to
provide a range of estimates.
    Estimations cluster standard errors by exporter-industry. This reflects the repeated
application of exporter-industry technology levels to each route and the serial correlations
concerns of panel models. Other variants are reported below, too. Finally, the
combination of 88 countries, 26 industries, and three time intervals creates an enormous
number of exporter-importer-year and importer-industry-year fixed effects. The number
of import destinations is in fact larger than the 88 exporters, as a UNIDO data match is
not required for import destinations. With such a large dataset, it is computationally
difficult to include exporter-importer-year and importer-industry-year fixed effects,
especially when considering IV estimations. By necessity, manual demeaning is
employed to remove the exporter-importer-year fixed effects, and this procedure is
applied over the importer-industry-year fixed effects. The baseline estimates also use an
aggregated version of the importer-industry-year fixed effects where the industry level
used for the groups is at the two-digit level of the ISIC system rather than the three-digit
level (reducing this dimension from 26 industries to eight higher-level industry groups).
Robustness checks on these simplifications are reported below.
   Interestingly, the “between” and “within” elasticities estimated in panel A are both
around 0.6 on the intensive margin. These coefficients suggest that a 10% growth in labor
productivity for an exporter-industry is associated with a 6% growth in exports. The
estimates in panel B are lower at 0.2–0.4, but they remain economically and statistically
important. These elasticities are somewhat lower than the unit elasticity often found in
this literature with OLS estimation techniques and cross-sectional data. There are many
empirical reasons why this might be true, with greater measurement error for productivity
estimates outside of OECD sources certainly being among them. An elasticity greater
than or equal to one is also the baseline for the Ricardian theory presented earlier. The
IV estimates reported below are greater than one and have a comparable level on some
dimensions to those estimated with OECD countries. The next subsection continues with
extensions for these OLS estimates to provide a foundation for the IV results.

                                   Extended OLS Results

Table 2 provides robustness checks on the first-differenced estimates, which are the focus
of the remainder of this study. The first column repeats the core results from column 2 of
table 1. The next two columns show robustness to dropping Brazil and China. Brazil, of
all included countries, displays the most outlier behavior with respect to its productivity
growth rates, likely due to definitional changes, but Brazil’s exclusion does not affect the
results. The results are also similar when excluding China, which experienced substantial
growth during the sample period. It is generally worth noting that the 1980–1999 period
predates the very rapid take-off of Chinese manufacturing exports after 2000 (Autor et al.
2013). Unreported tests consider other candidates like Mexico, Germany, and Japan, and
these tests, too, find the results very stable to the sample composition, reflective in large
part of the underlying exporter-importer-year fixed effects.
   Column 4 shows the results when excluding industry 383 (Machinery, electrical). The
coefficient estimates are reduced in size by about 30% from column 1, but they remain
quite strong and well-measured overall. The exclusion of industry 383 has the largest
impact on the results of the 26 industries in the sample, which is why it is reported. This
importance is not very surprising given the very rapid development of technology in this
sector, its substantial diffusion around the world, and its associated trade. On this
dimension, the industry-year portion of the importer-industry-year fixed effects play a
very stabilizing role. Quantitatively similar results are also found when excluding the
Tobacco and Petroleum sectors (314, 353, 354). Column 5 shows that winsorizing the
sample at the 2%/98% level delivers similar results, indicative that outliers are not overly
influencing the measured elasticities.
    It was earlier noted that computational demands require that the main estimations
employ the ISIC2-level industry groups when preparing importer-industry-year fixed
effects. Columns 6–8 test this choice in several ways. First, column 6 shows that the
results hold when estimating the full model with ISIC2-based cells, so that the importer-
industry-year fixed effects exactly match the cell construction. The weaker variation
reduces the coefficient estimates by half, but the results remain statistically and
economically important. Columns 7 and 8 alternatively estimate the model using the
sample from Kerr (2008) that focuses on a subset of the UNIDO data in the 1985–1997
period. The Kerr (2008) sample is substantially smaller in size than the present one, and
so there is greater flexibility with respect to these fixed effect choices. The choice of
industry aggregation for the importer-industry-year fixed effects does not make a material
difference in this sample. 10
    Finally, column 9 shows the results with exporter-level clustering. The labor
productivity and export development of industries within countries may be correlated
with each other due to the presence of general-purpose technologies, learning-by-doing
(e.g., Irwin and Klenow 1994), and similar factors, and Feenstra and Rose (2000) show
how the export ranges of countries can change over time in systematic ways across
industries. Clustering at the exporter level allows for greater covariance across industries
in this regard, returning lower standard errors. Most papers in this literature use robust
standard errors on cross-sectional data, which would translate most closely to bilateral-
route clustering in a panel model. Unreported estimates consider bilateral-route clustering
and alternatively bootstrapped standard errors, and these standard errors are smaller than
those reported in column 9.



    10. This extra check also has the advantage of linking the two studies closer together since the Kerr
(2008) paper focuses extensively on productivity growth due to technology transfer. Stability to the
somewhat different data preparation steps in Kerr (2008) is comforting.
    Further extensions are contained in tables S3 and S4. Interacting our core regressor
with the GDP/capita level of the exporter suggests that the OLS link between
productivity and exports is mainly through lower-income countries, suggestive of higher
trade due to varieties among developed economies. It is similar to the conclusion of
Fieler (2011) that trade among advanced economies links to product differentiation and
variety (low θ ), while trade among emerging economies links more closely to
fundamental productivity levels (higher θ). By contrast, there is limited heterogeneity by
country size or geographic distances, excepting the fact that the growth in exports is not
simply happening to bordering countries. Additional tests further confirm that the
observed role for technology within manufacturing is not due to specialized factor
accumulations and a Rybczynski effect. Under the Rybczynski effect, the accumulation
of skilled workers in country i shifts country i’s specialization toward manufacturing
industries that employ skilled labor more intensively than other factors. When
incorporating country-specific time trends for subgroups of manufacturing industries
according to their capital-labor ratio, mean wage rate, and non-production worker share
as evident in the United States, technology’s importance is confirmed. Finally, there is
limited adjustment on the extensive margin of trade routes compared to the intensive
margin adjustments.

                                        Base IV Results

Table 3 presents the core IV results. The first column reports the first-stage estimates of
how ∆ ln( M it
             k
               ) predicts ∆ ln( z k
                                it ) . The first-stage elasticity in panel A is 0.6, suggesting a
10% increase in the technology flow metric from the United States predicts a 6% increase
in labor productivity abroad at the exporter-industry level. The unweighted estimates in
panel B suggest a smaller 3% increase. While the second elasticity is lower, the
instrument generally performs better in the unweighted specifications due to its more
precise measurement. The F statistics in panels A and B are 4.7 and 11.6, respectively.
The sample weights in panel A place greater emphasis on larger and more advanced
countries that have large export volumes (e.g., Germany, Japan). While this framework
finds a substantial response, the weighted dependency of this group on heterogeneous
technology transfer from the United States is noisier than in the unweighted estimations
that emphasize more developing and emerging countries.
    The second column presents the reduced-form estimates where ∆ ln( M it
                                                                         k
                                                                           ) predicts

∆ ln( x
      ijt
        k
           ) using a format similar to equation (3). In both panels, there is substantial

reduced-form link of technology flows to export volumes. The interquartile range in the
reduced form, conditional on the fixed effects, can account for around 6% of the
interquartile range of export growth using a 0.8 coefficient estimate that sits in between
panels A and B.
    The third column provides the second-stage estimates from equation (3) having used
∆ ln( M it
         k
           ) to predict ∆ ln( z k
                              it ) . In panel A’s estimation, the weighted elasticity is 1.6,
suggesting a 16% increase in export volumes for every 10% increase in labor
productivity. In panel B’s unweighted estimation, the 10% increase in labor productivity
is linked to a 24% increase in export volumes. The second-stage elasticity in panel B is
larger than in panel A, as the IV estimates provide the reduced-form scaled up by the
first-stage effects. Thus, even though the unweighted reduced-form estimate in column 2
is smaller than the weighted reduced-form estimate, this ordering reverses once scaled-up
by the first stages.
    This study does not overly favor one set of estimates. The weighted and unweighted
approaches both have merits and liabilities. Instead, the conclusion from this work is that
the instrumented elasticity is in the neighborhood of two. While it is impossible to
differentiate among the various reasons as to why the IV estimates are larger than the
OLS estimates, a very likely candidate is that OLS suffers from a substantial downward
bias due to measurement error in the labor productivity estimates, especially with the
substantial differencing embedded in equation (3). While it is likely that omitted factors
or reverse causality influenced the OLS estimations as well, these appear to have been
second-order to the measurement issues. 11


     11. Costinot et al. (2012) adjust export volumes for trade openness using the import penetration ratio
for a country-industry (to link observed productivity to “fundamental productivity”). The estimates are very
similar when undertaking this approach, being 1.163 (0.457) and 2.513 (1.138) for weighted and
unweighted specifications, respectively. The unadjusted and adjusted first differences have a 0.93
correlation. This approach is not adopted for the main estimations due to worries about mismeasurement in
the import penetration ratio when combining UNIDO and WTF data.
   This instrumented θ elasticity is at the lower end of the estimates provided in the
literature. Costinot et al. (2012) is the closest comparison given their use of industry-level
regressions of productivity data and trade. Using a cross-sectional analysis of producer
price data for OECD countries in 1997, they derive their preferred estimate of 6.5, which
is substantially larger than this study’s estimate of about two. On the other hand, Costinot
et al. (2012) derive a quite similar elasticity of 2.7 when they consider labor productivity
metrics, the metric considered here. They too have IV estimates that are considerably
larger than OLS estimates. More broadly, Eaton and Kortum (2002) provide larger initial
estimates of the θ elasticity, with a preferred estimate in the range of eight. Simonovska
and Waugh (2014a) revisit these results with a new estimator and come to a preferred
estimate of about four. Overall, this study’s estimates are again lower than this connected
work. The robustness checks described below find θ estimates that continue in this
ballpark, never exceeding four. Thus, this empirical approach consistently derives θ
estimates that are among the lowest in the literature, with some part of this difference due
to methodology but an important part being substantive in interpretation.
   It is important to identify the dual meaning of the higher IV results compared to OLS
with respect to the θ parameter. In the Ricardian model, a higher θ parameter corresponds
to a reduced scope for intraindustry trade due to comparative advantages across varieties.
IV estimations thus suggest that OLS specifications overestimate the scope for
intraindustry trade because they understate the link between country-industry
productivity improvements and their associated export volumes. Both impetuses can be
connected to Ricardian theories of comparative advantage for trade, but the role of the
structural θ parameter needs to be carefully delineated. This partitioning can also have
important consequences for views of development and export success. Compared to OLS,
the IV results shift more emphasis toward fundamental country-industry productivity
improvements rather than intraindustry varieties; yet, on the whole, the overall work in
this paper with emerging economies provides more support for intraindustry varieties
than typically found in the Ricardian literature that has focused mostly on OECD trade
flows (as evidenced by the lower θ estimates compared to prior studies).
   These estimates are significant in terms of their potential economic importance and
explanatory power. Using an elasticity of two, the interquartile range of country-level
labor productivity growth, conditional on fixed effects, can explain up to 35% and 39%
of the interquartile range in conditional export growth levels using unweighted and
weighted specifications, respectively.

                                   Extended IV Results

The supplement provides many robustness checks on these IV estimations in tables S5-
S8b. The results are robust to the various specification checks conducted in table 2.
Moreover, dynamic estimations find lagged productivity growth estimators consistently
stronger than contemporaneous productivity growth estimators, providing comfort in the
estimation design and the proposed causal direction of the results. The IV is further
analyzed when: (i) considering variations on the city-industry technology trend terms and
                                                                                 k
cross-sectional distributions used to weight US cities for the development of M it ; (ii)
sample composition exercises that aggressively test for data quality and reverse causality
concerns; and (iii) direct inclusion of ethnic patenting in the United States as a control.
The supplement also contains an extended discussion of the identification achieved in this
study and its limitations. In the end, the paper is able to make substantial progress toward
causal identification in a Ricardian model, beginning with the panel estimation approach
and extending through many IV approaches. This effort remains incomplete, however,
and it is hoped that future work both identifies natural experiment settings to test these
arguments and also identifies other forms/impetuses for heterogeneous technology
transfer that can provide identification in a setting that focuses on large country-industry
samples like this one.




                                    IV. CONCLUSIONS

While the principle of Ricardian technology differences as a source of trade is well
established in the theory of international economics, empirical evaluations of its
importance are relatively rare due to the difficulty of quantifying and isolating technology
differences. This study exploits heterogeneous technology diffusion from the United
States through ethnic migrant networks to make additional headway. Estimations find
bilateral manufacturing exports respond positively to growth in observable measures of
comparative advantages. Ricardian technology differences are an important determinant
of trade in longitudinal changes in addition to their cross-sectional role discussed earlier.
   Leamer and Levinsohn (1995) argue that trade models should be taken with a grain of
salt and applied in contexts for which they are appropriate. This is certainly true when
interpreting these results. The estimating frameworks have specifically sought to remove
trade resulting from factor endowments, increasing returns, consumer preferences, and so
on, rather than test against them. Moreover, manufacturing exports are likely more
sensitive to patentable technology improvements than the average sector, and the
empirical reach of the constructed dataset to include emerging economies like China and
India heightens this sensitivity. Further research is needed to generalize technology’s role
to a broader set of industrial sectors and environments.
   Beyond quantifying the link between technology and trade for manufacturing, this
paper also serves as input into research regarding the benefits and costs of emigration to
the United States for the migrants’ home countries (i.e., the “brain drain” or “brain gain”
debate). While focusing on the Ricardian model and its parameters, the paper establishes
that the technology transfers from overseas migrants are strong enough to meaningfully
promote exports. Care should be taken to not overly interpret these findings as strong
evidence of a big gain from migration. The paper does not seek to establish a clear
counterfactual in the context of immigration from the source countries’ point of view
(e.g., Agrawal et al. 2011). As such, the positive export elasticities due to US
heterogeneous technology diffusion do not constitute welfare statements relative to other
scenarios. Future research needs to examine these welfare implications further.

                                        REFERENCES

Acemoglu, D., and J. Ventura. 2002. “The World Income Distribution.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 117 (2): 659–94.
Acemoglu, D., and F. Zilibotti. 2001. “Productivity Differences.” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 116 (2): 563–606.
Agrawal, A., D. Kapur, J. McHale, and A. Oettl. 2011. “Brain Drain or Brain Bank? The
   Impact of Skilled Emigration on Poor-Country Innovation.” Journal of Urban
   Economics 69 (1): 43–55.
Alcacer, J., and W. Chung. 2007. “Location Strategies and Knowledge Spillovers.”
   Management Science 53 (5): 760–76.
Alvarez, F., and R. Lucas. 2007. “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-Kortum
    Model of International Trade.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54: 1726–68.
Antweiler, W., and D. Trefler. 2002. “Increasing Returns to Scale and All That: A View
    From Trade.” American Economic Review 92 (1): 93–119.
Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
    Effects of Import Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review 103
    (6): 2121–68.
Bahar, D., and H. Rapoport. 2016. “Migration, Knowledge Diffusion, and the
    Comparative Advantages of Nations.” Economic Journal forthcoming.
Baxter, M. 1992. “Fiscal Policy, Specialization, and Trade in the Two-Sector Model: The
    Return of Ricardo?” Journal of Political Economy 100 (4): 713–44.
Bo, C., and D. Jacks. 2012. “Trade, Variety and Immigration.” Economic Letters 117 (1):
    243–6.
Bombardini, M., C. Kurz, and P. Morrow. 2012. “Ricardian Trade and the Impact of
    Domestic Competition on Export Performance.” Canadian Journal of Economics 45
    (2): 585–612.
Caliendo, L., and F. Parro. 2015. “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
    NAFTA.” Review of Economic Studies 82 (1): 1–44.
Chor, D. 2010. “Unpacking Sources of Comparative Advantage: A Quantitative
    Approach.” Journal of International Economics 82 (2): 152–67.
Cohen, L., U. Gurun, and C. Malloy. 2016. “Resident Networks and Firm Trade.”
    Journal of Finance 6: 63–91.
Costinot, A. 2009. “An Elementary Theory of Comparative Advantage.” Econometrica
    77 (4): 1165–92.
Costinot, A., and A. Rodriguez-Clare. 2014. “Trade with Numbers: Quantifying the
    Consequences of Globalization.” In Handbook of International Economics Volume 4.
    Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Costinot, A., and D. Donaldson. 2012. “Ricardo’s Theory of Comparative Advantage:
    Old Idea, New Evidence.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 102
    (3): 453–8.
Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, and I. Komunjer. 2012. “What Goods Do Countries Trade?
    New Ricardian Predictions.” Review of Economic Studies 79 (2): 581–608.
Costinot, A., and J. Vogel. 2015. “Beyond Ricardo: Assignment Models in International
    Trade.” Annual Review of Economics 7: 31–62.
Daruich, D., W. Easterly, and A. Reschef. 2016. “The Surprising Instability of Export
    Specializations.” NBER Working Paper 22869. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau
    of Economic Research.
Davis, D., and D. Weinstein. 2001. “An Account of Global Factor Trade.” American
    Economic Review 91 (5): 1423–53.
———. 2002. “Technological Superiority and the Losses from Migration.” NBER Working
    Paper 8971. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
di Giovanni, J., A. Levchenko, and F. Ortega. 2015. “A Global View of Cross-Border
    Migration.” Journal of the European Economic Association 31 (1): 168–202.
Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. Samuelson. 1977. “Comparative Advantage, Trade and
    Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods.” American Economic
    Review 67 (5): 823–39.
Eaton, J., and S. Kortum. 1999. “International Technology Diffusion: Theory and
    Measurement.” International Economic Review 40 (3): 537–70.
Eaton, J., and S. Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Econometrica 70
    (5): 1741–79.
Feenstra, R., R. Lipsey, H. Deng, A. Ma, and H. Mo. 2005. “World Trade Flows: 1962–
    2000.” NBER Working Paper 11040. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of
    Economic Research.
Feenstra, R., and A. Rose. 2000. “Putting Things in Order: Trade Dynamics and Product
    Cycles.” Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (3): 369–82.
Fieler, A.C. 2011. “Nonhomotheticity and Bilateral Export Trade: Evidence and a
    Quantitative Explanation.” Econometrica 79 (4): 1069–101.
Foley, C.F., and W. Kerr. 2013. “Ethnic Innovation and U.S. Multinational Firm
    Activity.” Management Science 59 (7): 1529–44.
Golub, S., and C. Hsieh. 2000. “Classical Ricardian Theory of Comparative Advantage
    Revisited.” Review of International Economics 8 (2): 221–34.
Gould, D. 1994. “Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications for US
    Bilateral Trade Flows.” Review of Economics and Statistics 76 (3): 500–18.
Hakobyan, S., and J. McLaren. 2016. “Looking for Local Labor Market Effects of
    NAFTA.” Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (4): 728–41.
Hall, B., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg. 2001. “The NBER Patent Citation Data File:
    Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools.” NBER Working Paper 8498.
    Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Harrigan, J. 1997. “Technology, Factor Supplies, and International Specialization:
    Estimating the Neoclassical Model.” American Economic Review 87 (4): 475–94.
Head, K., and J. Reis. 1998. “Immigration and Trade Creation: Econometric Evidence
    from Canada.” Canadian Journal of Economics 31 (1): 47–62.
Helpman, E., and P. Krugman. 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade. Cambridge,
    Mass.: MIT Press.
Hummels, D., and P. Klenow. 2005. “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports.”
    American Economic Review 95 (3): 704–23.
Hunt, J., and M. Gauthier-Loiselle. 2010. “How Much Does Immigration Boost
    Innovation?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2): 31–56.
Hunter, L. 1991. “The Contribution of Non-Homothetic Preferences to Trade.” Journal of
    International Economics 30 (3): 345–58.
Hunter, L., and J. Markusen. 1988. “Per Capita Income as a Determinant of Trade.” in R.
    Feenstra, ed., Empirical Methods for International Trade. Cambridge, Mass.:
    MIT Press.
Irwin, D., and P. Klenow. 1994. “Learning by Doing Spillovers in the Semiconductor
    Industry.” Journal of Political Economy 102: 1200–27.
Keller, W. 2002. “Geographic Localization of International Technology Diffusion.”
    American Economic Review 92 (1): 120–42.
Kerr, W. 2008. “Ethnic Scientific Communities and International Technology Diffusion.”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (3): 518–37.
———. 2007. “The Ethnic Composition of US Inventors.” HBS Working Paper 08-006.
    Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School.
———.   2005. “The Role of Immigrant Scientists and Entrepreneurs in International
    Technology Transfer.” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT Cambridge, Mass.
Kerr, W., and W. Lincoln. 2010. “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms
    and US Ethnic Invention.” Journal of Labor Economics 28 (3): 473–508.
Kovak, B. 2013. “Regional Effects of Trade Reform: What is the Correct Measure of
    Liberalization?” American Economic Review 103 (5): 1960–76.
Kugler, M., and H. Rapoport. 2007. “International Labor and Capital Flows:
    Complements or Substitutes?” Economics Letters 92 (2): 155–62.
Leamer, E., and J. Levinsohn. 1995. “International Trade Theory: The Evidence.”
    Handbook of International Economics 3: 1339–94.
Levchenko, A., and J. Zhang. 2014. “Ricardian Productivity Differences and the Gains
    from Trade.” European Economic Review 65: 45–65.
MacDougall, G.D.A. 1951. “British and American Exports: A Study Suggested by the
    Theory of Comparative Costs. Part I.” Economic Journal 61 (244): 697–724.
———. 1952. “British and American Exports: A Study Suggested by the Theory of
    Comparative Costs. Part II.” Economic Journal 62 (247): 487–521.
Morrow, P. 2010. “Ricardian-Heckscher-Ohlin Comparative Advantage: Theory and
    Evidence.” Journal of International Economics 82 (2): 137–51.
Peri, G., K. Shih, and C. Sparber. 2015. “STEM Workers, H1B Visas and Productivity in
    US Cities.” Journal of Labor Economics 33 (S1): S225–55.
Rauch, J. 2001. “Business and Social Networks in International Trade.” Journal of
    Economic Literature 39 (4): 1177–1203.
Rauch, J., and V. Trindade. 2002. “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade.”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (1): 116–30.
Ricardo, D. 1817. On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. London, UK:
    John Murray.
Saxenian, A., Y. Motoyama, and X. Quan. 2002. Local and Global Networks of
    Immigrant Professionals in Silicon Valley. San Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute
    of California.
Saxenian, A. 2006. The New Argonauts. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Shikher, S. 2012. “Putting Industries into the Eaton–Kortum Model.” Journal of
    International Trade & Economic Development 21 (6): 807–37.
Simonovska, I., and M. Waugh. 2014a. “The Elasticities of Trade: Estimates and
    Evidence.” Journal of International Economics 92 (1): 34–50.
———. 2014b. “Trade Models, Trade Elasticities, and the Gains from Trade.” NBER
    Working Paper 20495. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Stern, R. 1962. “British and American Productivity and Comparative Costs in
    International Trade.” Oxford Economic Papers 14 (3): 275–96.
Wilson, C. 1980. “On the General Structure of Ricardian Models with a Continuum of
    Goods: Applications to Growth, Tariff Theory, and Technical Change.”
    Econometrica 48 (7): 1675–1702.
            Table 1: OLS estimations of labor productivity and exports
                                            Between estimation                           FD estimation
                                                      (1)                                       (2)
                                     Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and
                                        importer trade in industry (summed across all bilateral routes)
                                         DV: Log bilateral exports               DV: Δ Log bilateral exports
Log country-industry labor                        0.640***
productivity                                       (0.242)
Δ Log country-industry labor                                                                0.573***
productivity                                                                                 (0.185)
Observations                                       149,547                                   103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                              Yes                                       Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                              Yes                                       Yes

                                                        Panel B: Excluding sample weights
                                         DV: Log bilateral exports               DV: Δ Log bilateral exports
Log country-industry labor                        0.361***
productivity                                       (0.091)
Δ Log country-industry labor                                                                0.210***
productivity                                                                                 (0.041)
Observations                                       149,547                                   103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                              Yes                                       Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                              Yes                                       Yes
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: Panel estimations consider manufacturing
exports taken from the WTF database. Data are organized by exporter-importer-industry-year. Industries are
defined at the three-digit level of the ISIC Revision 2 system. Annual data are collapsed into five-year groupings
beginning with 1980-1984 and extending to 1995-1999. The dependent variable in Column 1 is the log mean
nominal value (US$) of bilateral exports for the five years; the dependent variable in Column 2 is the change in log
exports from the prior period. The intensive margin sample is restricted to exporter-importer-industry groupings
with exports exceeding $100k in every year. The $100k threshold is chosen due to WTF data collection
procedures discussed in the text. Labor productivity from the UNIDO database measures comparative
advantages. Column 1 estimates Ricardian elasticities using both within-panel variation and variation between
industries of a country. Column 2 estimates Ricardian elasticities using only variation within panels. Estimations
in Panel A weight bilateral routes by the interaction of total exporter and importer trade in industry; estimations in
Panel B are unweighted. Estimations cluster standard errors by exporter-industry. Importer-Industry-Yr FE are
defined at the two-digit level of the ISIC system. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.
                                 Table 2: Robustness checks on OLS specifications in Table 1
                                                                                                   Kerr (2008) Kerr (2008)
                                     Base                                       Using a Using ISIC sample        sample      Using
                                   estimation Excluding Excluding Excluding 2%/98% 2-digit level using Imp- using Imp- exporter-
                                  (Column 2, exports       exports  electrical winsorized industry ISIC2-Year ISIC3-Year      level
                                    Table 1) from Brazil from China machinery   sample     groups     fixed       fixed    clustering
                                      (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)       (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)           (9)
                                        The dependent variable is Δ log bilateral exports on the intensive margin by exporter-importer-industry
                                              Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer trade in industry
Δ Log country-industry labor       0.573***       0.573***     0.472***      0.390***     0.493***     0.266**      0.287**      0.281**      0.573***
productivity                        (0.185)        (0.185)      (0.097)       (0.121)      (0.133)     (0.112)      (0.113)      (0.138)       (0.086)
Observations                        103,839        103,010      101,221          97,326   103,839       51,483       23,345       23,345      103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE               Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE               Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

                                                                             Panel B: Excluding sample weights
Δ Log country-industry labor       0.210***       0.210***     0.221***      0.154***     0.264***    0.097***     0.248***      0.184***     0.210***
productivity                        (0.041)        (0.041)      (0.041)       (0.039)      (0.043)     (0.037)      (0.066)       (0.069)      (0.048)
Observations                        103,839        103,010      101,221          97,326   103,839       51,483       23,345       23,345      103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE               Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE               Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: See Table 1.
                   Table 3: IV estimations of labor productivity and exports
                                       First-stage estimation       Reduced-form estimation             IV estimation
                                                  (1)                           (2)                           (3)
                                      Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer
                                                                     trade in industry
                                        DV: Δ Log country-             DV: Δ Log bilateral           DV: Δ Log bilateral
                                     industry labor productivity            exports                       exports
Δ Log estimator for technology                 0.589**                      0.938***
flows from the United States                   (0.272)                       (0.298)
Δ Log country-industry labor                                                                               1.592**
productivity                                                                                               (0.637)
Observations                                   103,839                       103,839                       103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                          Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                          Yes                           Yes                           Yes

                                                              Panel B: Excluding sample weights
                                        DV: Δ Log country-             DV: Δ Log bilateral           DV: Δ Log bilateral
                                     industry labor productivity            exports                       exports
Δ Log estimator for technology                0.267***                      0.648***
flows from the United States                   (0.078)                       (0.112)
Δ Log country-industry labor                                                                               2.429***
productivity                                                                                                (0.791)
Observations                                   103,839                       103,839                       103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                          Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                          Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: See Table 1. The instrument combines panel variation on
the development of new technologies across US cities during the 1975-2000 period with historical settlement patterns for
migrants and their ancestors from countries that are recorded in the 1980 Census of Populations. The F statistics in Panels A
and B are 4.7 and 11.6, respectively.
S1. Online Supplement for
Heterogeneous Technology Di¤usion and Ricardian Trade Patterns

I     Additional Literature
Recent research quanti…es the role of international labor mobility in ethnic technology exchanges
(e.g., Saxenian 2006, Kapur and McHale 2005, Obukhova 2008, 2009, Nanda and Khanna
2010). Related unpublished work includes Papageorgiou and Spilimbergo (2008) and Kugler
and Rapoport (2012). Other sources of heterogeneous technology frontiers are geographic dis-
tances to major R&D nations (e.g., Keller 2002), the innovative e¤orts of trading partners (e.g.,
Grossman and Helpman 1991, Coe and Helpman 1995, Coe et al. 1997), or international patent-
ing decisions (e.g., Eaton and Kortum 1999). Keller (2004) reviews the technology transfer
literature.

II      Costinot et al. (2012) Model
This theoretical framework derives from Costinot et al. (2012). A world economy is comprised
of I countries and K industries or goods. Labor is the sole factor of production and there
are constant returns to scale in the production of each good. Labor is perfectly mobile across
industries and immobile across countries. Li and wi are the number of workers and the wage
rate in country i, respectively. Consumers consume their full wages in each period. Accordingly,
time subscripts are omitted until the estimating equation is introduced. Countries are free to
produce or trade all goods. Each good k 2 K has an in…nite number of varieties indexed by
!2         [1; : : : ; +1]. zik (! ) represents the number of units of the ! th variety of good k that
can be produced with one unit of labor in country i.
     Following Eaton and Kortum (2002), zik (! ) is a random variable drawn independently for
each triplet (i; k; ! ) from a Fréchet distribution,

                               Fik (z ) = exp[ (z=zik ) ], for all z   0,                      (S1.1)

where zik > 0 and    > 1. Thus, technological di¤erences across countries and industries depend
on two parameters, zik and . The …rst parameter zik captures the fundamental productivity
of country i in industry k , which a¤ects the productivity of all producers (e.g., institutions,
climate). For each industry, the cross-country variation of this zik parameter governs the cross-
country variation in relative labor productivity that sits at the core of the standard Ricardian

                                                   1
model. A larger zik raises the absolute advantage for trade for exporter i in industry k . The second
parameter models the intra-industry heterogeneity that exists due to the scope for idiosyncratic
di¤erences in technological know-how across varieties. This variation is the same in all countries
and industries, and         parameterizes the impact of changes in fundamental productivity levels
zik on aggregate trade ‡ows. A larger            implies a tighter distribution that limits the scope for
comparative advantage across nations.
     Trade frictions have iceberg costs such that for each unit of good k shipped from exporter i
to importer j , only 1=dk
                        ij       1 units arrive, with dk           k
                                                       ii = 1 and dil                   dk   k
                                                                                         ij djl for any third country l

to rule out cross-country arbitrage opportunities. Perfect competition in markets and constant
returns to scale in production imply that the price pk
                                                     j (! ) paid by buyers of variety ! of good k

in any country j is
                                             pk             k
                                              j (! ) = min[cij (! )],                                                     (S1.2)
                                                            i2 I

where ck           k        k
       ij (! ) = (dij wi )=zi (! ) is the cost of producing and delivering one unit of this variety

from country i to country j . For each variety ! of good k , buyers in country j select the best
                                                               s e¢ ciency for good j lowers the
price available from around the world. An increase in country i’
price it must charge.
     Representative consumers in each country have a two-tier utility function. The upper tier is
                                                            k
Cobb-Douglas, and the preference parameter                  j   measures the share of expenditure on varieties
from industry k in country j . The lower tier is constant elasticity of substitution (CES), and
 k
 j   is the elasticity of substitution between varieties. Accordingly, expenditures are such that in
any importer j , total expenditure on variety ! of good k is

                                                         k 1            k
                                     xk          k
                                      j (! ) = [pj (! )=pj ]
                                                                        j   k
                                                                            j wj Lj ,                                     (S1.3)
                                               hP                           k
                                                                                i1=(1   k)
                                                                                        j
               k        k                                         0 1
where 0        j   1,   j   < 1 + , and pk
                                         j           !0 2    pk
                                                              j (! )
                                                                            j                . The restriction   k
                                                                                                                 j   < 1 + is
a technical assumption that guarantees the existence of a well-de…ned CES price index pk   j . The
                                           QK       k j k
consumer price index in country j is pj       k=1 (pj ) :
                                                                                  P
    The value of total exports from exporter i to importer j in industry k is xk
                                                                               ij
                                                                                             k  0
                                                                                   ! 0 2 k xj (! ),                  ij
          k
where    denotes the set of varieties exported. The share of exports in importer j and industry
          ij
                               PI
k from country i is k
                    ij   xk
                          ij =
                                        k
                                 i0 =1 xi0 j . With this model structure, the bilateral exports from

exporter i to importer j in industry k is

                                               (wi dk    k
                                                    ij =zi )
                                   xk
                                    ij = PI               k      k
                                                                                k
                                                                                j wj Lj ;                                 (S1.4)
                                              i0 =1 (wi0 di0 j =zi0 )



                                                            2
which has an intuitive interpretation that closely connects to a similar expression in Eaton and
Kortum (2002). The righthand terms express the overall economic size of the importer j and its
preferences over goods. The lefthand fraction describes the extent to which the exporter is the
lowest cost producer of the good, taking into account delivery costs, production costs, technology
levels, and the underlying heterogeneity in varieties for countries. Under assumptions of balanced
trade, the relatives wages around the world can further be determined.
    Costinot et al. (2012) show that equation (S1.4) provides the foundation for estimating an
                                                                                                        k
                                                                            ~k
econometric equation of the form shown in speci…cation (1) of main text: ln x ij =             ij   +   j   +
     zik ) + "k
  ln(~                   ~k
              ij , where x ij represents “corrected” trade ‡ows that adjust for country openness.
           ~ik represents observed productivity, given that not every country produces every good
Similarly, z
                                                                k
as it can import goods from other countries.         ij   and   j   are vectors of exporter-importer and
importer-industry …xed e¤ects. Comparing these equations shows the basic function of these
…xed e¤ects. The importer-industry …xed e¤ects control for the righthand terms about the
importer and its preferences over goods. Importer-industry …xed e¤ects also account for the
denominator of the lefthand fraction, given that it is a worldwide aggregate for an industry. The
                                                   s terms, which emphasize cost levels in
exporter-importer …xed e¤ects capture the numerator’
the exporter and distances between the two countries. Under the assumption that the delivery
cost term dk
           ij in the numerator can be expressed in proportionate terms over these two vectors

of …xed e¤ects (e.g., dk         k
                       ij = dij dj ), speci…cation (1) of main text provides an unbiased estimate

of the        parameter. An alternative assumption is that the residual di¤erences in delivery costs
after controlling for these vectors of …xed e¤ects are uncorrelated with the focal productivity
      ~ik .
level z

III           Extended Data Development
Labor Productivity Data
The UNIDO collects industry-level manufacturing statistics for The International Yearbook of
Industrial Statistics and specialized publications on topics like development and competition.
Researchers at the UNIDO supplement the data resources of the OECD with national records
                                                                  s stated objective
for non-OECD members, creating a unique global resource. The UNIDO’
is the compilation of internationally comparable and internally consistent series (e.g., variable
de…nitions, accounting units, collection procedures).
    Table S1a describes the 88 exporting countries included. Column 2 provides a count of the


                                                    3
number of periods the country is included in after the …rst di¤erence is taken, with a maximum
of three changes. Column 3 documents the count of bilateral route observations included at
the exporter-importer-industry level for the intensive-margin estimations. The total observation
count is 103,839 intensive-margin changes for an exporter-importer-industry. Countries di¤er
in their observation counts, even if observed for the same number of periods, due to variations
in their industry-level reporting in the UNIDO database and minimum requirements for export
volumes discussed below.
   Column 4 documents the average manufacturing productivity levels for countries, expressed
in US dollars. While direct comparisons across countries are limited with an unbalanced panel,
productivity di¤erences between industrialized countries and developing nations are clearly evi-
dent. Oil-producing countries (e.g., Kuwait, Norway) have the highest average labor productiv-
ity levels, with Ireland, Japan and Singapore among the highest when excluding oil producers.
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, and Myanmar are among the lowest levels recorded. A small num-
ber of country-industry observations with under ten employees or very problematic data are
excluded. Column 5 documents the mean growth rate in labor productivity for each country
over its observations. These growth rates are …ve-year di¤erences, with outliers winsorized at
their 2% and 98% levels for reporting. Hong Kong, Myanmar, Peru, and Syria have the highest
growth rates, while the Dominican Republic, Tanzania, and Romania show the sharpest declines.
   Table S1b provides similar statistics for the 26 industries, aggregating over countries. In-
dustry 353 (Petroleum re…neries) has the highest average labor productivity, while industry 322
(Wearing apparel, except footwear) has the lowest. Productivity growth is strongest in industries
382 and 383 (Machinery, except electrical, and Machinery, electric). Productivity growth rates
are lowest in industry 323 (Leather products) and industry 361 (Pottery, china, earthenware).
   Most Ricardian models suggest using labor productivity to measure comparative advantage.
This is fortunate in that manufacturing output and employment data are among the most avail-
able metrics for the broad grouping of countries under study. Labor is typically the only factor
of production in Ricardian models, so a natural extension might be total factor productivity that
also allows for capital accumulation as well. Unfortunately, capital data at the country-industry
level for this sample is too sparse to be of bene…t in a panel study. An earlier version of this
paper presents results using output to measure industrial specialization.




                                               4
Export Volumes
Columns 6-8 of Tables S1a and S1b describe the WTF data. These descriptives focus on the
intensive-margin estimations that require exporter-importer-industry observations maintain the
minimum threshold of trade volume. Columns 6 and 7 provide comparable statistics about the
mean export levels and growth rates for included routes. Germany and Japan have the highest
average volumes, and Nicaragua and El Salvador have the lowest average volumes. Export growth
rates are strongest in Nicaragua, Congo, and Costa Rica, and they are lowest in Guatemala and
Zimbabwe. From an industry perspective, trade volumes have the highest average values in
industries 382-384 (Machinery and Transportation equipment), and the lowest average volumes
are observed in industry 361 (Pottery, china, earthenware). Industry 383 (Machinery, electric)
has the highest growth rate, while industries 353 (Petroleum re…neries) and 371 (Iron and steel)
have the lowest.
   Column 8 of Table S1a documents the share of total WTF exports for countries that are
included in this sample. The main reasons why exports are not included are lack of corresponding
UNIDO labor productivity estimates or that the exports are going to the United States. This
sample accounts for 78% of exports to destinations other than United States from these countries
(about 63% if exports to the United States are included in the denominator). Column 8 of Table
S1b provides comparable data for industries. The sample accounts for 69% of exports in these
industries to destinations other than United States. This share is lower than 78% due to the
inclusion of exporters not captured in Table S1a. Much of the decline on the industry side comes
through limited representation of major petroleum producers.
   Price de‡ators are not available for this sample (exports or labor productivity data). To the
extent that exporter-industry-year de‡ators are comprised of exporter-year, industry-year, and
exporter-industry components, the …xed e¤ects and …rst di¤erencing strategy will control for
them automatically. Residual exporter-industry-year trends could bias OLS estimations. The
IV estimations will overcome any such OLS biases due to de‡ators.
   As a …nal note, a break exists in WTF data collection procedures at 1984. This break
does not have a signi…cant impact on ISIC3-level export volumes, and the results are robust to
dropping the initial period.




                                               5
US Historical Settlement Patterns
                                                                         s ancestry population.
Columns 9 and 10 of Table S1a provide the largest cities for each country’
Due to their large overall size and high immigration shares, cities like New York, Los Angeles,
and Miami appear frequently. Nonetheless, there is substantial heterogeneity. East and West
Coast cities are more likely to link respectively to European and Asian ancestries, for example,
while southern parts of the United States link more to Latin American ancestries. The migration
                                                               s presence in Minnesota).
from Nordic countries to the mid-west is evident (e.g., Finland’
   Robustness checks use the spatial distributions present in the 1990 Census of Populations.
These patterns are constructed from the 5% sample in a manner that parallels the 1980 distri-
bution.

US Patenting Data
The addresses listed on inventor records are used to group patents to the cities identi…ed in the
1980 census. This procedure uses city lists collected from the O¢ ce of Social and Economic
Data Analysis at the University of Missouri, with a matching rate of 99%. Manual recoding
further ensures that all patents with more than 100 citations and all city names with more than
100 patents are identi…ed. Some smaller metropolitan areas identi…ed in the patent data are
excluded since they do not link to places identi…ed in the 1980 census. Only patents with all
inventors living in the United States at the time of their patent application are included, and
multiple inventors are discounted so that each patent receives the same weight when measuring
inventor populations.
   Second, the USPTO issues patents by technology categories rather than by industries. The
work of Johnson (1999), Silverman (1999), and Kerr (2008) develops concordances that link
the USPTO classes to ISIC3 industries in which new inventions are manufactured or used.
The main estimations focus on industry-of-use, a¤ording a composite view of the technological
opportunity developed for an industry. Studies of advanced economies …nd accounting for these
inter-industry R&D ‡ows important (e.g., Scherer 1984, Keller 2002b). Estimations using the
alternative categorization of technologies to industry of manufacturer are also presented below.
Cohen (2011) discusses the larger literature on industry-level mappings and evidence regarding
patents, R&D, and productivity.
   With respect to ethnic name matching, Kerr (2007) documents speci…c algorithms, lists
frequent ethnic names, and provides extensive descriptive statistics. This paper also discusses


                                               6
quality assurance exercises performed. For example, the ethnic-name database can be applied
to foreign patents registered with the USPTO. The ethnic-name database assigns ethnicities to
98% of foreign records. Moreover, estimated inventor compositions are quite reasonable— for
example, approximately 90% of inventors …ling from Chinese countries and regions are classi…ed
as ethnically Chinese.
                                                                                      k
      The developed approach, in combination with the interactions embedded in model Mit out-
lined in the main text, has the subtler advantage of allowing the construction of instruments
for many more countries and their ancestry groups than what one can directly identify through
inventor names, either due to lack of names for some countries (e.g., Ethiopia, Oman) or due
to extensive name overlap among countries within an ethnic group (e.g., most of Latin Amer-
ica sharing Hispanic names). The instrument also has only non-zero predicted changes for
country-industries due to its summation over cities and the connection to Anglo-Saxon technol-
ogy development in cities.
      The Costinot et al. (2012) model dictates the inclusion of importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects
 k
 jt   in the …rst-di¤erenced speci…cation for structural reasons such as country preferences. Two
other rationales exist for having at least industry-year …xed e¤ects due to the data development
depicted. First, the US technology frontier is taken as exogenous in the IV model, and the
identi…cation of the       parameter should thus be independent of the pace of US technology
expansion in di¤erent industries. A second methodological rationale stems from the US patent
process. US patent grants have increased dramatically since the early 1980s. While several
factors lie behind this increase, it is clear that USPTO grant rates grew faster than the underlying
growth of US scienti…c personnel and innovation can explain. Moreover, di¤erences in grant rates
exist across industries. The …xed e¤ects account for these secular changes in the underlying
patenting productivity.1

IV        Extended OLS Empirical Results
Table S3 considers several extensions of Table 1 to characterize heterogeneity in the sample.
Column 2 interacts the regressor with the GDP/capita level of the exporter, broken down into
quintiles. Interestingly, the OLS link between base productivity and exports is mainly coming
o¤ of the lower-income countries, suggestive of higher trade due to varieties among developed
economies. This may be due to the greater potential for within-country productivity dispersion
   1
     For example, Griliches (1990), Kortum and Lerner (2000), Kim and Marschke (2004), Hall (2005), Branstetter
and Ogura (2005), Ja¤e and Lerner (2005), and Lemley and Sampat (2008).


                                                      7
in the sample of developing and emerging economies, their more rapid productivity development
over the 1980-1999 period, and similar factors. It is similar to the conclusion of Fieler (2011) that
trade among advanced economies links to product di¤erentiation and variety (low ), while trade
among emerging economies links more closely to fundamental productivity levels (higher ).2 By
contrast, Column 3 …nds very little di¤erence across countries of di¤erent sizes. Columns 4 and
5 also show very little connection of export growth to geographic distances, excepting the fact
that the growth in exports is not simply happening to bordering countries. These extensions
suggest that spatial distance is a second-order factor in shaping where export growth occurs
following technology expansion.
   In contrast to the Ricardian framework, Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek (HOV) models describe trade
as resulting from factor di¤erences across countries (e.g., labor, capital, natural resources). In
the above model, technology is the only channel promoting export growth due to identical
factor endowments and no intertemporal factor accumulation. During the period studied, some
countries experienced signi…cant growth in their skilled labor forces and physical capital stocks,
as well as their technology sets, and the former could lead to growth in manufacturing exports
due to the Rybczynski e¤ect. Capital accumulation is particularly noted in rapid advances
made by several East Asian economies (e.g., Young 1992, 1995; Ventura 1997). The inclusion
of exporter-importer-year …xed e¤ects suggests that a Rybczynski e¤ect for the manufacturing
sector as a whole is not responsible for the observed trade patterns. Columns 6-8 provide
additional evidence that the observed role for technology within manufacturing is not due to
specialized factor accumulations.3
   The intuition behind the proposed test is straightforward. Under the Rybczynski e¤ect, the
                                                             s specialization towards manufac-
accumulation of skilled workers in country i shifts country i’
turing industries that employ skilled labor more intensively than other factors. By grouping
                                                                                        s impor-
manufacturing industries by their skilled-labor intensities, tests examine if technology’
tance is preserved after time trends are removed for these industry groups within each country.
These time trends are included in addition to the …xed e¤ects listed at the bottom of the table.
To illustrate, the computer and pharmaceutical industries are both highly skill intensive. A
general Rybczynski e¤ect due to skilled worker accumulation in China would favor specializa-
   2
     These interactions are an empirical extension that are beyond the closed-form model depicted above. Fieler
(2011) provides a theoretical foundation for this work.
   3
     See Heckscher (1919), Ohlin (1933), and Vanek (1968). Dornbusch et al. (1980) provide a classic HOV
model, while Schott (2003) and Romalis (2004) o¤er powerful extensions and empirical tests. Tre‡     er (1994,
1996), Harrigan (1997b), Davis and Weinstein (2001), Chor (2010), Morrow (2010), and Burstein and Vogel
(2012) jointly explore technology and factor di¤erences as determinants of trade.


                                                      8
                                                                                       s role is
tion and export growth in these industries equally. Additional con…dence for technology’
                  s exports grow faster in the skill-intensive industry that receives the strongest
warranted if China’
technology transfer from the United States relative to its peer industries.
    To implement this matching exercise, industries are grouped into quintiles based upon their
                                                                                    s capital-labor
factor intensities in the United States. Three intensities are studied— the industry’
                   s mean wage rate, and the share of non-production workers in the industry’
ratio, the industry’                                                                        s
labor force. Table S1b documents for each industry the quintile groupings assigned. Textiles
and apparel consistently rank in the lowest quintile in all three classi…cations schemes, while
chemicals and industrial machinery consistently fall into top quintiles. Some di¤erences do exist
though. The correlations among quintile groupings are 0.77 for capital-labor and mean wage, 0.60
for mean wage and non-production share, and 0.44 for capital-labor and non-production share.
The role for technology holds up well in all three variants. These …ndings suggest an omitted
factor accumulation is not confounding the identi…ed role for technology. The NBER working
paper for this article further discusses tests and limitations at this interface (e.g., Leontief 1953,
Leamer 1980, Davis and Weinstein 2001, Romalis 2004, Morrow 2010).

V      Extended IV Empirical Results
Extensive Margin Results
The reported estimations in the main text focus on the intensive margin of export growth.
Table S4 reports OLS and reduced-form results related to the extensive margin of trade com-
mencement. These estimations follow Tables 1 and 3 in their approach, with linear probability
models considering an indicator variable for exports above US $100,000 on a bilateral route as
the outcome variable. The OLS and reduced-form results do not display signi…cant elasticities.
Computational limits prevent the full estimation of IV elasticities, but the weak and insigni…cant
reduced-form elasticities are su¢ cient to conclude that the IV results would also be weak. On
the whole, this study concludes that the exporting growth due to enhanced labor productivity
and technology transfer comes through export growth on existing routes rather than through
entry into new bilateral routes.
    Baldwin and Harrigan (2011) identify for the United States some weaknesses of the compar-
ative advantage model for accounting for export zeros. The test in this paper links exporting in
a speci…c industry with technology for that industry. This approach di¤ers from examinations
of the extensive margins of trade that count the number of independent varieties exported (e.g.,


                                                  9
Feenstra 1994, Feenstra and Rose 2000, Hummels and Klenow 2005).

Extended IV Results: Basic Robustness
Table S6a provides robustness checks in the same format as Table 2, and Table S6b provides
reduced-form relationships. The instrumented elasticity is again very stable to the exclusion
of high-pro…le countries, and sample composition is further considered below. The weighted
elasticity is very stable in Column 4 to excluding industry 383 (Machinery, electrical), while the
unweighted elasticity strengthens. This choice of reporting is again due to electrical machinery
having the largest impact on the results, with, for example, very similar elasticities to Column
1 being observed if excluding industry 382 (Machinery, except electrical). Results are also again
very similar with a winsorized sample. The instrumented elasticities are reasonably stable to
variations on industry dimensions and samples in Columns 6-8 in terms of economic magnitudes,
but the standard errors on the unweighted sample in Panel B become too large for de…nitive
conclusions.
   The last column again shows the results are robust to exporter-level clustering. The F
statistics with this approach are 8.9 and 11.9 for Panels A and B, respectively. Employing
bilateral-route clustering or bootstrapped standard errors substantially increases the precision
of the results, with the standard errors declining in size by 60-70%. The F statistics also
increase substantially. Bilateral-route clustering is more comparable to prior estimates in the
trade literature, but the exporter-industry clustering is a conservative approach common in
applied econometrics.
   The primary IV estimations build a …ve-year lag structure into when the technology growth
occurs in the United States to when the productivity growth happens abroad. Thus, growth in
technology ‡ows over the 1975-1979!1980-1984 period towards an exporter-industry are used to
predict labor productivity growth and export growth during the 1980-1984!1985-1989 period.
This …ve-year lag matches discussions of rates of di¤erential technology ‡ows across countries.
Table S5 compares this lag structure with contemporaneous technology ‡ows in estimations
similar to the …rst-stage and reduced-form speci…cations. The lagged estimator is stronger than
the contemporaneous estimator when both are modelled independently or when modelled jointly.
This pattern provides comfort in the estimation design and the proposed causal direction of the
results.
   Unreported estimations model additional …xed e¤ects for distance-industry-year, where dis-
tance is an indicator variable for being more than the median distance from the United States.

                                               10
This augmented speci…cation controls even more tightly for geographical distance as a determi-
nant of technology di¤usion, …nding continued and strong evidence that di¤erential technology
transfer from the United States matters. Similar results are also found when including an equiv-
alent set of …xed e¤ects that partition on GDP/capita of countries.
      Additional estimations also test including the three Rybczynski e¤ect controls discussed ear-
lier. In the unweighted estimations, the inclusion of these controls does not materially in‡uence
the instrumented elasticities. All three elasticities are in the range of 1.5-2.1 and are statistically
signi…cant at a 5% level or higher. In the weighted estimations, these controls have a larger im-
pact. For the non-production share control, the weighted elasticity is 2.5 (1.7), while estimations
with the other two controls have invalid …rst stages. Thus, the conclusions regarding heteroge-
neous technology transfer, productivity growth, and exports for the weighted estimations need
to be cautious to acknowledge that these e¤ects are not well-distinguished from a generalized
Rybczynski e¤ect operating inside of the manufacturing sector itself. In unweighted estimations,
these e¤ects are better distinguished.

Extended IV Results: Instrument Design
Table S7a reports additional robustness checks related to the instrument design, with Table
S7b again providing reduced-form results. Columns 2-4 consider variations in the city-industry
                          k
technology trend term in Mit outlined in the main text, while Columns 5-9 consider variations
in the cross-sectional distributions used to weight US cities for countries.
      Column 2 begins by showing similar results when using the total technology trends that en-
                                    k
compass all ethnic groups in model Mit , rather than just the Anglo-Saxon ethnic trend. Column
3 goes the opposite direction by emphasizing even further isolated Anglo-Saxon-led develop-
ments. A possible concern for achieving identi…cation with the Anglo-Saxon ethnic technology
trend is that it could be very tightly integrated to migrant contributions and their inputs into
the innovation process, ranging from the generation of breakthrough ideas to serving as research
assistants. While it is impossible to fully disentangle all of these features, patent citations pro-
vide useful traction for considering knowledge collaboration and information exchange among
peers. Column 3 reduces the emphasis on Anglo-Saxon-invented patents when the patents cite
a substantial number of recent patents with non-Anglo-Saxon inventors in the United States;
in contrast, it emphasizes even more the Anglo-Saxon-invented patents where the citations are
mostly going to recent work by other Anglo-Saxon ethnic inventors.4 These estimations deliver
  4
      More speci…cally, the procedure …rst isolates the “backwards” citations that each patent makes to patents


                                                       11
modestly larger       values that are statistically signi…cant. While the larger standard errors are
evidence of non-trivial empirical strain from “doubling down” on the Anglo-Saxon exclusion
idea, this robustness check is quite valuable for asserting that the measured e¤ects do not dis-
play …rst-order evidence of reverse causality, recognizing the limits of empirical tests for ruling
out these alternatives.
    More deviation, however, is observed in Column 4 when using the technology-to-industry
concordances that emphasize where manufacturing occurs, rather than where technologies are
used. The main estimations focus on industry-of-use, a¤ording a composite view of the techno-
logical opportunity developed for an industry. Keller (2002b) reports inter-industry R&D ‡ows
aid productivity growth signi…cantly within OECD countries, equal to half or more of the own-
industry development. Estimations with manufacturing industries support the using-industry
speci…cations in a weighted format, albeit with larger standard errors. Unweighted estimates
have a zero-valued …rst stage that prevents further analysis. This di¤erence emphasizes the
importance of technology adoption behind the labor productivity results.
    Columns 5-9 test variations on the construction of M %i;c;1980 . Columns 5 and 6 show that
very similar results are obtained when using …rst- or later-generation migrants for de…ning the
spatial patterns of migrants. This comparability is not surprising given the persistence of ethnic
enclaves in the United States and their attraction of new immigrants from the home country. This
stability suggests that the results are not being in‡uenced by endogenous migrant decisions about
which cities will show particular strength in patenting growth for certain industries. Columns
                                                s educated workers from a country’
7 and 8 show similar results when using bachelor’                                s ancestry
                             s degrees, with the weighted estimations somewhat favoring the
versus those without bachelor’
                        s educated workers. Overall, these variations suggest a strong stability
distribution of bachelor’
                      s construction. Finally, Column 9 shows the results strengthen slightly
to this part of the IV’
when using the 1990 city distribution of ancestry stocks for each country. The ancestry variable
in the 1990 census is comparable to that in the 1980 census, albeit with slightly less detail. While
it is better to focus on the 1980 distributions given that they are fully pre-determined for the
sample period, this stability to using 1990 distributions is quite important given the substantial
…led over the prior three years. This …xed window uses application years for patents and their citations. A three-
year window focuses on recent knowledge development; a …xed window is also important for having a uniform
approach over the sample period, as the ethnicity of inventors can only be determined on patents granted after
1975 when the inventor records become digitized. From this citation set, the procedure next estimates the US-
based inventor share of cited work that is not of Anglo-Saxon ethnicity. This is a share-based measure given
that patents cite multiple prior patents and most patents have multi-inventor teams. The additional weighting
applied to patents is one minus this share. This creates e¤ectively a double weight that multiplies the share of
the patent’ s own inventor US-based team that is of Anglo-Saxon origin with the added weight based upon the
patent’s citations.


                                                       12
spatial shifts in economic activity in the United States towards the south and west during this
period.

Extended IV Results: Sample Composition
Tables S8a and S8b consider additional variations on sample composition beyond those reported
in Tables S6a and S6b. Columns 2-4 consider the exclusion of countries with limited data points,
with Column 3 of Table S1a listing observation counts by country. These tests are a …rst-order
check on data quality by considering settings with richer inputs that have been collected over
a longer period. Implicitly, the sample focus across Columns 2-4 shifts increasingly towards
advanced economies as the requirement moves from 100 data points to 2000 data points. The
sample does however retain some important emerging economies like China and India. The
coe¢ cients decline somewhat across these columns, but remain quite comparable and precisely
measured despite excluding up to 30% of the base sample. Column 5 takes a di¤erent route
and includes only long-term OECD countries. This increases the sample size from Column 4,
but excludes all emerging economies. The weighted results show a smaller coe¢ cient that is
no longer precisely measured, while the unweighted results in Panel B are stronger. Column 6
demonstrates robustness to dropping countries with a limited migrant connection to the United
States, speci…cally those nations with fewer than 100,000 people in the United States in 1980 re-
porting ancestral connections to the country. These various approaches highlight that the central
conclusions of the IV estimations are robust to many settings and that the emerging economies
in large part help to sharpen the precision of the estimates. The comparative advantage of this
paper remains estimations that include 88 exporters and many destinations, but the results are
robust to considering subsets that emphasize data quality features.
   Columns 7-10 analyze further the concern that productivity advances abroad might result in
                                                                                      s specialized
the endogenous migration of talent to the United States that is skilled in the country’
work and the simultaneous heightened exports of the country itself. These extra tests in Tables
S8a and S8b take the aggressive approach of removing for each nation the top one or …ve cases
that would generate the most concern to see if the results still hold. (Of course, the worry with
these types of robustness checks is that they exclude industries within each country that are
also prime candidates for the technology transfer account outlined in this paper.) In Columns
7-8, industries are excluded on the basis of being the initial top patenting industry abroad for a
country; in Columns 9-10, industries are dropped if they are those that show the highest labor



                                                13
productivity for a country adjusted for country and industry …xed e¤ects.5 The results are
overall robust to these tests, with the one failure happening in the …rst stage of the weighted
analysis that excludes …ve top patenting industries for each country. These exclusions tend to
result in slightly higher    estimates, but the most important conclusion is that the results are
broadly robust to these exclusions of special cases.

Extended IV Results: Identi…cation
This section concludes with an extended discussion of identi…cation, consolidating some of the
earlier results in the paper and presenting one new one. It is very important that the instrument
not re‡ect reverse causality or omitted factors— that is, that technology transfer from the United
States facilitated by past migration be promoting foreign productivity increases abroad and the
concomitant exports, rather than foreign productivity advances leading directly to both exports
and heightened migration to the United States that results in greater patenting. This concern
…nds its greatest expression when contemplating a foreign multinational like Sony or Mercedes-
Benz exporting new products and sending their inventors to the United States to engage in R&D
and patenting.
   An empirical study can never rule out every possible aspect of these inter-relationships, but
                                                         k
the progress here is substantial. The instrument design Mit outlined in the main text holds
…xed the 1980 ancestry spatial distribution in the United States for countries and interacts this
distribution with Anglo-Saxon-led technology trends by city-industry. Identi…cation with this
IV design and the modelled …xed e¤ects in the …rst-di¤erenced speci…cation (3) of the main text
thus limits reverse causality to being present in the 1980 distribution, in a way that anticipates
                                      s booming industries by US city, or that reverse causality
future technology growth for a country’
come through the technology trend itself.
   For the …rst part about endogenous US city selection being present by 1980, it is important
to recall that the city distribution does not itself provide identi…cation given the …rst di¤er-
encing and …xed e¤ects included in the …rst-di¤erenced speci…cation. What matters instead
                                                                             s US spatial foot-
is the di¤erential exposure across industries and technologies that a country’
                                                                     s spatial placements by
print generates. Thus, for a bias to exist, it must be that a country’
1980 sought out speci…c city-industry combinations in the United States that would become
   5
     The top industries for each country in Columns 7-8 are determined through USPTO patent …lings made
by inventor teams working in each country and industry during 1975-1984. For Columns 9-10, the procedure
regresses country-industry labor productivity on a set of country, industry, and year …xed e¤ects. For each
country, the one or …ve industries with the highest average residual labor productivity are excluded.



                                                    14
                                          s exports over the ensuing two decades. Given the
disproportionately relevant to the country’
importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects, this selection must also be disproportionate for the coun-
try compared to other nations. Important tests against this concern include the exclusions of
candidate industries in Table S8a and the robustness checks on spatial distributions in Table
S7a.
   With respect to the technology trends of US cities being endogenous, the robustness checks
consider a variety of techniques, including the stringent restrictions around technology trends
built upon Anglo-Saxon inventors and the work they cite. Another test utilizes the ethnic
patenting growth in the United States to formulate an additional control against reverse causality.
This control is calculated as the patenting growth within each industry in the United States by
members of the focal ethnic community. Thus, estimations consider the technology transfer
            k
instrument Mit outlined in the main text and its impact for productivity growth and trade
after controlling for the direct growth of patenting by industry of ethnic communities. The
control is calculated across the ethnic groups discussed for ethnic patenting data, with the same
control applied to countries within an ethnicity (e.g., the growth in US patenting by ethnic
                                                                      s and Chile’
Hispanic inventors for computers is used as a control with both Mexico’          s computer
productivity and exports). As some countries do not map to an identi…able ethnic group with
the name matching approach, the sample is reduced to 73,545 observations. For this sample,
the weighted and unweighted instrumented elasticities before the ethnic patenting control is
introduced are 1.32 (0.54) and 2.21 (0.92), respectively. With the control, these instrumented
elasticities are very similar at 1.40 (0.64) and 2.32 (1.37), respectively. These too suggest the
technology transfer is happening over and above direct immigrant contributions. Earlier versions
of this paper consider direct ethnic patenting and exports more extensively. The early work also
evaluates the role of sector reallocation from agriculture, the empirical contrast of the technology
states in the exporter and the importer, and the potential for vertical integration through parts
trade (e.g., Ng and Yeats 2001, Schott 2004). These results are available upon request.
   The timing of e¤ects is important as shown in Table S5, where the …ve-year lagged instru-
ments outperform contemporaneous variables. There is not a simple story that identi…es why
a productivity boom in an Indian industry, for example, would become …rst visible in spillover
patenting to US-based Anglo-Saxon inventors versus …rst increasing directly Indian exports in
the industry. This timing could be argued— if, for example, local institutions or complementary
factors in India are not developed su¢ ciently to realize exports without a signi…cant delay— but
the inverted timing structure is far from obvious and would need to be systematic across coun-

                                                15
tries to be picked up in the   estimates. On the other hand, the technology transfer story would
suggest Anglo-Saxon patenting would precede export growth abroad by India. These types of
timing arguments are not perfect, which is why they are relegated to an appendix, but are useful
for thinking through the technology trend argument.
   In the end, the paper is able to make substantial progress towards causal identi…cation in
a Ricardian model, beginning with the panel estimation approach and extending through the
many IV approaches. This e¤ort remains incomplete, however, and it is hoped that future
work both identi…es natural experiment settings to test these arguments and also identi…es
other forms/impetuses for heterogeneous technology transfer that can provide identi…cation in
a setting that focuses on large country-industry samples like this one.


Additional Supplemental References
Baldwin, Richard, and James Harrigan. 2011. “Zeros, Quality, and Space: Trade Theory and
Trade Evidence.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 3 (1): 60-88.
Branstetter, Lee, and Yoshiaki Ogura. 2005. “Is Academic Science Driving a Surge in Industrial
Innovation? Evidence from Patent Citations.” NBER Working Paper 11561. Cambridge, Mass.:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Burstein, Ariel, and Jonathan Vogel. 2012. “Factor Prices and International Trade: A Unifying
Perspective.” Working Paper.
Coe, David, and Elhanan Helpman. 1995. “International R&D Spillovers.” European Economic
Review 39 (5): 859-887.
Coe, David, Elhanan Helpman, and Alexander Ho¤maister. 1997. “North-South R&D Spillovers.”
Economic Journal 107 (440): 134-149.
Cohen, Wesley. 2011. “Fifty Years of Empirical Studies of Innovative Activity and Performance.”
In B. Hall and N. Rosenberg, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Innovation. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Paul Samuelson. 1980. “Heckscher-Ohlin Trade
Theory with a Continuum of Goods.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 95 (2): 203-224.
Feenstra, Robert. 1994. “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices.”
American Economic Review 84 (1): 157-177.
Frankel, Je¤rey. 1997. Regional Trading Blocs in the World Economic System. Washington,
DC: Institute for International Economics.
Griliches, Zvi. “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey.” Journal of Economic
Literature 28 (4): 1661-1707.
Griliches, Zvi. “Productivity, R&D, and the Data Constraint.” American Economic Review 84
(1): 1-23.
Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Hall, Bronwyn. 2005. “Exploring the Patent Explosion.” Journal of Technology Transfer 30
(2.2): 35-48.


                                               16
Harrigan, James. 1997. “Cross-Country Comparisons of Industry Total Factor Productivity:
Theory and Evidence.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Research Paper 9734.
Heckscher, Eli. 1919. “The E¤ect of Foreign Trade on the Distribution of Income.” Ekonomisk
Tidskrift 21 (2): 1-32.
Helpman, Elhanan. 1999. “R&D and Productivity: The International Connection.” In A. Razin
and E. Sadka, eds., The Economics of Globalization. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ja¤e, Adam, and Joshua Lerner. 2005. Innovation and Its Discontents. Boston, Mass.: Harvard
Business School Press.
Ja¤e, Adam, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 1999. “International Knowledge Flows: Evidence from
Patent Citations.” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 8: 105-136.
Johnson, Daniel. 1999. “150 Years of American Invention: Methodology and a First Geographic
Application.” Wellesley College Economics Working Paper 99-01.
Kapur, Devesh. 2001. “Diasporas and Technology Transfer.” Journal of Human Development
2 (2): 265-286.
Kapur, Devesh, and John McHale. 2005. “Sojourns and Software: Internationally Mobile
Human Capital and High-Tech Industry Development in India, Ireland, and Israel.” In A. Arora
and A. Gambardella, eds., From Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise and Growth of the Software
Industry in Some Emerging Economies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Keller, Wolfgang. 2002a. “Geographic Localization of International Technology Di¤usion.”
American Economic Review 92 (1): 120-142.
Keller, Wolfgang. 2002b. “Trade and the Transmission of Technology.” Journal of Economic
Growth 7: 5-24.
Keller, Wolfgang. 2004. “International Technology Di¤usion.” Journal of Economic Literature
42 (3): 752-782.
Kim, Jinyoung, and Gerald Marschke. 2004. “Accounting for the Recent Surge in U.S. Patent-
ing: Changes in R&D Expenditures, Patent Yields, and the High Tech Sector.” Economics of
Innovation and New Technologies 13 (6): 543-558.
Kortum, Samuel, and Joshua Lerner.2000. “Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to
Innovation.” RAND Journal of Economics 31 (4): 674-692.
Kugler, Maurice, and Hillel Rapoport. 2012. “Migration, FDI and the Margins of Trade.”
Unpublished Working Paper.
Leamer, Edward. “The Leontief Paradox, Reconsidered.” Journal of Political Economy 88 (3):
495-503.
Lemley, Mark, and Bhaven Sampat. 2008. “Is the Patent O¢ ce a Rubber Stamp?” Emory Law
Journal 58: 181.
Leontief, Wassily. 1953. “Domestic Production and Foreign Trade: The American Capital
Position Re-examined.” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 97 (4): 332-349.
Nanda, Ramana, and Tarun Khanna. 2010. “Diasporas and Domestic Entrepreneurs: Evidence
from the Indian Software Industry.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 19 (4):
991-1012.
Ng, Francis, and Alexander Yeats. 2001. “Production Sharing in East Asia: Who Does What
for Whom and Why?” In Global Production and Trade in East Asia. New York: Springer US.
Obukhova, Elena. 2008. “Global-Pull, State-Push, or Brain Circulation? Firm-Level Techno-
                             s Semiconductor Design Industry.” Working Paper.
logical Upgrading in Shanghai’
Obukhova, Elena. 2009. “Does Brain Circulation Promote International Development? High-
Skilled Migration and Organizational Performance.” Working Paper.

                                            17
Ohlin, Bertil. 1933. Interregional and International Trade. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Papageorgiou, Chris, and Antonio Spilimbergo. 2008. “Learning Abroad and Technology Adop-
tion.” Unpublished Working Paper.
Romalis, John. 2004. “Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade.” American
Economic Review 94 (1): 67-97.
Scherer, Frederic. “Using Linked Patent Data and R&D Data to Measure Technology Flows.”
In Z. Griliches, ed., R & D, Patents and Productivity. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Schott, Peter. 2003. “One Size Fits All? Heckscher-Ohlin Specialization in Global Production.”
American Economic Review 93 (2): 686-708.
Schott, Peter. 2004. “Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International
Trade.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2): 647-678.
Silverman, Brian. 1999. “Technological Resources and the Direction of Corporate Diversi…ca-
tion: Toward an Integration of the Resource-Based View and Transaction Cost Economics.”
Management Science 45 (8): 1109-1124.
Tre‡ er, Daniel. 1993. “International Factor Price Di¤erences: Leontief was Right!” Journal of
Political Economy 101 (6): 961-987.
Tre‡er, Daniel. 1995. “The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries.” American Eco-
nomic Review 85 (5): 1029-1046.
Vanek, Jaroslav.1968. “The Factor Proportions Theory: The N-Factor Case.” Kyklos 21 (4):
749-756.
Ventura, Jaume. 1997. “Growth and Interdependence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112
(1): 57-84.
Waugh, Michael. 2010. “International Trade and Income Di¤erences.” American Economic
Review 100 (5): 2093-2124.
Young, Alwyn. 1992. “A Tale of Two Cities: Factor Accumulation and Technical Change in
Hong Kong and Singapore.” National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual 7:
13-63.
Young, Alwyn. 1995. “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the
East Asian Growth Experience.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (3): 641-680.




                                              18
                                      Table S1a: Descriptive statistics for exporting countries
                               Count of UNIDO productivity       WTF manufacturing exports
                     Count of intensive-   Mean Mean log 5-      Mean                  Share of
                    periods in  margin labor prod.    year    exports per Mean log 5- total WTF                                               Second largest
                    sample as   obs. as    over    growth for   5-year      year        exports Largest 1980 city                              1980 city for
                     exporter  exporter  included included      period growth rate included in    for ancestry                                   ancestry
Country              after FD  after FD industries industries  included for routes      sample     population                                   population

       (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)          (8)                (9)                  (10)
Afghanistan              1            15         3.7E+03         0.01         2.2E+08         -0.15         0.79      San Francisco, CA Dallas-Ft. Wth, TX
Algeria                  3            40         3.3E+04         -0.13        2.6E+08         -0.09         0.01      Tampa-St. Pete, FL    Boston, MA
Argentina                3            819        9.0E+04         0.28         3.3E+10         0.36          0.64        New York, NY      Los Angeles, LA
Australia                3           1819        1.4E+05         0.19         6.4E+10         0.42          0.68       Los Angeles, LA     New York, NY
Austria                  3           3702        1.4E+05         0.35         1.6E+11         0.53          0.97        New York, NY      Los Angeles, LA
Bangladesh               3            194        3.7E+03         0.07         3.6E+09         0.54          0.44        New York, NY      Los Angeles, LA
Barbados                 3            18         5.1E+04         0.05         9.9E+07         0.18          0.33        New York, NY        Boston, MA
Belgium                  3           1445        1.4E+05         0.16         9.4E+10         0.45          0.20         Detroit, MI       Green Bay, WI
Bolivia                  3            102        6.8E+04         -0.05        1.3E+09         0.11          0.69       Los Angeles, LA     New York, NY
Brazil                   2            829        7.8E+04         0.47         7.8E+10         0.25          0.60        New York, NY      Los Angeles, LA
Bulgaria                 3            640        2.8E+04         0.10         5.2E+09         0.43          0.48         Chicago, IL      Los Angeles, LA
Cameroon                 3            102        2.0E+04         -0.06        1.7E+09         -0.12         0.51       Washington, DC           None
Canada                   3           3876        1.9E+05         0.17         1.2E+11         0.45          0.98         Boston, MA       Los Angeles, LA
Chile                    3            723        2.2E+05         0.15         2.8E+10         0.45          0.86        New York, NY      Los Angeles, LA
China                    3           2618        1.3E+04         0.18         4.0E+11         1.25          0.82      San Francisco, CA    New York, NY
Colombia                 3            876        5.5E+04         0.10         6.9E+09         0.52          0.42        New York, NY         Miami, FL
Congo                    1             2         4.3E+04         0.47         1.1E+07         1.56          0.03       Los Angeles, LA          None
Costa Rica               3            63         4.6E+04         0.11         3.2E+08         1.31          0.12        New York, NY      Los Angeles, LA
Cote d'Ivoire            1            41         5.2E+04         -0.08        8.8E+09         0.35          0.85        Baltimore, MD      New York, NY
Cuba                     1            47         2.0E+04         -0.04        2.4E+09         -0.36         0.61         Miami, FL         New York, NY
Cyprus                   3            319        3.9E+04         0.15         1.6E+09         0.30          0.61        New York, NY     San Francisco, CA
Denmark                  2           1954        1.2E+05         0.18         9.9E+10         0.49          0.72       Los Angeles, LA   Salt Lake City, UT
Dom. Republic            1            14         3.8E+04         -0.37        5.1E+08         0.74          0.35        New York, NY         Miami, FL
Ecuador                  3            252        4.6E+04         0.02         2.9E+09         0.60          0.70        New York, NY      Los Angeles, LA
Egypt                    3            396        3.1E+04         0.21         5.0E+09         0.13          0.55        New York, NY      Los Angeles, LA
El Salvador              2             5         4.3E+04         0.02         1.7E+06         -0.02         0.00       Los Angeles, LA   San Francisco, CA
Ethiopia                 1            22         1.0E+04         -0.10        2.6E+08         -0.19         0.18         Chicago, IL        Atlanta, GA
Fiji                     2            31         4.3E+04         -0.01        9.3E+08         0.07          0.60      San Francisco, CA     Honolulu, HI
Finland                  3           2319        1.6E+05         0.39         9.7E+10         0.74          0.79      Duluth-Super., MN Minn.-St. Paul, MN
France                   3           6100        1.6E+05         0.36         7.3E+11         0.48          0.83       Los Angeles, LA      Boston, MA
Germany                  1           1379        2.1E+05         0.28         1.1E+12         0.33          0.68         Chicago, IL       New York, NY
Ghana                    3            51         1.8E+04         0.02         1.4E+09         0.63          0.36        New York, NY      Los Angeles, LA
Greece                   3           1860        9.9E+04         0.14         3.0E+10         0.36          0.91        New York, NY         Chicago, IL
Guatemala                3            32         2.1E+04         -0.18        1.1E+08         -0.55         0.04       Los Angeles, LA       Chicago, IL
Honduras                 3            51         2.9E+04         -0.11        2.8E+08         0.75          0.16        New York, NY      Los Angeles, LA
Hong Kong                3           2453        1.0E+05         0.53         1.4E+11         0.56          0.96        New York, NY      Sacramento, CA
Hungary                  3           1446        2.7E+04         0.17         3.8E+10         0.79          0.85        New York, NY       Cleveland, OH
Iceland                  3            177        1.2E+05         0.23         6.2E+09         0.43          0.92       Los Angeles, LA      Seattle, WA
India                    3           2544        1.8E+04         0.14         6.0E+10         0.72          0.81        New York, NY         Chicago, IL
Indonesia                3            735        2.0E+04         0.12         5.4E+10         1.10          0.45        New York, NY      Los Angeles, LA
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: Table provides descriptive statistics on intensive-margin sample. An included observation
is the first-difference of values for an exporter-importer-industry-period from the prior period. For the differencing, the exporter's labor productivity at the
industry level must be reported in the UNIDO database in both periods and the export volumes in the World Trade Flows database must exceed $100k for
both periods. All trade with the United States is excluded. Column 2 reports the number of periods after first differencing that a country is included in, and
the third column provides route-level observation counts after first differencing. Columns 4 and 5 provide labor productivity estimates from the UNIDO
database. Columns 6-8 report statistics from the World Trade Flows database, with volumes expressed in US dollars. The last two columns document the
two largest ethnic heritage cities used in the instrument design. Cities are defined at the consolidated metropolitan area level, with abbreviated names
provided.
                                                    Table S1a, continued
                             Count of UNIDO productivity       WTF manufacturing exports
                   Count of intensive-   Mean Mean log 5-      Mean                  Share of
                  periods in  margin labor prod.    year    exports per Mean log 5- total WTF                        Second largest
                  sample as   obs. as    over    growth for   5-year      year        exports Largest 1980 city       1980 city for
                   exporter  exporter  included included      period growth rate included in    for ancestry            ancestry
Country            after FD  after FD industries industries  included for routes      sample     population            population

      (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)            (9)                 (10)
Iran                 2          157     2.1E+04      -0.09     4.4E+09     0.43        0.55     Los Angeles, LA     San Francisco, CA
Ireland              3         2061     2.9E+05      0.41      1.2E+11     0.79        0.96      New York, NY        Philadelphia, PA
Israel               3         1123     1.0E+05      0.22      1.3E+10     0.69        0.50      New York, NY        Los Angeles, LA
Italy                3         6102     1.5E+05      0.35      6.2E+11     0.50        0.89      New York, NY        Philadelphia, PA
Jamaica              2           3      1.1E+05      0.07      7.6E+06     0.92        0.01      New York, NY           Miami, FL
Japan                3         5799     2.7E+05      0.37      1.2E+12     0.43        0.99       Honolulu, HI       Los Angeles, LA
Jordan               3          113     5.3E+04      0.20      5.5E+08     0.25        0.26      New York, NY           Detroit, MI
Kenya                3          231     4.8E+04      0.13      1.1E+09     0.32        0.28     Washington, DC      San Francisco, CA
Kuwait               3          391     7.8E+05      0.12      1.5E+10     -0.35       0.74       Orlando, FL         Providence, RI
Macau                3          166     2.7E+04      0.33      3.6E+09     0.34        0.72     Los Angeles, LA        Seattle, WA
Malaysia             3         1317     6.6E+04      0.33      1.1E+11     1.28        0.61    San Francisco, CA     Los Angeles, LA
Malta                3          223     2.0E+05      0.50      3.5E+09     0.83        0.68        Detroit, MI        New York, NY
Mexico               3         1474     7.3E+04      0.21      3.8E+10     0.84        0.82     Los Angeles, LA      San Antonio, TX
Morocco              3          551     4.2E+04      0.00      1.8E+10     0.54        0.86      New York, NY          Chicago, IL
Myanmar              2          40      2.4E+03      0.64      3.2E+08     0.38        0.24     Washington, DC       Los Angeles, LA
Nepal                1           2      7.0E+03      0.21      1.7E+06     0.42        0.00       Boston, MA          St. Louis, MO
Netherlands          3         5429     2.7E+05      0.29      5.1E+11     0.46        0.91     Los Angeles, LA     Grand Rapids, MI
New Zealand          3          735     1.0E+05      0.31      1.7E+10     0.40        0.49     Washington, DC      San Francisco, CA
Nicaragua            1           1      4.1E+04      0.40      7.4E+05     1.90        0.00     Los Angeles, LA     San Francisco, CA
Nigeria              3          28      1.1E+05      -0.06     7.9E+07     0.04        0.03      New York, NY        Washington, DC
Norway               3         2295     3.4E+05      0.26      8.5E+10     0.36        0.90    Minn.-St. Paul, MN      Seattle, WA
Oman                 1          14      3.1E+05      -0.19     1.4E+09     0.60        0.33     Los Angeles, LA        Salinas, CA
Pakistan             3          784     2.1E+04      0.19      2.1E+10     0.46        0.87      New York, NY        Los Angeles, LA
Panama               3          288     3.7E+04      -0.06     3.0E+09     0.07        0.47      New York, NY        Los Angeles, LA
Peru                 3          354     6.6E+04      0.54      3.0E+09     0.26        0.27      New York, NY        Los Angeles, LA
Philippines          3          930     2.8E+04      0.35      3.5E+10     0.97        0.80    San Francisco, CA     Los Angeles, LA
Poland               3         1213     2.6E+04      0.25      4.1E+10     0.69        0.71      New York, NY          Chicago, IL
Portugal             3         2160     6.1E+04      0.39      7.2E+10     0.72        0.96      Providence, RI     San Francisco, CA
Romania              1          191     6.7E+03      -0.31     8.0E+09     -0.08       0.29      New York, NY        Los Angeles, LA
Senegal              3          64      3.5E+04      0.10      1.6E+09     0.19        0.81     Los Angeles, LA      Washington, DC
Singapore            3         2790     2.6E+05      0.51      2.0E+11     0.83        0.94      New York, NY       San Francisco, CA
South Africa         3         1017     5.1E+04      -0.02     3.1E+10     0.36        0.67      New York, NY       Dallas-Ft. Wth, TX
South Korea          3         3204     1.2E+05      0.52      2.5E+11     0.95        0.84     Los Angeles, LA       New York, NY
Spain                3         5130     1.4E+05      0.36      2.6E+11     0.69        0.97      New York, NY        Los Angeles, LA
Sri Lanka            3          348     8.0E+03      0.20      3.5E+09     0.63        0.59     Los Angeles, LA        Boston, MA
Sweden               3         4032     1.5E+05      0.30      2.5E+11     0.45        0.98    Minn.-St. Paul, MN      Chicago, IL
Switzerland          2          908     1.9E+05      0.29      1.1E+11     0.35        0.42     Los Angeles, LA       New York, NY
Syria                3          87      9.9E+04      0.54      9.1E+08     0.47        0.36      New York, NY          Chicago, IL
Taiwan               3         2022     7.7E+04      0.46      2.1E+11     0.87        0.74     Los Angeles, LA     San Francisco, CA
Tanzania             3          54      6.6E+03      -0.35     1.6E+08     0.55        0.09      New York, NY          Chicago, IL
Thailand             2          499     5.7E+04      0.37      4.2E+10     1.33        0.37     Los Angeles, LA       New York, NY
Trinidad-Tobago      3          41      1.7E+05      0.11      4.9E+08     -0.36       0.22      New York, NY        Washington, DC
Tunisia              1          46      8.8E+04      0.25      2.6E+09     -0.39       0.15      New York, NY        Los Angeles, LA
Turkey               3         1233     6.8E+04      0.25      4.8E+10     0.81        0.80      New York, NY        Los Angeles, LA
United Kingdom       3         7143     1.6E+05      0.37      6.1E+11     0.48        0.90     Los Angeles, LA       New York, NY
Uruguay              3          431     4.4E+04      0.20      6.5E+09     0.21        0.88      New York, NY        Washington, DC
Venezuela            3          490     3.1E+05      -0.03     8.4E+09     -0.01       0.51      New York, NY           Miami, FL
Zimbabwe             3          14      3.7E+04      0.12      5.7E+07     -0.58       0.01     Los Angeles, LA            None
                                               Table S1b: Descriptive statistics for ISIC Revision 2 industries
                                                             UNIDO productivity            WTF manufacturing exports                   US patenting           US quintiles (5 = Highest)
                                               Count of             Mean log                          Mean log Share of
                                              intensive-              5-year             Mean          5-year   total WTF    Share of Mean log                                       Non-
                                                margin Mean level growth               exports per     growth     exports   patenting  5-year                 Capital/               prod.
                                              obs. after per 5-year rate for             5-year       rate for included in included in growth                  labor      Mean      worker
ISIC Industry title                               FD       period   industries           period        routes     sample     sample      rate                  ratio      wages      share
 (1)                    (2)                       (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)            (9)          (10)         (11)       (12)      (13)
311    Food products                             8183        1.5E+05         0.16        5.9E+11         0.33         0.74           0.02          0.15           3         2          3
313    Beverages                                 2294        2.2E+05         0.31        6.5E+10         0.49         0.75           0.01          0.17           5         3          5
314    Tobacco                                   1498        3.3E+05         0.22        2.6E+10         0.49         0.56           0.00          0.15           5         5          3
321    Textiles                                  7067        6.8E+04         0.22        4.9E+11         0.48         0.79           0.02          0.16           2         1          1
322    Wearing apparel, except footwear          3738        4.5E+04         0.18        2.8E+11         0.48         0.83           0.00          0.20           1         1          1
323    Leather products                          2605        7.8E+04         0.14        7.8E+10         0.64         0.73           0.00          0.19           1         1          1
324    Footwear, except rubber or plastic        1848        5.8E+04         0.30        4.8E+10         0.42         0.44           0.00          0.19           1         1          1
331    Wood products, except furniture           3217        7.5E+04         0.15        1.1E+11         0.47         0.73           0.01          0.15           2         1          1
332    Furniture, except metal                   2551        7.9E+04         0.21        7.9E+10         0.56         0.68           0.01          0.16           1         1          2
341    Paper and products                        4382        1.7E+05         0.19        2.0E+11         0.35         0.76           0.03          0.15           4         4          2
342    Printing and publishing                   2736        9.6E+04         0.20        4.4E+10         0.43         0.68           0.01          0.16           2         2          5
351    Industrial chemicals                      6309        2.5E+05         0.23        5.3E+11         0.46         0.59           0.05          0.10           5         5          4
352    Other chemicals                           5379        1.7E+05         0.21        2.8E+11         0.60         0.53           0.08          0.18           4         4          5
353    Petroleum refineries                      2257        1.6E+06         0.24        2.2E+11         0.03         0.50           0.01          0.09           5         5          4
354    Misc. petroleum and coal products          722        2.7E+05         0.15        1.8E+10         0.62         0.29           0.01          0.10           4         4          4
355    Rubber products                           3819        1.0E+05         0.29        7.8E+10         0.45         0.75           0.01          0.14           3         3          2
361    Pottery, china, earthenware               1648        5.4E+04         0.12        1.4E+10         0.44         0.58           0.00          0.14           1         2          2
362    Glass and products                        2750        1.1E+05         0.24        3.7E+10         0.47         0.58           0.01          0.14           4         3          1
369    Other non-metallic mineral products       3157        1.2E+05         0.22        6.6E+10         0.38         0.70           0.01          0.12           4         3          3
371    Iron and steel                            4301        2.0E+05         0.29        2.6E+11         0.27         0.59           0.01          0.13           5         5          2
372    Non-ferrous metals                        3355        2.1E+05         0.21        1.7E+11         0.35         0.60           0.02          0.16           4         3          3
381    Fabricated metal products                 5612        9.0E+04         0.20        2.2E+11         0.42         0.69           0.05          0.15           2         3          3
382    Machinery, except electrical              6989        1.5E+05         0.43        1.1E+12         0.67         0.67           0.25          0.25           3         4          4
383    Machinery, electric                       6513        1.5E+05         0.46        1.1E+12         0.74         0.81           0.22          0.26           3         4          5
384    Transport equipment                       5714        2.0E+05         0.33        1.0E+12         0.49         0.76           0.09          0.16           2         5          4
385    Professional & scientific equipment       5195        1.1E+05         0.28        2.8E+11         0.45         0.81           0.08          0.24           3         4          5
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: See Table S1a. Column 3 provides route-level observation counts by industry after first differencing. Columns 4 and 5
provide labor productivity estimates from the UNIDO database. Columns 6-8 report statistics from the World Trade Flows database, with volumes expressed in US dollars. Industries 356
and 390 are excluded. Columns 9-10 report the share and growth rate of patenting in United States that is used for the technology transfer measures. The last columns report the quintile to
which the industry is assigned for the Rybczynski effect controls of country time trends x industry quintiles.
                                  Table S2: Descriptive statistics for inventors residing in United States
                                                                                       Ethnicity of inventor
                         Anglo-Saxon       Chinese         European         Hispanic       Indian         Japanese           Korean          Russian         Vietnam.

                                                      A. Ethnic Inventor Shares Estimated from US Inventor Records, 1975-2004 (%)
1975-1979                74.8              2.1             15.6             2.7             2.0             0.6              0.3             1.9             0.1
1980-1984                73.4              2.9             15.1             2.7             2.6             0.7              0.4             2.0             0.1
1985-1989                72.2              3.6             14.6             2.9             3.1             0.8              0.5             2.1             0.2
1990-1994                70.0              4.8             14.1             3.2             3.9             0.9              0.6             2.2             0.4
1995-1999                66.4              6.7             13.6             3.5             5.2             0.9              0.7             2.5             0.5
2000-2004                63.1              8.8             13.0             3.8             5.9             1.0              0.9             2.8             0.6
Chemicals                65.8              7.3             14.4             3.2             4.9             0.9              0.7             2.5             0.3
Computers                62.9              8.4             12.6             3.4             7.5             1.0              0.7             2.7             0.7
Pharmaceuticals          64.8              7.2             14.8             3.9             4.6             1.1              0.8             2.6             0.3
Electrical               64.3              8.3             13.3             3.3             5.3             1.0              0.9             2.8             0.7
Mechanical               72.8              3.3             14.2             3.3             2.8             0.7              0.5             2.2             0.2
Miscellaneous            74.1              2.9             13.9             3.6             2.3             0.6              0.5             1.9             0.2
Top Cities as a          WS (84)           SF (14)         MIL (21)         MIA (16)        SF (8)          SD (2)           BAL (2)         NYC (4)         AUS (2)
Percentage of            SLC (83)          LA (8)          NOR (19)         SA (9)          AUS (7)         SF (2)           LA (1)          BOS (4)         SF (1)
City’s Patents           NAS (82)          AUS (6)         STL (19)         WPB (6)         PRT (6)         LA (2)           DC (1)          HRT (4)         LA (1)
                                                  B. Immigrant Scientist and Engineer Shares Estimated from 1990 US Census Records (%)
Bachelor's Share         87.6              2.7             2.3              2.4             2.3             0.6              0.5             0.4             1.2
Master's Share           78.9              6.7             3.4              2.2             5.4             0.9              0.7             0.8             1
Doctorate Share          71.2              13.2            4                1.7             6.5             0.9              1.5             0.5             0.4
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: Panel A presents descriptive statistics for inventors residing in the US at the time of patent application.
Inventor ethnicities are estimated through inventors' names using techniques described in the text. Patents are grouped by application years and major technology fields.
Cities, defined through Metropolitan Statistical Areas, include AUS (Austin), BAL (Baltimore), BOS (Boston), DC (Washington), HRT (Hartford), LA (Los Angeles),
MIA (Miami), MIL (Milwaukee), NAS (Nashville), NOR (New Orleans), NYC (New York City), PRT (Portland), SA (San Antonio), SD (San Diego), SF (San Francisco),
SLC (Salt Lake City), STL (St. Louis), WPB (West Palm Beach), and WS (Winston-Salem). Cities are identified from inventors' city names using city lists collected from
the Office of Social and Economic Data Analysis at the University of Missouri, with a matching rate of 99%. Manual recoding further ensures all patents with more than
100 citations and all city names with more than 100 patents are identified. Panel B presents comparable statistics calculated from the 1990 Census using country of birth for
scientists and engineers. Anglo-Saxon provides a residual in the Census statistics. Many US inventors with European names are native citizens.
                                  Table S3: Robustness checks on OLS specifications in Table 1
                                         Base                 Including    Including    Including   Including Rybczynski effect controls of
                                      estimation Including     exporter       route       border    country time trends x industry quintiles
                                     (Column 2, GDP/capita populations distance           effect   Capital/ labor                Non-prod.
                                       Table 1) interactions interactions interactions interaction     ratio      Mean wages        share
                                          (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)
                                        The dependent variable is Δ log bilateral exports on the intensive margin by exporter-importer-industry
Δ Log country-industry labor          0.573***       0.938***       0.578***       0.269**       0.602***        0.465***        0.332**          0.313**
productivity                           (0.185)        (0.219)        (0.126)       (0.125)        (0.186)         (0.129)        (0.135)          (0.132)
x Second quartile of trait                           -0.582**         0.272        0.330**
indicated in column header                            (0.283)        (0.284)       (0.139)
x Third quartile of trait                            -0.972***        -0.368       0.570**
indicated in column header                             (0.271)       (0.248)       (0.231)
x Highest quartile of trait                          -0.734***        0.060          0.268
indicated in column header                             (0.234)       (0.269)        (0.183)
x Bordering economies                                                                            -0.581***
                                                                                                   (0.177)
Effect at first quartile                                0.938         0.578          0.269
Effect at second quartile                               0.356         0.850          0.599
Effect at third quartile                               -0.034         0.210          0.839
Effect at highest quartile                              0.204         0.638          0.536
Value at second quartile start                         8,431        8,852,235        2,319
Value at third quartile start                         14,765       29,900,000        5,596
Value at highest quartile start                       19,024       57,100,000        9,184
Observations                           103,839        103,839       103,839        103,839        103,839        103,839         103,839          103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                  Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                  Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: See Table 1. Interactions in Column 4 use Great Circle distances between capital cities. To
give a feel for these demarcations, the distances from Beijing, China, to the capitals of Bangladesh, United Arab Emirates, and Spain are 3029 km., 5967 km.,
and 9229 km., respectively. Columns 6-8 test for the Rybczynski effect within manufacturing. Industries are grouped into quintiles by their US capital-labor
ratios, mean wage rates, and non-production worker wage bill shares. Table S1b lists industry groupings. Linear time trends for each country by industry
quintile are included in the estimation.
                  Table S4: Estimations of extensive margin
                                             OLS estimation            Reduced-form estimation
                                                    (1)                            (2)
                                         Dependent variable is Δ (0,1) [exports > US$100k]
                                        Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction
                                              of exporter and importer trade in industry
Δ Log country-industry labor                       -0.001
productivity                                      (0.004)
Δ Log estimator for technology                                                    -0.050
flows from the United States                                                     (0.034)
Observations                                     241,792                         241,792
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                            Yes                             Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                            Yes                             Yes

                                                  Panel B: Excluding sample weights
Δ Log country-industry labor                       -0.002
productivity                                      (0.004)
Δ Log estimator for technology                                                    -0.023
flows from the United States                                                     (0.027)
Observations                                     241,792                         241,792
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                            Yes                             Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                            Yes                             Yes
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: See Tables 1 and 3. Estimations
test the extensive margin of trade through linear probability models. The dependent variable is a
dichotomous indicator variable taking unit value if bilateral exports exceed $100k. The $100k
threshold is chosen due to WTF data collection procedures discussed in the text.
                        Table S5: Lag structure of first-stage and reduced-form estimations
                                                      First-stage estimation                                 Reduced-form estimation
                                             (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)
                                         Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer trade in industry
                                        DV: Δ Log country-industry labor productivity                       DV: Δ Log bilateral exports
Δ Log estimator for technology            0.589**                               0.524**           0.938***                              0.886***
flows from the United States,             (0.272)                               (0.241)            (0.298)                               (0.272)
lagged five years
Δ Log estimator for technology                                0.376*             0.275                                 0.393              0.223
flows from the United States,                                 (0.212)           (0.169)                               (0.253)            (0.256)
contemporaneous
Observations                              103,839            103,839            103,839            103,839           103,839            103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                     Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                     Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes

                                                                          Panel B: Excluding sample weights
                                        DV: Δ Log country-industry labor productivity                       DV: Δ Log bilateral exports
Δ Log estimator for technology            0.267***                             0.265***           0.648***                              0.636***
flows from the United States,              (0.078)                              (0.078)            (0.112)                               (0.107)
lagged five years
Δ Log estimator for technology                                 0.064             0.059                               0.473***           0.459***
flows from the United States,                                 (0.071)           (0.069)                               (0.111)            (0.105)
contemporaneous
Observations                              103,839            103,839            103,839            103,839           103,839            103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                     Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                     Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: See Table 3. The first-stage and reduced-form performance of the lagged technology
flows, the preferred instrument, is contrasted with contemporaneous flows.
                                          Table S6a: Basic robustness checks on IV specifications
                                                                                                                   Kerr (2008) Kerr (2008)
                                        Base                                                  Using a   Using ISIC    sample        sample       Using
                                     estimation Excluding Excluding Excluding                 2%/98% 2-digit level using Imp- using Imp- exporter-
                                    (Column 3,   exports     exports  electrical             winsorized  industry ISIC2-Year ISIC3-Year           level
                                      Table 3) from Brazil from China machinery                sample     groups   fixed effects fixed effects clustering
                                         (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)             (9)
                                               The dependent variable is Δ log bilateral exports on the intensive margin by exporter-importer-industry
                                                  Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer trade in industry
Δ Log country-industry labor          1.592**         1.616**       1.372**      1.616**      1.715**       0.673*      1.109***      1.794**         1.592***
productivity                          (0.637)         (0.644)       (0.649)      (0.746)      (0.717)       (0.393)      (0.390)      (0.770)          (0.335)
Observations                          103,839         103,010       101,221      97,326       103,839       51,483        23,345       23,345         103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                 Yes             Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                 Yes             Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes

                                                                                 Panel B: Excluding sample weights
Δ Log country-industry labor         2.429***        2.485***      2.331***      3.415**     2.862***        1.578       3.448*         -0.808        2.429***
productivity                          (0.791)         (0.801)       (0.778)      (1.735)      (0.851)       (1.452)      (2.059)       (2.094)         (0.646)
Observations                          103,839         103,010       101,221      97,326       103,839       51,483        23,345       23,345         103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                 Yes             Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                 Yes             Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: See Table 3.
                                                       Table S6b: Reduced forms for Table S6a
                                                                                                                   Kerr (2008) Kerr (2008)
                                        Base                                                  Using a   Using ISIC    sample        sample       Using
                                     estimation Excluding Excluding Excluding                 2%/98% 2-digit level using Imp- using Imp- exporter-
                                    (Column 2,   exports     exports  electrical             winsorized  industry ISIC2-Year ISIC3-Year           level
                                      Table 3) from Brazil from China machinery                sample     groups   fixed effects fixed effects clustering
                                         (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)             (9)
                                               The dependent variable is Δ log bilateral exports on the intensive margin by exporter-importer-industry
                                                  Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer trade in industry
Δ Log estimator for tech             0.938***        0.956***      0.698***      0.748***    1.044***        0.597      0.948***      0.794**         0.938**
flows from the United States          (0.298)         (0.299)       (0.220)       (0.288)     (0.304)       (0.387)      (0.265)      (0.325)         (0.434)
Observations                          103,839         103,010       101,221       97,326      103,839       51,483        23,345       23,345         103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                 Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                 Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes

                                                                                 Panel B: Excluding sample weights
Δ Log estimator for tech             0.648***        0.664***      0.602***      0.545***    0.764***       0.259*      0.583***        -0.079        0.648***
flows from the United States          (0.112)         (0.112)       (0.110)       (0.110)     (0.123)       (0.141)      (0.180)       (0.200)         (0.177)
Observations                          103,839         103,010       101,221       97,326      103,839       51,483        23,345       23,345         103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                 Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                 Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: See Table 3.
                                                    Table S7a: Variations in IV design structure
                                                    Variations in city-industry trend term                 Variations in city cross-sectional term
                                                Using total Weighting              Using                                                         Using 1990
                                        Base    technology patents by             industry                                 Using      Using non- ancestry
                                     estimation trend with backwards             groupings     Using first- Using later- bachelor's   bachelor's distribution
                                    (Column 3, all ethnic     Anglo-             based on       generation generation educated         educated    for city
                                      Table 3)    groups    Saxon cites          mfg roles     immigrants immigrants workers           workers     weights
                                         (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)            (9)
                                               The dependent variable is Δ log bilateral exports on the intensive margin by exporter-importer-industry
                                                  Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer trade in industry
Δ Log country-industry labor          1.592**        1.513***       2.812**       2.634*       1.581***       1.699       2.233**       1.607**       1.888**
productivity                          (0.637)         (0.498)       (1.118)       (1.583)       (0.420)      (1.097)      (1.052)       (0.683)       (0.815)
Observations                          103,839        103,839        103,839      103,839        103,839      103,839      103,839       103,839       103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes

                                                                                  Panel B: Excluding sample weights
Δ Log country-industry labor         2.429***        3.342***       3.085**        Invalid     2.645***      2.341**     2.727***      2.812***       2.650***
productivity                          (0.791)         (1.096)       (1.538)      first stage    (0.733)      (1.062)      (0.988)       (0.962)        (0.825)
Observations                          103,839        103,839        103,839      103,839        103,839      103,839      103,839       103,839       103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: See Table 3.
                                                       Table S7b: Reduced forms for Table S7a
                                                    Variations in city-industry trend term                Variations in city cross-sectional term
                                                Using total Weighting              Using                                                         Using 1990
                                        Base    technology patents by             industry                               Using        Using non- ancestry
                                     estimation trend with backwards             groupings   Using first- Using later- bachelor's     bachelor's distribution
                                    (Column 2, all ethnic     Anglo-             based on     generation generation educated           educated    for city
                                      Table 3)    groups    Saxon cites          mfg roles   immigrants immigrants workers             workers     weights
                                         (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)            (9)
                                               The dependent variable is Δ log bilateral exports on the intensive margin by exporter-importer-industry
                                                  Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer trade in industry
Δ Log estimator for tech             0.938***        0.999***      0.795***      0.248**      1.257***      0.570*       1.224***     0.893***        1.126***
flows from the United States          (0.298)         (0.311)       (0.158)      (0.111)       (0.387)      (0.269)       (0.323)      (0.300)         (0.314)
Observations                          103,839        103,839        103,839      103,839       103,839      103,839       103,839      103,839        103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes

                                                                                  Panel B: Excluding sample weights
Δ Log estimator for tech             0.648***        0.789***      0.374***      0.124***     0.875***     0.386***      0.637***     0.650***        0.766***
flows from the United States          (0.112)         (0.107)       (0.063)       (0.044)      (0.144)      (0.102)       (0.118)      (0.105)         (0.120)
Observations                          103,839        103,839        103,839      103,839       103,839      103,839       103,839      103,839        103,839
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: See Table 3.
                                                       Table S8a: Variations in IV sample composition
                                                 Excluding        Excluding       Excluding                Excluding Excluding Excluding 5 Excluding Excluding 5
                                        Base    nations with     nations with    nations with Examining exporters      largest    largest    largest      largest
                                     estimation fewer than        fewer than      fewer than long-term with <100k      foreign   foreign    foreign      foreign
                                    (Column 3, 100 data            1000 data       2000 data     OECD      ethnic US patenting  patenting productivity productivity
                                      Table 3)     points           points          points    nations only members    industry  industries   outlier     outliers
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)      (8)           (9)       (10)
                                                    The dependent variable is Δ log bilateral exports on the intensive margin by exporter-importer-industry
                                                        Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer trade in industry
Δ Log country-industry labor          1.592**        1.590**        1.470**       1.417**         1.322      1.669**      2.023*       Invalid     1.520**    2.563*
productivity                          (0.637)        (0.636)        (0.568)       (0.614)        (0.816)     (0.797)      (1.098)    first stage   (0.586)    (1.554)
Observations                          103,839        103,013        89,059         71,779         74,087      78,411      97,011      73,518       100,740     82,939
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes

                                                                                           Panel B: Excluding sample weights
Δ Log country-industry labor         2.429***       2.426***       2.315***       1.900***       2.205**     2.251***    3.072***     3.257*       2.853***   2.923***
productivity                          (0.791)        (0.787)        (0.764)        (0.671)       (0.874)      (0.875)     (1.179)     (1.843)       (0.931)    (1.081)
Observations                          103,839        103,013        89,059         71,779         74,087      78,411      97,011      73,647       100,740     82,939
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: See Table 3.
                                                             Table S8b: Reduced forms for Table S8a
                                                 Excluding        Excluding       Excluding                Excluding Excluding Excluding 5 Excluding Excluding 5
                                        Base    nations with     nations with    nations with Examining exporters      largest    largest    largest      largest
                                     estimation fewer than        fewer than      fewer than long-term with <100k      foreign   foreign    foreign      foreign
                                    (Column 2, 100 data            1000 data       2000 data     OECD      ethnic US patenting  patenting productivity productivity
                                      Table 3)     points           points          points    nations only members    industry  industries   outlier     outliers
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)      (8)           (9)       (10)
                                                    The dependent variable is Δ log bilateral exports on the intensive margin by exporter-importer-industry
                                                        Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer trade in industry
Δ Log estimator for tech             0.938***       0.937***       0.936***       0.904***      0.622***     0.975***    0.898***    0.716***      0.948***   0.747***
flows from the United States          (0.298)        (0.298)        (0.308)        (0.341)       (0.239)      (0.352)     (0.175)     (0.249)       (0.302)    (0.274)
Observations                          103,839        103,013        89,059         71,779         74,087      78,411      97,011      73,518       100,740     82,939
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes

                                                                                           Panel B: Excluding sample weights
Δ Log estimator for tech             0.648***       0.653***       0.668***       0.634***      0.580***     0.601***    0.657***    0.529***      0.655***   0.619***
flows from the United States          (0.112)        (0.113)        (0.120)        (0.135)       (0.124)      (0.124)     (0.115)     (0.124)       (0.116)    (0.126)
Observations                          103,839        103,013        89,059         71,779         74,087      78,411      97,011      73,647       100,740     82,939
Importer-Industry-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE                 Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes
Source: Author's analysis based on data described in text. Notes: See Table 3.
