                                                  WPS8011


Policy Research Working Paper                    8011




      How Effective Are Active Labor Market
        Policies in Developing Countries?
               A Critical Review of Recent Evidence

                                David McKenzie




Development Research Group
Finance and Private Sector Development Team
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8011


  Abstract
  Jobs are the number one policy concern of policy makers                           typically assume. Many of these evaluations find no sig-
  in many countries. The global financial crisis, rising                            nificant impacts on either employment or earnings. One
  demographic pressures, high unemployment rates, and                               reason is that urban labor markets appear to work reason-
  concerns over automation all make it seem imperative                              ably well in many cases, with fewer market failures than is
  that policy makers employ increasingly more active labor                          often thought. As a result, there is less of a role for many
  market policies. This paper critically examines recent                            traditional active labor market policies than is common
  evaluations of labor market policies that have provided                           practice. The review then discusses examples of job cre-
  vocational training, wage subsidies, job search assistance,                       ation policies that do seem to offer promise, and concludes
  and assistance moving to argue that many active labor                             with lessons for impact evaluation and policy is this area.
  market policies are much less effective than policymakers




  This paper is a product of the Finance and Private Sector Development Team, Development Research Group. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The author may be contacted at dmckenzie@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
          How Effective Are Active Labor Market Policies in Developing Countries?
                                  A Critical Review of Recent Evidence#
                                        David McKenzie, World Bank




JEL classification codes: O15; J08; J68
Keywords: Active Labor Market Policy; Jobs; Wage Subsidies; Vocational Training; Job Search.




#
 I thank Asli Demirguc-Kunt for encouraging me to give a policy talk on this topic, and the authors of the different
papers summarized for helpful clarifications and comments.
Introduction
In a well-functioning labor market, firms that want workers and workers who want jobs are able
to find one another reasonably easily, and the only unemployment is low, frictional, and temporary.
In such a world, the main area for government policy is passive policy, in which the government
undertakes investments in infrastructure and provides the regulatory framework needed for the
economy as a whole to grow and raise incomes, but does not intervene directly to help particular
workers find jobs or particular firms to find workers.

However, in practice, governments have long engaged in a variety of active labor market policies
(ALMPs) that directly intervene in the labor market with the aim of generating more and better
employment opportunities for workers. Examples include training programs that aim to increase
the skills of the labor supply, wage subsidies that aim to increase firms’ demand for labor, and job
search and matching assistance that aims to better enable firms and workers to find and contract
with one another.

Four recent global trends have increased the importance of jobs as a policy concern, and renewed
interested in the effectiveness of ALMPs. The first was the global financial crisis of 2007-2008,
which increased unemployment in many countries worldwide. Second, rising demographic
pressures in some parts of the developing world have led to headlines of a “jobs time bomb” with
claims like India needing to create 12 million new jobs annually (Kumar and Busvine, 2014), 10
to 12 million young people entering the job market annually in Africa (Mohammed, 2015), and
the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region needing to create 100 million new jobs by 2020
(World Bank, 2004). Third, high rates of youth unemployment, particularly in the MENA region,
have raised fears of social unrest and large emigration flows (Kelly, 2016). Finally, enormous
progress in automation may mean that manufacturing jobs, which were vital to the growth of East
Asian countries, may no longer be available for poorer countries as they develop. This has led to
headlines like “Robots could eat all of Ethiopia’s jobs; South Africa, Nigeria and Angola not safe
either” (Mwiti, 2016).

While policy makers have long employed ALMPs and interest in their effectiveness has increased,
until recently most of the evidence as to their effectiveness came from developed and transition
countries, and very little from experimental evidence. For example, Dar and Tzannatos (1999)

                                                 2 
 
cover 72 evaluations but only find Hungary and Poland among non-developed countries, and have
evaluations for their programs based on matching participants with non-participants. The heavily
cited update of this work by Betcherman et al. (2004) added 39 additional evaluations from
developing and transition countries, of which only four drew on randomized experiments, and of
which only one (Galasso et al, 2004) was published in an academic journal. The typical evaluation
during this period uses propensity score matching, attempting to compare participants in an ALMP
to non-participants, using a relatively small number of cross-sectional observed characteristics to
compare the two groups. There is continued debate about the extent to which matching can provide
reliable estimates of program impacts, but estimates are likely to be more reliable when the
selection process into programs is known and multiple periods of pre-program data are available
for both treatment and control (Smith and Todd, 2005), conditions few of these non-experimental
evaluations satisfy.

The last decade has seen growth in the number of experimental evaluations of ALMPs in
developing countries. These new studies provide more rigorous evidence for the impacts of these
programs, but still suffer from some of the same problems faced by many non-experimental studies
such as survey attrition, the difficulty in accounting for general equilibrium effects, and concerns
with the right timing over which to measure impacts. I critically survey this recent literature and
draw out lessons for the effectiveness of ALMPs.1 The general message is that traditional ALMPs
that focus on skill training, wage subsidies, and job search assistance have at best modest impacts
in most circumstances. I compare this to expectations of program impacts from participants and
policy makers, and show that they tend to have over-optimistic expectations of how beneficial
these programs can be. However, revealed preference also shows that many of the formal sector
manufacturing jobs that these programs are intended to foster are not that highly valued by
workers. I then turn to emerging evidence on the effectiveness of less traditional active labor
market policy actions. I note the promise of policies which attempt to deal with sectoral and spatial
mismatches, in which workers are stuck in occupations or locations that differ from where demand
is. Finally, I attempt to draw out lessons for new impact evaluations in this area, as well as
concluding lessons for policy makers.




                                                 3 
 
The Rationale and Evidence for Traditional ALMPs as a Response

Traditional ALMPs are divided into three main categories. The first set of programs operate on the
labor supply side, aiming to increase the employability of workers through vocational training (see
McKenzie and Woodruff (2014) for a separate review of programs that foster self-employment
through business training). A second set of programs operates to increase the demand for labor,
through subsidizing the cost of labor to firms with employment subsidies.2 Finally, search and
matching assistance programs aim to lower frictions that prevent demand meeting supply in the
labor market. I discuss the key economic rationale for each type of program, and the recent
empirical evidence for each.

Vocational Training

Vocational training programs were the most common ALMP used by governments following the
global financial crisis of 2007-08 (McKenzie and Robalino, 2010). Blattman and Ralston (2015)
note that the World Bank and its client governments invested nearly US$1 billion per year between
2002 and 2012 on skills training programs. The premise of such programs is that a lack of certain
technical skills is the reason that particular individuals are unemployed, and that these skills can
be taught and learned in a relatively short period of time.

In practice, these programs are typically used with two target groups of beneficiaries. The first is
to offer the program to the general population of unemployed workers. Although this is a common
policy option, the only evaluation of such a program in a developing country setting is Hirshleifer
et al. (2016), who conduct a randomized experiment to evaluate Turkey’s program for the
unemployed. Typical programs here last a duration of 3 months, and cover a wide range of
occupations.

The second approach is to more narrowly focus on low-income, or “at-risk” youth, where youth
can run from 15 to 24 years old, or even to 29 years depending on the country. Programs focusing
on youth have been particularly common in Latin America, and act as a substitute to the formal
schooling system for youth who have dropped out. The standard model in the entra21, Jovenes,
and Juventud y Empleo programs in Latin America has been to combine 3 months of classroom




                                                 4 
 
training with 2 to 3 months of on-the-job training in the form of an internship. Some programs
additionally provide life skills training.

There has been rapid growth in the number of randomized experiments evaluating these programs.
I focus on evaluations of traditional vocational training programs – there have also been several
recent evaluations of bundled packages for adolescent girls which incorporate vocational training
with other services such as business skills training, empowerment activities, and support in setting
up businesses or finding jobs. An example is Adoho et al. (2014) who report early findings from
Liberia. They find positive impacts of that program on employment, but estimate that it would take
12 years for participants to recoup the costs of the job skills training provided in that program.

Table 1 summarizes the results from 12 evaluations from 8 countries. The typical evaluation
measures impacts 12 to 18 months after the conclusion of the training program, using surveys
administered to the treatment and control groups. The use of surveys to measure key employment
outcomes raises several concerns. The most major one is that of attrition, with all, but one study,
having attrition rates of 18 percent or higher, ranging up to 46 percent in Cho et al. (2013). This
attrition is a problem, because we might expect the employment outcomes of individuals who
refuse to be surveyed or who cannot be found to differ from those who are interviewed. A typical
approach has been to compare attrition rates in the treatment and control groups, and then do a
bounding exercise if the attrition rates vary (often the control group is slightly less likely to
respond). But it is easy to think of problems which can arise even when the attrition rates are the
same for both groups: for example, the attritors in the treatment group may be people who went
through the training and did not find it useful and have still not found jobs, while those in the
control group could be those who are too busy to answer surveys because they are employed in
good jobs. This type of differential response would bias the estimated treatment effect upwards,
overstating the impact of training.

A second issue with the use of survey measures of employment is the possibility that those in the
treatment groups over-report their employment outcomes to express their appreciation for being
given the program, while those in the control group potentially underreport these outcomes
because they maintain some hope of still being given the program. Good survey design and survey
framing can mitigate these issues. An alternative approach is then to use administrative data on
employment from national social security or labor databases. These databases capture formally

                                                  5 
 
registered employment, and enable the trajectory of formal employment outcomes to be measured
over longer time windows – including up to 10 years after treatment in the case of Attanasio et al.
(2015). They are not subject to attrition, but because they only capture formal employment, may
overestimate the employment impacts of the program if individuals simply shift from informal to
formal employment.

With these caveats in mind, Table 1 then provides an overview of the evidence from these recent
studies. I consider two key outcomes: paid employment, and earnings. I report here the intention-
to-treat (ITT) effects estimated in the different studies. These give the impact of offering vocational
training to target participants. Even though most programs require individuals to express interest
and sign up for the training, not all of those selected for training complete it. In most of the
programs here, between 70 and 85 percent of those selected for training complete it. The local-
average-treatment effect, which is the effect of taking up training when it is offered, can then be
obtained by multiplying these ITT impacts by between 1.2 to 1.4 in most cases.

We see that only 3 of 9 studies find a significant impact on employment. The simple unweighted
average across the studies is a 2.3 percentage point increase in employment. That is, for every 100
people offered vocational training, fewer than 3 will find a job they would not have otherwise
found. The last column of Table 1 shows the cost of these programs typically ranges from $500 to
$1700 per person trained (the exception being the tailoring and stitching training in India studied
by Maitra and Mani (2016) which cost a remarkably low $13 per person trained). The result is
approximately $17,000-$60,000 cost per additional person employed.

A number of the studies have also considered formal employment as an outcome. This is of interest
in its own right, because of a belief that formal employment may offer additional benefits and
stability to workers, as well as being a measure that can be obtained from administrative data.
Studies which have measured both employment and formal employment have tended to find
slightly larger impacts on formal employment, indicating that training helps shift workers towards
more formal jobs. The average impact across the studies is 3.6 percentage points.

I consider the impact on earnings in terms of two measures. The first is the percentage increase in
earnings relative to the earnings levels of the control group. The second is the absolute level
increase in earnings relative to the control group in terms of US dollars. We see that only 2 out of
9 studies find a statistically significant impact on earnings. However, all but two show positive

                                                  6 
 
point estimates, with a mean of a 17 percent increase and median of 11 percent. The absolute
change in monthly income ranges from -$5 to $83 per month, with a mean of $19.

Taken together, these studies show the promise of vocational training to have some impact on
employment, but also that these impacts are modest in many cases. In order to get a sense of how
to view the size of these effects, I find two perspectives useful. The first is to consider vocational
training as a substitute for schooling in building human capital. Standard estimates of the return to
an additional year of schooling around the world show an average return of 10 percent, with returns
to tertiary schooling averaging 21 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa (Montenegro and Patrinos, 2014).
From this perspective, we might expect a 3 month course to result in 3-7 percent higher earnings,
and six months to result in 5 to 10 percent higher earnings. The earnings impacts in Table 1 are
largely within this order of magnitude, and are consistent with there being a return to human
capital, but that vocational training should not be expected to deliver much different returns from
schooling itself. An exception is Maitra and Mani (2012), where the increase in income represents
a 95.7 percent increase on the control group’s mean. This reflects a situation where the women in
their sample are unlikely to be working and have very low earnings, so this large relative increase
is a small absolute increase of only $2.40 per month.

The second, more standard, perspective is that of cost-benefit. Comparing the cost of providing
these programs to the monthly income gains shows that the cost of these programs averages 50
times the monthly income gain. Even adjusting for incomplete take-up (which means not having
to pay the full costs for people who drop-out), it will typically take three or four years at least for
participants to recoup in income gains the cost of the program. This calculation also excludes the
opportunity cost of income lost by the participants during the period they are trained. The result is
that cost-benefit calculations for these programs are reliant on making assumptions of the
trajectories of impact lasting for periods beyond which impacts have typically been measured.
Some studies which have measured impacts over multiple time periods beyond a year after training
(Hirshleifer et al, 2016; Alzúa et al. 2016; Acevedo et al. 2017)3 have tended to find impacts fall
over time, making the assumption that short-term gains will necessarily persist problematic
(although others have found sustained impacts on formal employment for certain subgroups
(Attanasio et al, 2015; Ibarrarán et al., 2015)). Further adding the need to discount the future at




                                                  7 
 
some rate, and it is easy to arrive at the conclusion of Blattman and Ralston (2015, p. ii) that “it is
hard to find a skills training program that passes a simple cost-benefit test.”

In search of a more positive role for vocational training, researchers have pursued two approaches.
The first is to find training programs that can be provided much more cheaply, such as the NGO
program of Maitra and Mani (2016). If skills training can be delivered much cheaper, it does not
need to deliver as large an income gain to be cost effective.

The second approach has been to investigate whether the returns to training might be different for
some subgroups of the population or training types, to argue that targeted training might work.
Foremost among this has been a focus on gender, and there appears to be a stylized fact in the
literature that vocational training has higher returns for women (e.g. Blattman and Ralston, 2015).
This appears to stem largely from the work in Colombia by Attanasio et al. (2011, 2015), who find
significant impacts on employment for women but not for men. However, they never formally test
for a difference in impact by gender, and indeed in their long-term follow-up, note the magnitudes
are similar for both men and women, but only statistically significant for women. Moreover, as
Table 2 shows, all of the studies which have formally tested for equality by gender can either not
reject that impacts have been similar for men and women, or have found significantly higher
impacts for men.4 Therefore, it should not be assumed that training is generally more effective for
women.

Hirshleifer et al. (2016) investigate treatment heterogeneity by key characteristics of the type of
training provided. They find some evidence that training is more effective when given by private
providers rather than government training institutes. This is consistent with increasing emphasis
in policy towards better aligning training programs with private sector demand. However, they
still find that even the impacts of privately-provided training are modest and fall off over time.

Finally, an important point to note with all these evaluations is that they measure the private returns
to vocational training, assuming that the treatment group and control group are not competing for
the same jobs. Even if this is the case, and the estimates remain internally valid, the public policy
question of whether to support such programs also depends on whether trained individuals get new
jobs, or crowd out non-program participants who would have otherwise taken them. None of the
studies were designed to look at this question, although Hirshleifer et al. (2016) and Attanasio et
al. (2015) discuss it, and examine whether impacts differ by the tightness of the labor market,

                                                  8 
 
finding no significant differences. This offers some comfort against the displacement concern, but
it still seems likely that at least some of the modest gains shown by vocational training programs
come from changing who gets particular jobs, rather than from generating new employment in the
economy as a whole.

Wage Subsidies

In	a	simple	model	of	the	labor	market,	workers	are	paid	their	marginal	product,	and	so	if	
young	workers	are	not	very	productive	to	begin	with,	they	would	simply	be	paid	low	wages.	
Indeed,	in	some	African	contexts	under	the	apprenticeship	system,	workers	actually	receive	
negative	wages,	paying	firms	for	the	privilege	of	learning	on	the	job.	However,	in	many	labor	
markets,	minimum	wages	and	subsistence	constraints	set	a	lower	bar	on	the	amount	firms	
can	pay	for	labor,	and	additionally	the	presence	of	hiring	and	firing	frictions	means	that	if	
there	is	uncertainty	about	the	productivity	of	a	worker,	firms	may	prefer	not	to	hire	them.	
The	result	is	that	individuals	who	are	willing	to	work	may	be	unemployed,	particularly	youth	
who	are	inexperienced	and	untested,	and	less	able	to	signal	productivity.	
	
Wage	subsidies	are	intended	to	help	overcome	these	causes	of	unemployment.	A	temporary	
wage	subsidy	given	to	a	worker	lowers	the	cost	to	a	firm	of	hiring	that	worker	(although	as	
Levinsohn	 and	 Pugatch	 (2014)	 show,	 workers	 may	 increase	 their	 reservation	 wages	 in	
response	so	the	cost	of	labor	need	not	fall	by	the	full	amount	of	the	subsidy).	This	should	
then	 lead	 to	 an	 increase	 in	 employment	 for	 the	 period	 the	 subsidy	 is	 in	 effect.	Moreover,	
there	 are	 several	 possible	 ways	 for	 this	 short‐term	 subsidy	 to	 have	 a	 lasting	 impact	 on	
employment:	the	experience	gained	may	act	as	a	stepping	stone	to	longer‐term	employment,	
workers	may	learn	on	the	job	and	increase	productivity	to	a	level	above	minimum	wages,	
and	firms	may	learn	about	the	quality	of	workers	and	be	able	to	keep	individuals	who	are	
good	matches.	
	
Three	 studies	 have	 evaluated	 the	 impact	 of	 wage	 subsidies	 given	 to	 workers	 using	
randomized	experiments	in	developing	countries	(Table	3).	The	earliest	was	Galasso	et	al.	
(2004),	who	offered	welfare	recipients	a	wage	subsidy	voucher	that	was	valid	for	up	to	18	
months,	paying	the	firm	up	to	$150	per	month.	However,	employers	had	to	formally	register	

                                                   9 
 
any	 workers	 hired	 with	 this	 subsidy,	 and	 would	 face	 severance	 charges	 if	 they	 fired	 the	
worker	after	the	program,	so	only	three	workers	in	the	treatment	group	were	hired	using	
the	voucher.	A	similar	situation	arose	in	Levinsohn	et	al.	(2014)	in	South	Africa,	in	which	
youth	were	given	vouchers	that	would	pay	the	firm	a	monthly	subsidy	for	up	to	6	months,	if	
the	 firm	 formally	 registered	 the	 worker.	 Only	 22	 firms	 used	 the	 voucher,	 hiring	 only	 30	
workers	out	of	1,500	given	the	voucher.	Both	studies	show	the	reluctance	of	firms	to	face	the	
labor	regulations	associated	with	hiring	workers.	
	
In	 contrast,	 Groh	 et	 al.	 (2016a)	 in	 Jordan	 did	 not	 require	 firms	 to	 formally	 register	 the	
worker,	following	the	norms	of	the	labor	market	in	which	most	employment	was	informal.	
Their	subsidy	was	also	valid	for	six	months.	Half	of	the	individuals	given	the	voucher	in	their	
study	used	it,	and	there	was	a	38	percentage	point	increase	in	employment	during	the	period	
the	 subsidy	 was	 in	 effect.	 However,	 as	 detailed	 in	 Figure	 1,	 once	 the	 subsidy	 ended	 this	
treatment	 effect	 disappeared	 quickly,	 as	 firms	 fired	 workers,	 other	 workers	 quit,	 and	 the	
control	 group	 caught	 up	 a	 little.	 The	 result	 was	 no	 long‐term	 significant	 impact	 on	
employment.	Subsidies	did	not	provide	the	stepping	stone	to	additional	work	that	theory	
might	suggest.	
	
Despite	the	lack	of	use	of	the	vouchers	in	the	Argentina	and	South	Africa	experiments,	both	
studies	do	report	significant	impacts	on	wage	employment	(although	no	overall	impact	on	
employment	in	the	Argentina	case).	The	authors	of	both	studies	speculate	that	having	the	
voucher	gave	job‐seekers	the	confidence	to	approach	more	employers	and	exert	more	job	
search	effort,	which	resulted	in	more	employment,	just	of	an	informal	sort.	If	true,	this	would	
make	the	policy	very	cost‐effective,	since	hardly	anyone	cashed	in	the	voucher.	However,	
note	that	the	attrition	rates	are	high	in	both	studies	(23	percent	in	Argentina,	and	39	percent	
by	the	2	year	follow‐up	in	South	Africa).	The	South	African	study	has	a	higher	point	estimate	
at	 2	 years	 than	 1	 year,	 but	 then	 shows	 the	 treatment	 effect	 decreasing	 over	 time	 when	
restricted	 to	 the	 sample	 present	 in	 both	 follow‐up	 years.	 It	 seems	 highly	 likely	 that	 the	
employment	outcomes	of	the	attritors	are	different	from	those	who	responded	to	the	survey,	
so	that	extreme	caution	should	be	used	in	interpreting	these	treatment	effects.	
	
                                                  10 
 
Moreover,	as	with	vocational	training,	a	key	concern	is	that	any	gains	to	those	receiving	the	
vouchers	come	at	the	expense	of	others	in	the	economy	who	would	have	otherwise	been	
hired.	 Groh	 et	 al.	 (2016a)	 find	 suggestive	 evidence	 of	 this	 in	 Jordan.	 When	 they	 examine	
impacts	 by	 region,	 and	 look	 at	 longer‐term	 time	 trends,	 they	 find	 a	 lasting	 impact	 of	 the	
subsidy	 on	 employment	 in	 the	 less	 populated	 labor	 markets	 outside	 of	 Amman.	 But	 the	
control	group	ends	up	with	a	lower	employment	rate	than	other	cohorts	of	graduates	had	
received	 in	 recent	 years,	 and	 direct	 survey	 evidence	 suggests	 that	 they	 were	 competing	
directly	with	the	treatment	group	for	some	jobs.	The	result	is	that	wage	subsidies	do	not	
seem	likely	to	have	increased	aggregate	employment	in	this	case.	
	
An	 alternative	 to	 giving	 subsidies	 to	 workers	 has	 been	 to	 give	 the	 subsidies	 to	 firms,	 to	
encourage	them	to	hire	more	workers.	De	Mel	et	al.	(2016)	test	the	impact	of	wage	subsidies	
given	to	microenterprises	to	encourage	them	to	hire	workers.	They	find	24	percent	of	firms	
use	the	subsidy	to	hire	a	worker,	resulting	in	an	increase	in	employment	while	the	subsidy	
is	in	effect.	But	the	dynamics	then	look	reasonably	similar	to	those	in	Figure	1,	with	much	of	
this	impact	disappearing	as	soon	as	the	subsidy	is	removed,	and	no	long‐term	impact	after	
two	years.		
	
A	 final	 use	 of	 subsidies	 is	 to	 use	 them	 to	 help	 prevent	 liquidity‐constrained	 firms	 from	
shedding	 workers	 during	 a	 temporary	 shock.	 This	 type	 of	 policy	 was	 another	 common	
response	to	the	global	financial	crisis.	The	idea	was	that	firms	suffering	a	temporary	demand	
shock	and/or	liquidity	shock	may	fire	workers	who	they	would	later	want	to	hire	back.	A	
subsidy	 may	 prevent	 them	 from	 firing	 these	 workers	 in	 the	 first	 place,	 and	 hasten	 the	
recovery	of	these	firms	if	hiring	and	firing	is	costly.	Bruhn	(2016)	evaluates	a	wage	subsidy	
program	 Mexico	 used	 during	 the	 global	 financial	 crisis,	 using	 difference‐in‐difference	
analysis	 to	 compare	 the	 employment	 trajectories	 of	 durable	 manufacturers	 in	 industries	
eligible	 for	 the	 program	 to	 those	 in	 industries	 ineligible	 for	 the	 program.	 She	 finds	
employment	to	be	6	to	13	percent	higher	in	the	affected	industries	during	the	program,	and	
to	grow	faster	after	the	crisis,	suggesting	the	program	helped	firms	to	recover	more	quickly	
from	the	shock.		
	
                                                  11 
 
This	accumulated	evidence	suggests	that	wage	subsidies	are	unlikely	to	be	very	effective	in	
generating	additional	employment	under	standard	labor	market	conditions,	and	may	also	
even	not	be	very	effective	in	playing	a	distributional	role	in	determining	which	individuals	
get	 to	 access	 jobs.	 However,	 it	 also	 suggests	 two	 potential	 use	 cases.	 The	 first	 is	 during	
conditions	of	large,	temporary	shocks.	Even	if	ALMPs	like	wage	 subsidies	have	no	lasting	
impacts,	 from	 a	 social	 protection	 viewpoint	 if	 they	 help	 households	 smooth	 temporary	
shocks,	then	this	might	be	justification	enough	for	their	use.	The	difficulty	here,	of	course,	is	
in	knowing	whether	or	not	the	shocks	are	temporary	or	structural	in	nature,	since	there	is	a	
danger	 in	 trying	 to	 maintain	 employment	 in	 industries	 that	 economic	 shocks	 make	
permanently	less	competitive.	Secondly,	the	evidence	suggests	that	wage	subsidies	may	be	
useful	for	temporary	employment	creation.	This	might	be	important	particularly	in	fragile	
economies,	where	large	youth	unemployment	raises	other	concerns.	In	this	vein,	short‐term	
evidence	from	Yemen	(McKenzie	et	al,	2016)	showed	positive	impacts	of	a	youth	internship	
program	which	subsidized	firms	to	take	on	interns,	although	the	outbreak	of	war	prevented	
analysis	of	any	lasting	impacts.	
	
Search and Matching Assistance

Many governments provide employment services in the form of helping job-seekers with preparing
resumes, hosting labor exchanges, and helping to match firms with workers seeking employment.
The review of Betcherman et al. (2004) was relatively favorable of these types of programs, noting
that since the costs are often low for providing such services, the cost-benefit ratios can be
favorable. However, this recommendation was largely based on developing country evidence, and
the review also noted, based on non-experimental evaluations from Brazil and Uruguay, that such
programs may be less effective in countries with large informal sectors if workers typically use
other channels to find jobs, and if they work at all, might work best for more educated job-seekers.

A competing view to this concern is that search and matching frictions may be greater in
developing countries, leaving more scope for improvements. The educational systems in many
countries may not be very good at signaling quality, and may teach content that is very different
from the skills employers are looking for. Information about vacancies may be more difficult to
come by if workers and firms are not all online, and match quality may be worse if informal

                                                   12 
 
networks are relied upon to fill vacancies. Improving this process could then reduce unemployment
directly (by filling existing vacancies) as well as indirectly (by lowering hiring costs so firms create
more vacancies).

Table 4 summarizes the results of 9 recent randomized experiments which have tested various
interventions designed to reduce information and search frictions, and to better match workers and
firms together. These incorporate several types of specific interventions. The work that tests public
intermediation services most directly is Dammert et al. (2015), who worked with the public service
provider in Peru to test whether providing information about job vacancies to registered job seekers
improves employment, and additionally whether sending these announcements by SMS message
helps further. Another example of providing information about job opportunities and recruiting
services is Jensen (2012), who connected rural villages in India to experienced recruiters at the
start of the business process outsourcing boom in India, providing information about this new
sector.

Two studies (Beam, 2016; Abebe et al, 2016b) test the impact of job fairs which bring firms and
workers together. The idea here is to give both firms and workers the opportunity to assess a large
number of possible matches at the same time, and become better informed about the range of job
opportunities and worker types. Two studies (Franklin (2015), Abebe et al. (2016a)) test the impact
of reducing the monetary costs of search for job seekers by offering transport subsidies to allow
them to travel to a different part of town where job opportunities are more commonly displayed.

The final approach used in four studies is to try and reduce the information frictions faced by firms
by providing more information about job-seekers. Abel et al. (2016) approach this by developing
a standardized reference letter format, and encouraging job-seekers to get this reference from
former employers. Groh et al. (2015), Abebe et al. (2016a), and Bassi and Nansamba (2017)
instead develop their own tests of a variety of soft and hard skills that might otherwise be difficult
for firms to observe, but which firms say they find valuable. Examples include information about
math ability, creativity, teamwork, attendance rates, and communication skills.

These types of programs tend to be much cheaper than vocational training and wage subsidies (if
taken up) in terms of cost per person invited to participate. The last column shows that all but one
of the studies that provide cost information have costs of $25 or lower per person assisted. That is,
the costs are one-fiftieth to one-hundredth of the cost of vocational training programs. The

                                                  13 
 
exception is Groh et al. (2015) who had a cost of $203 per person, since their enrollment and
testing procedure was rather expensive.

These lower costs certainly lower the bar in terms of treatment impacts needed in order for these
programs to pass cost-benefit tests. However, as seen in Table 4, out of the 10 different
interventions, only one (Jensen, 2012) finds a significant impact on employment, increasing
employment by 2.4 percentage points over 3 years. Dammert et al. (2015) find their intermediation
services tend to speed up the process of finding a job, with a significant employment impact after
1 month, but by 3 months the control group has caught up. Many of the other studies have small,
but positive, point estimates, with an average impact across the studies of 2.7 percentage points.
However, it is also worth noting that, apart from Jensen (2012), none of the studies measures
impacts beyond a year, so cannot measure whether there is any sustained employment impact.

A number of studies de-emphasize employment as an output, claiming their intervention helps in
improving the quality of jobs. They examine quality in different ways, sometimes defining quality
jobs as “permanent” or “formal” or simply as “wage employment” rather than self-employment.
For example, Beam (2016) finds attending a job fair results in a 10 percentage point increase in
formal employment, that is matched by a reduction in self-employment; Franklin (2015) finds
more positive impacts on permanent employment and being employed in an office than on total
employment; and Abebe et al. (2016a) find their job application workshop, which certified skills
and provided interview preparation, led to a 6.9 percentage point increase in permanent
employment.

However, there are two problems with justifying these programs on the basis of improved “job
quality.” The first is that there is a long and large literature that debates the extent to which
informality and self-employment are choices made by individuals, that have benefits associated
with them such as flexible labor hours and less taxation, rather than reflecting exclusion from
formal wage jobs (e.g. Maloney, 2004). Indeed, Abebe et al. (2016a) find no significant change in
job satisfaction from their treatment, despite the change to permanent employment. Secondly, as
seen in Table 4, none of these interventions shows a significant impact in labor earnings. While
the confidence intervals are wide in many cases, and therefore allow the possibility of these
interventions passing cost-benefit tests, the short time horizons and lack of significant impact on
earnings means that there is currently no evidence that they do.

                                                14 
 
A further point to note is how few direct hires occur through many of these interventions, and how
an important share of job offers are turned down by job-seekers. Groh et al. (2015) made more
than 1,000 matches between firms and workers. Youth rejected the opportunity of an interview 28
percent of the time, and when a job offer was received, they rejected the job offer or quit quickly
83 percent of time, resulting in only 9 hires that lasted one month. Bassi and Nansamba (2017)
report that only 2-4 percent of their job matches resulted in a worker being hired, and few workers
hired were still employed at the firm at their follow-up. Abebe et al. (2017b) invited 1,007 people
to their job fairs, 606 attended, but only 76 job offers were made and 14 people were hired. Beam
(2016) reports only two respondents from her job fair were working for one of the employers that
attended the fair at endline. As such, while the cost per person invited to treatment can be low, the
cost per individual actually placed in a job can be substantially higher – Groh et al. (2015) estimate
a cost of $22,000 in their case.

Several studies note that programs which allow workers to better certify their skill levels may have
differential effects for those with low and high skills. Being able to signal your skills can be good
if you have high skill levels, but disadvantageous if your skill levels are below those of other job-
seekers. The result might be better quality workers for firms, but simply a reallocation of who gets
work from less- to more-skilled workers.

What Do Policy Makers Expect of Such Programs and What Does Revealed Preference
Show?

The above discussions show that traditional active labor market programs have had at most modest
impacts on employment in most cases, with a typical intervention leading to a 2 percentage point
increase in employment that is usually not statistically significantly different from zero. Cost-
benefit calculations usually rely heavily on extrapolating statistically insignificant total earnings
gains over periods well beyond the timeframe of the study.

These impacts are much lower than expected by policy makers and program participants in many
cases. Hirshleifer et al. (2016) show this formally in the context of their vocational training
experiment in Turkey. There was strong demand for this training from participants, with courses
oversubscribed by a factor of two or more. Subjective expectations of the employment impact of
the program elicited from participants show that they expected a 32 percentage point increase in
the likelihood of employment, while staff in the government employment office expected the

                                                 15 
 
training to increase the likelihood of employment by 24 percentage points. These expectations far
exceed the actual impact of 2 percentage points seen in Table 1. Groh et al. (2016b) likewise show
that policy makers in Jordan expected the wage subsidy program to have lasting impacts on youth
employment, in contrast to the realized impacts.

Economists are also not immune to this tendency to think active labor market programs will be
more effective than they typically are. A first testament to this comes from a number of the studies
covered in this review being interventions designed by the researchers themselves, in addition to
those evaluating programs that governments were already going to implement. Secondly, Groh et
al. (2016b) carried out an expectations elicitation exercise when presenting the results of their
Jordan wage subsidy research. They find that development economists on average expected a 10
percentage point increase in employment after the subsidy had ended, compared to the 2.8
percentage point increase seen in Table 3.

However, while revealed preference shows that there are participants who think these programs
will be effective and therefore choose to participate in them, revealed preference also suggests that
the types of formal jobs and manufacturing jobs that many of these programs think of as
“successful” outcomes are not that valued by job-seekers. For example, Blattman and Dercon
(2016) randomize job-seekers into industrial jobs in large formal firms in Ethiopia, and find that
almost a third of people offered a job quit in the first month, and 77 percent within the first year,
and that workers experienced health problems from staying in this work. Similarly, Adhvaryu et
al. (2016) find female garment workers in India to have very high quit rates, losing almost 80
percent of the workers in their study over two years. These high rates of turnover are not consistent
with formal jobs being so valuable and desired that workers never want to leave once they attain
such positions.

The implicit assumption behind search and matching interventions in particular is often that search
frictions make it costly and difficult for firms to find workers. Simple queries of firms often find
firms saying that they find it hard to find the right workers. But one also sees firms being reluctant
to raise wages or spend more money in getting better matches. Groh et al. (2015) conducted a
survey in Jordan where they tracked firms as they opened up job vacancies, and found that only 6
percent of positions required more than 4 weeks to find a new employee, and most firms could, in
fact, fill jobs quite quickly. De Mel et al. (2016) similarly find firms in Sri Lanka say it would take

                                                  16 
 
7 days on average to fill positions. If it were particularly costly for firms to find and recruit workers,
we might expect a range of market solutions to emerge to help them lower these costs. Indeed,
there are a range of human resources consultants and executive talent firms that help firms fill
skilled and unusual positions. But the lack of an existing market alternative to many of the
interventions being trialed may suggest that firms do not face large search costs for other entry-
level positions.



What Types of Alternative Policies Show Promise?

Given the continued pressure for governments to be seen to be doing something to help people
find jobs, this lack of empirical evidence for the effectiveness of many traditional programs is
unlikely to be enough to cause them to be abandoned unless better alternatives can be found
instead. What might these alternatives be?

One set of alternative policies is to move away from interventions on the labor supply side and
focus more on policies to help firms overcome the obstacles they face in innovating, growing and
creating more jobs. Such private sector development programs also have a mixed record of
success, but there are examples (e.g. McKenzie, 2016 and the references therein) of programs that
have generated new jobs. A related approach is to help firms overcoming onerous regulations and
labor laws that limit their hiring. Bertrand and Crépon (2016) find that teaching South African
firms about labor laws and providing legal support to help them deal with these laws spurred new
employment generation.

On the labor supply side, the most promising interventions appear to be ones that help workers
access different labor markets, overcoming sectoral and, especially, spatial mismatches. Sectorial
mismatches arise when people are trapped in the wrong occupations as trade and technology
changes the demand for labor, or because of gender-segregation in society. Campos et al. (2016)
show that in Uganda that women who cross-over into male-dominated industries make three times
as much as women who remain in female-dominated industries. Hendra et al. (2016) report that a
demand-driven training program in the U.S. that aimed to train the unemployed in sectors which
were in demand resulted in a 14 percent income gain after two years. However, they also note that
these programs can be complex to run and need experienced providers.


                                                   17 
 
The largest market failures in labor markets occur across space, with very different employment
opportunities for the same skills depending on where individuals are located. We have seen some
of the more successful screening and matching interventions were ones that provided assistance
with learning about job opportunities in a different location (Jensen, 2012), or subsidizing job
search in different parts of the city (Franklin, 2015; Abebe et al. 2016a). More striking evidence
comes from Bryan et al. (2014) who show a small subsidy equal to the cost of a bus ticket spurred
new seasonal migration in Bangladesh, increasing household consumption by 30-35 percent during
the hungry season (they do not measure household income). Even larger gains can be had from
facilitating international migration. Gibson and McKenzie (2014) show that sending seasonal
workers to New Zealand increased per-capita incomes in Tonga and Vanuatu by more than 30
percent. Luthria and Malaulau (2013) discuss the process of facilitation used by governments and
the World Bank to allow this movement to happen. However, such facilitation is not always
successful, especially if it focuses only on barriers on the worker side. For example, Beam et al.
(2016) conducted several interventions in the rural Philippines to facilitate more international
migration, and were unsuccessful in generating additional international employment.

Concluding Lessons for Impact Evaluations

The modal study surveyed in this review is from 2016, reflecting rapid recent growth in the body
of evidence around active labor market interventions in developing countries. This body of work
has generated substantial new knowledge, but also suffers from several limitations that future work
can attempt to learn from:

    1) Given the likely effect size of active labor market interventions, sample sizes may need to
       be a lot larger. Based on the current body of research, it seems many interventions may
       have only a modest impact on employment, such as a 2 percentage point increase. In some
       cases, such as expensive training programs, such an effect size is too small to be
       economically meaningful. But cheaper programs such as search and matching assistance
       could still deliver gains that exceed the costs with these modest impacts. Taking as an
       example the 13 percent employment rate in the control group of Abel et al. (2016), a study
       needs to have 6,424 individuals in the treatment group and 6,424 in the control group to
       detect a 2 percentage point employment impact with 80 percent statistical power. This is
       much larger than existing studies.

                                                18 
 
    2) Measuring impacts over longer-time frames: the returns to these programs will differ
       substantially if they merely speed up the process of gaining employment versus having
       lasting impacts. Yet most studies measure impacts over at most 1 to 2 years, leaving them
       to speculate about cost-benefit on the basis of assumptions about how impacts vary over
       time. Tracking impacts over longer-time periods is therefore needed. Studies which link
       participants to administrative records (such as Attanasio et al, 2015) offer one promising
       way to do this.
    3) Limiting attrition: When the likely impact on employment is only 2 to 3 percentage points,
       and attrition rates are 10, 20, or even more than 30 percent, any treatment effects are
       dwarfed by attrition, and bounds that incorporate this attrition will be completely
       uninformative. Limiting attrition is particularly difficult given that so many ALMPs focus
       on youth, who tend to be more mobile and difficult to track over time. Serious investment
       in limiting attrition, combined with the use of administrative data is needed.
    4) Continued and improved careful measurement of costs: I was pleasantly surprised by the
       number of studies which did report the costs of the intervention, although a number still
       lack this key information. More work is needed to make clear average versus marginal
       costs in understanding the cost structure as pilot programs expand.
    5) Pre-specifying outcomes and heterogeneity: a number of studies fail to find a significant
       impact on either employment or earnings, but then emphasize impacts on a particular
       subgroup (such as one gender, or one skill level) or for one outcome (such as formal
       employment). Pre-specification of the primary outcomes and key heterogeneity of interest
       lessens concerns about multiple hypothesis testing.
    6) Testing placebo effects: Several studies find impacts despite almost no direct hires through
       the program they study (e.g. Beam (2016), Galasso et al. (2004), Levinsohn et al. (2014)).
       These studies raise the possibility that simply doing anything to support job-seekers may
       encourage them to keep exerting effort and search, so that what matters is their sense that
       someone wants them to succeed, not the particular policy pursued.5 Testing more formally
       this sort of placebo effect would be interesting in further work.
    7) Understanding general equilibrium better: a key concern with many of these policies
       directed at particular job-seekers is that they merely change who gets the jobs firms are
       advertising, without increasing the total number of jobs available. The ideal would be

                                                19 
 
       approaches like Crepón et al.’s (2013) experiment in France, which randomized at the local
       labor market level. Abebe et al. (2016a) attempt this within clusters in Ethiopia. A second
       approach is to randomize also at the firm level, as in Groh et al. (2015) and Abebe et al.
       (2016b) to attempt to measure if firms increase hiring. Further methodological work to
       develop additional ways to examine these spillovers is needed.



Concluding Lessons for Policy

Given the importance of jobs for poverty reduction, productivity growth, and social cohesion
(World Bank, 2012), it is no surprise that policy makers have actively pursued policies to try to
help job-seekers find jobs. But as this review has shown, an emerging body of evidence shows
these policies to generally be far less effective than policy makers, program participants, and
economists typically expect. It should be noted that this is not unique to ALMPs in developing
countries: Crépon and van den Berg (2016) in their review of largely developed country evidence
conclude that “the general outlook for ALMPs is rather grim.”

One reason for this lack of effectiveness is a positive one: labor markets (at least in urban areas)
in developing countries actually appear to work a lot better than is sometimes thought. It is easy
to imagine all types of constraints that might inhibit the functioning of labor markets, but in
practice firms appear to be able to fill many vacancies quite quickly, and workers turn down many
job opportunities and quit jobs frequently in pursuit of better opportunities. These facts do not
suggest workers and firms have great difficulties meeting one another, or that job-matches are so
rare and scarce that workers cling to every job opportunity they receive. There may be other
constraints that limit the number of jobs created, such as high minimum wages and inflexible labor
laws, or lack of access to financing and infrastructure that prevent firm growth, but the solution to
these issues lies outside of active labor market policies.

Nevertheless, while this suggests less of a role for traditional active labor market policies, there
still appears to be significant scope for improvements in dealing with structural and spatial
mismatches in labor. As the evidence here has shown, not everything that policy makers try works,
and so these new policy innovations should be piloted against competing alternatives and
accompanied by rigorous impact evaluations in order to test different approaches.


                                                 20 
 
References
Abebe, Girum, Stefano Caria, Marcel Fafchamps, Paolo Falco, Simon Franklin and Simon Quinn
(2016a) “Anonymity or Distance? Experimental Evidence on Obstacles to Youth Employment
Opportunities”, Mimeo. Stanford University.
Abebe, Girum, Stefano Caria, Marcel Fafchamps, Paolo Falco, Simon Franklin, Simon Quinn and
Forhad Shilpi (2016b) “All the fun of the (job) fair: Matching firms and workers in a field
experiment in Ethiopia”, Mimeo.
Abel, Martin, Rulof Burger, and Patrizio Piraino (2016) “The Value of Reference Letters:
Experimental Evidence from South Africa”, Mimeo. Harvard University.
Acevedo, Paloma, Guillermo Cruces, Paul Gertler and Sebastián Martínez (2017) “Living Up to
Expectations: How Job Training Made Women Better Off and Men Worse Off”, Mimeo.
Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Namrata Kala and Anant Nyshadham (2016) “The Skills to Pay the Bills:
Returns to On-the-job Soft Skills Training”, Mimeo. University of Michigan.
Adoho, Franck, Shubha Chakravarty, Dala Korkoyah, Mattias Lundberg and Afia Tasneem (2014)
“The Impact of an Adolescent Girls Employment Program: The EPAG Project in Liberia”, World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 6832.
Alzúa, María Laura, Guillermo Cruces and Carolina Lopez (2016) “Long-run effects of youth
training programs: Experimental Evidence from Argentina”, Economic Inquiry 54(4): 1839-59.
Attanasio, Orazio Arlen Guarín, Carlos Medina and Costas Meghir (2015) “Long-term impacts of
vouchers for vocational training: Experimental evidence for Colombia”, NBER working paper no.
21390.
Attanasio, Orazio, Adriana Kugler, and Costas Meghir (2011). ‘Subsidizing vocational training
for disadvantaged youth in Colombia: evidence from a randomized trial’, American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3): 188–220.
Bassi, Vittorio and Aisha Nansamba (2017) “Information Frictions in the Labor Market: Evidence
from a Field Experiment in Uganda”, Mimeo. UCL.
Beam, Emily (2016) “Do job fairs matter? Experimental evidence on the impact of job fair
attendance”, Journal of Development Economics 120: 32-40.
Beam, Emily, David McKenzie and Dean Yang (2016) “Unilateral Facilitation Does Not Raise
International Labor Migration from the Philippines”, Economic Development and Cultural
Change, 64(2): 323-68.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Bruno Crépon (2016) “Teaching labor laws: Results from a randomized
control trial in South Africa”, Mimeo. CREST.
Betcherman, Gordon, Karina Olivas and Amit Dar (2004) “Impacts of Active Labor Market
Programs: New Evidence from Evaluations with Particular Attention to Developing and Transition
Countries”, World Bank Social Protection Discussion Paper Series no. 29142.
                                             21 
 
Blattman, Christopher and Stefan Dercon (2016) “Occupational choice in early industrializing
societies: Experimental evidence on the income and health effects of industrial and entrepreneurial
work”, Mimeo. University of Chicago.
Blattman, Christopher and Laura Ralston (2015) “Generating employment in poor and fragile
states: Evidence from labor market and entrepreneurship programs”, Mimeo. Chicago.
Bruhn, Miriam (2016) “Can Wage Subsidies Boost Employment in the Wake of an Economic
Crisis?”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 7607.
Bryan, Gharad, Shyamal Chowdhury, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak (2014) “Underinvestment in
a Profitable Technology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh.” Econometrica
82(5):1671–1748
Campos, Francisco, Markus Goldstein, Laura McGorman, Ana Maria Boudet and Obert Pimhidzai
(2016) “Breaking the Metal Ceiling: Female Entrepreneurs who Succeed in Male-Dominated
Sectors”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 7503.
Card, David, Pablo Ibarrarán, Ferdinando Regalia, David Rosas, and Yuri Soares (2011) “The
Labor Market Impacts of Youth Training in the Dominican Republic.” Journal of Labor
Economics, 29(2): 267–300.

Card, David, Jochen Kluve and Andrea Weber (2015) “What Works? A Meta-Analysis of Recent
Active Labor Market Program Evaluations”, NBER Working Paper no. 21431

Cho, Yoonyoung, Davie Kalomba, Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak and Victor Orozco (2013) “Gender
Differences in the Effects of Vocational Training: Constraints on Women and Drop-out Behavior”,
IZA Discussion Paper no. 7408.

Crepón, Bruno, Esther Duflo, Marc Gurgand, Roland Rathelot and Philippe Zamora (2013) “Do
labor market policies have displacement effects? Evidence from a clustered randomized trial”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(2): 531-80.

Crepón, Bruno and Gerard van den Berg (2016) “Active Labor Market Policies”, Annual Review
of Economics 8: 521-46.

Dammert, Ana, Jose Galdo and Virgilio Galdo (2015) “Integrating mobile phone technologies into
labor-market intermediation: a multi-treatment experimental design”, IZA Journal of Labor and
Development 4:11

Dar, Amit and Zafiris Tzannatos (1999) “Active Labor Market Programs: A Review of the
Evidence from Evaluations”, World Bank Social Protection Working Paper.
De Mel, Suresh, David Mckenzie and Christopher Woodruff (2016) “Labor Drops: Experimental
Evidence on the Return to Additional Labor in Microenterprises”, World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper no. 7924



                                                22 
 
Diaz, Juan Jose and David Rosas (2016) “Impact Evaluation of the Job Youth Training Program
ProJoven”, IADB Working Paper no. 693.
Franklin, Simon (2015) “Location, Search Costs and Youth Unemployment: A Randomized Trial
of Transport Subsidies in Ethiopia”, CSAE Working Paper WPS/2015-11
Galasso, Emanuela, Martin Ravallion and Augustin Salvia (2004) “Assisting the Transition from
Workfare to Work: A Randomized Experiment”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 57(5):
128-42.
Gibson, John and David McKenzie (2014) “The Development Impact of a Best Practice Seasonal
Worker Policy”, Review of Economics and Statistics 96(2): 229-243.
Groh, Matthew, Nandini Krishnan, David McKenzie and Tara Vishwanath (2016a) “Do wage
subsidies provide a stepping stone to employment for recent college graduates? Evidence from a
Randomized Experiment in Jordan” Review of Economics and Statistics 98(3): 488-502.
Groh, Matthew, Nandini Krishnan, David McKenzie and Tara Vishwanath (2016b) “The impact
of soft skills training on female youth employment: Evidence from a randomized experiment in
Jordan” IZA Journal of Labor and Development 5:9.
Groh, Matthew, David McKenzie, Nour Shammout, and Tara Vishwanath (2015) “Testing the
importance of search frictions and matching through a randomized experiment in Jordan”, IZA
Journal of Labor Economics, 4:7, 2015
Hendra, Richard, David Greenberg, Gayle Hamilton, Ari Oppenheim, Alexandra Pennington,
Kelsey Schaberg, and Betsy Tessler (2016) “Encouraging Evidence on a Sector-Focused
Advancement Strategy: Two-Year Impacts from the WorkAdvance Demonstration”, MDRC
Washington D.C.
Hirshleifer, Sarojini, David McKenzie, Rita Almeida and Cristobal Ridao-Cano (2016) “The
Impact of Vocational Training for the Unemployed: Experimental Evidence from Turkey”,
Economic Journal 126: 2115-2146.
Honorati, Maddalena (2015) “The Impact of Private Sector Internship and Training on Urban
Youth in Kenya”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 7404.
Ibarrarán, Pablo, Jochen Kluve, Laura Ripani and David Rosas (2015) “Experimental Evidence on
the Long-Term Impacts of a youth training program”, IDB Working Paper no. 657.
Ibarrarán, Pablo, Laura Ripani, Bibiana Taboada, Juan Miguel Villa and Brigida Garcia (2014)
“Lifeskills, employability, and training for disadvantaged youth: Evidence from a randomized
evaluation design”, IZA Journal of Labor and Development 3:10
Jensen, Robert (2012) “Do labor market opportunities affect young women's work and family
decisions? Experimental evidence from India”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (2), 753–792.




                                             23 
 
Kelly, Tom (2016) “Middle East and North Africa jobs crisis ‘may import terror into Europe’”,
Daily Mail, 26 May, http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3611803/Middle-East-North-
Africa-jobs-crisis-import-terror-Europe.html
Kumar, Manoj and Douglas Busvine (2014) “Business looks to Modi to defuse India’s jobs time
bomb”, Reuters, May 4. http://www.reuters.com/article/us-india-election-employment-
idUSBREA4309B20140504
Levinsohn, James and Todd Pugatch (2014) “Prospective Analysis of a Wage Subsidy for Cape
Town Youth”, Journal of Development Economics 108:169-183.
Levinsohn, James, Neil Rankin, Gareth Roberts and Volker Schöer (2014) “Wage Subsidies and
Youth Employment in South Africa: Evidence from a Randomized Control Trial”, Stellenbosch
Economic Working Paper 02/14.
Luthria, Manjula and Mai Malaulau (2013) “Bilateral labor agreements in the Pacific: A
Development-Friendly Case Study” pp. 129-147 in Sebastian Saez (ed.) Let Workers Move:
Bilateral Labor Agreements to Increase Trade in Services. World Bank, Washington D.C.
Maitra, Pushkar and Subha Mani (2016) “Learning and Earning: Evidence from a Randomized
Trial in India”, Labour Economics, forthcoming.
Maloney, William (2004) “Informality Revisited”, World Development 32(7): 1159-1178.
McKenzie, David (2016) “Identifying and Spurring High-Growth Entrepreneurship: Experimental
Evidence from a Business Plan Competition”, Mimeo. World Bank.
McKenzie, David, Nabila Assaf and Ana Paula Cusolito (2016) “The Demand for, and Impact of,
Youth Internships: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Yemen”, IZA Journal of Labor
and Development, 5:1.
McKenzie, David and David Robalino (2010) “Jobs and the Crisis: What has been done, and where
to                go                 from                  here?”,                  Viewpoint
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/11076/585760VP03251j10BOX3
53808B01PUBLIC1.pdf?sequence=1
McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruff (2014) “What are we learning from business training
evaluations around the developing world?”, World Bank Research Observer, 29(1): 48-82.
Mohammed, Omar (2015) “Africa has the World’s fastest-growing labor force but needs jobs
growth to catch up” Quartz Africa, November 13, https://qz.com/547929/africa-has-the-worlds-
fastest-growing-labor-force-but-needs-jobs-growth-to-catch-up/
Montenegro, Claudio and Harry Patrinos (2014) “Comparable Estimates of Returns to Schooling
Around the World”, World Bank Policy Research Working paper no. 7020.
Mwiti, Lee (2016) “Robots could eat all of Ethiopia’s jobs; South Africa, Nigeria, and Angola not
safe either”, Mail and Guardian Africa, 31 January, http://mgafrica.com/article/2016-01-28-look-
away-ethiopia-south-africa-and-nigeria-the-robots-are-coming-for-your-jobs

                                               24 
 
Smith, Jeffrey and Petra Todd (2005) “Does Matching Overcome Lalonde’s Critique of Non-
experimental Evaluations”, Journal of Econometrics 125: 305-353.
World Bank (2004) Unlocking the Employment Potential in the Middle East and North Africa:
Toward      a     New     Social     Contract.    World    Bank,     Washington     D.C.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/343121468753030506/pdf/288150PAPER0Unlockin
g0employment.pdf
World Bank (2012) World Development Report 2013: Jobs. World Bank: Washington, D.C.




                                           25 
 
Table 1: Summary of Vocational Training Program Impacts
                                                                                                                                Impacts on:
Country     Study                     Population Sample Size Attrition       Time Frame   Employment Formal Employment             Earnings Formal Earnings Monthly income   Cost
Turkey      Hirshleifer et al. (2016) Unemployed   5,902        6%              1 year          2.0           2.0                     5.8           8.6        US$11.5     US$1700
                                                                                           [‐0.5, 4.4]    [‐0.4, 4.4]            [‐2.3, 13.8]   [‐0.5,17.7]
                                    Unemployed                     0%         2.5 years         n.r           ‐0.1                    n.r           ‐0.8        ‐US$3
                                                                                                          [‐3.3, 1.5]                           [‐7.9, 6.3]
Argentina   Alzúa et al. (2016)    Low‐income          407         0%        18 months         n.r.           8.0                     n.r.         64.9         US$83      US$1722
                                   Youth                                                                  [0.7, 15.3]                         [17.1, 112.7]
                                   Low‐income                      0%        33 months         n.r.           4.3                     n.r.         23.1         US$45
                                   Youth                                                                 [‐3.6, 12.1]                         [‐15.3, 61.5]
Colombia Attanasio et al. (2011) Low‐income           4,350      18.5%       14 months          4.5           6.4                    11.6          27.1        US$12.8     US$750
                                   Youth                                                    [1.0, 8.0]     [3.2, 9.6]             [4.5, 18.7]  [12.8, 41.3]
          Attanasio  et al. (2015) Low‐income                      0%      up to 10 years      n.r.           4.2                     n.r.         13.6        US$17.7
                                   Youth                                                                   [1.8, 6.6]                           [5.5, 21.8]
Dominican Card et al. (2011)       Low‐income         1,556       38%        12 months          0.7           2.2                    10.8           n.r.        US$10      US$330
Republic                           Youth                                                   [‐4.6, 6.0]    [‐2.3, 6.7]            [‐4.2, 25.7]
          Ibarrarán et al. (2014) Low‐income          5,000       20%     18 to 24 months      ‐1.3           1.8                     6.5           n.r.        US$8.5     US$700
                                   Youth                                                   [‐4.8, 2.2]    [‐0.3, 3.9]            [‐4.8, 17.9]
          Ibarrarán et al. (2015) Low‐income          5,000       34%          6 years         ‐1.4           2.6                    ‐1.9           n.r.       ‐US$2.3     US$700
                                   Youth                                                   [‐4.4, 1.6]    [‐0.5, 5.5]            [‐10.0,6.3]
          Acevedo et al. (2017) Low‐income            2,779      17.6%         3 years          0.7           n.r.                  n.r. (a)        n.r.         n.r.        n.r.
                                   Youth                                                   [‐4.0, 5.3]
India     Maitra and Mani (2012) Low income            658        25%        18 months          8.1           n.r.                   95.7           n.r.      US$2.4       US$13
                                   Women                                                   [2.2, 14.0]                           [5.6, 186.0]
Kenya     Honorati (2015)          Low‐income         2,100       23%        14 months          5.6            n.r                   29.7           n.r.      US$47.5     US$1150
                                   Youth                                                   [0.9, 10.3]                           [‐2.9, 62.3]
Malawi    Cho et al. (2013)        Low‐income         1,900       46%         4 months         n.r.           n.r.                  ‐19.6           n.r.       ‐US$5        n.r.
                                   Youth                                                                                         [‐63.9,24.7]

Peru        Diaz and Rosas (2016) Low‐income          4,509       35%        36 months           1.6                3.8             13.4            n.r.       n.r.        US$420
                                  Youth                                                       [‐3.3,6.5]        [0.3, 7.3]      [‐17.6, 44.4]
                                                      7,151        0%        36 months           n.r                4.5              n.r            n.r
                                                                                                                [‐0.1, 9.0]
Notes:
Timeframe refers to time since the end of the intervention before measuring follow‐up outcomes.
n.r. denotes not recorded. Estimates are the Intention‐to‐Treat estimates reported in different studies.
95 percent confidence intervals shown in parentheses.
(a) no impact on unconditional earnings reported. A negative and statistically significant impact on earnings conditional on working is reported.
Impacts on employment are in terms of percentage points, impacts on earnings in terms of percentage growth relative to control mean.
When study reports results for subgroups only, a weighted average is used to present the overall effect.



                                                                                             26 
 
Table 2: The Vocational Training Works Better for Women Myth
Country       Study                         Findings
Turkey        Hirshleifer et al. (2016)     Can't reject equality of impacts by gender
                                            Impacts only significant for males aged 25 and older
Argentina     Alzúa et al. (2016)           Impacts for men statistically different from women
                                            Impacts are only significant for men
Colombia      Attanasio et al. (2011)       Does not test for equality by gender
                                            Impacts only significant for women
              Attanasio  et al. (2015)      Does not test for equality by gender
                                            Impacts more significant for women
Dominican Card et al. (2011)                Can't reject equality of impacts by gender
Republic                                    No significant impact for either gender
              Ibarrarán et al. (2014, 2015) Does not test for equality by gender
                                            Significant impact on formal employment for men
              Acevedo et al. (2017)         Does not test for equality by gender
                                            No significant long‐run impact for either gender
Kenya         Honorati (2015)               Does not test for equality by gender
                                            Finds significant impacts for both men and women
Malawi        Cho et al. (2013)             Can't reject equality of impacts by gender
                                            No significant impact for either gender
Peru          Diaz and Rosas (2016)         Does not test for equality by gender
                                            Some significant impacts on formal employment for both




                                                                  27 
 
Table 3: Summary of Wage Subsidy Impacts
                                                                                                          Proportion using         Impact on
Country      Study                   Population           Sample Size Attrition    Time Frame In Effect       Subsidy      Employment Earnings
Argentina    Galasso et al. (2004)   Welfare recipients      548        22.5       18 months     Yes           0.011             1.7         n.r.
                                                                                                                                 [a]
Jordan       Groh et al. (2016a)     Female community        1349         8         6 months       Yes         0.503            38.4        228.3
                                     college graduates                                                                      [33.3, 43.5] [197, 260]
                                                                          4        14 months       No                            2.8        15.9
                                                                                                                             [‐3.4, 9.1]  [‐14,46]
                                                                          8        27 months       No                            1.4        14.0
                                                                                                                             [‐3.2, 9.8]  [‐17,45]
South Africa Levinsohn et al. (2014) Youth                   3064        23.0      12 months       No           0.02             7.4          14
                                                                                                                             [2.9, 11.9]   [‐9,37]
                                                                         39.2      24 months       No                            9.5         ‐19
                                                                                                                             [3.6,15.4]   [‐72,34]
Notes:
a. Paper did not provide standard errors, but this impact was not statistically significant.
Time Frame refers to timing since subsidy begun. In Effect denotes whether subsidy still being paid at time of survey.
n.r. denotes not reported
South African sample started with 4,009, but waited one year and re‐interviewed before starting intervention. Estimates here based on 2010 sample.
Impacts on Employment are in terms of percentage points, on Earnings are Percent increase on Control Mean.




                                                                        28 
 
Table  4: Evidence  on Search and Matching Assistance
                                                                                               Attrition                     Impact on
Country       Study                      Type of Assistance      Population        Sample Size   (%) Time Frame Employment Earnings             Cost
Ethiopia      Abebe  et al. (2016a)      transport subsidy       young                2097        6.5    8 months          4.0         0.1      $7.5
                                                                 Job‐seekers                                           [‐1.9,9.9]     [‐ 7,7]
                                         certifying hard skills young                 1778        6.5    8 months          2.0         5.4      n.r.
                                         + interview assistance Job‐seekers                                            [‐4.0,8.0]    [‐9, 20]
              Franklin (2015)            transport subsidy       Unemployed           877         31     10 months         6.8       n.r. (b)   $9
                                                                 Youth                                               [‐ 0.8, 14.4]
              Abebe  et al. (2016b)      job fair                18‐29 year old       4059        6.5    4 months         ‐1.2         6.6      $14
                                                                 Job‐seekers                                           [‐8.0,5.6]    [‐9,23]
India         Jensen (2012)              connecting to           young                1534         6       3 years         2.4         n.r.     $12
                                         recruiters              women                                                  [0.2,4.6]
Jordan        Groh et al. (2015)         certifying soft and hardunemployed           1354        19     5 months          2.4       n.r. (a)   $203
                                         skills & matching       tertiary graduates                                   [‐4.7,+9.4]
Peru          Dammert et al. (2015)      information about       Job‐seekers          1280         7      1 month          6.2       n.r. (a)   $25
                                         job vacancies                                                                [0.9, 11.5]
                                                                                      1280         7     3 months         ‐0.2         n.r. 
                                                                                                                      [‐6.7, 6.3]
Philippines Beam (2016)                  Attending job fair      20‐35 year           865         3.5    10 months         2.7         n.r.     $3.5
                                                                 olds                                                [‐13.6,19.0]
South AfricaAbel  et al. (2016)          encouraged to use       Unemployed           1267        17     3 months          2.0         n.r.
                                         reference  letter       Youth                                                [‐2.3, 4.3]
Uganda        Bassi  and Nansamba (2017)certifying soft skills Young                  515        15.2    12 months         5.8         ‐ 6.3    $19
                                                                 Job‐seekers                                         [‐ 3.6, 15.2] [ ‐42,29]
Notes:
Peru estimates are  for pooled treatment effect across three  subtreatments which all  provided job vacancy information.
a. Study does not report unconditional  earnings estimates. No significant impact found on earnings conditional  on work.
b. No significant impact on log earnings conditional  on work at 4 month follow‐up.
ITT estimates reported except for Beam (2016) where  several  incentives used in encouragement design, and LATE impact of attending
job fair after receiving attendance  voucher is reported.
Impacts on employment are  in terms of percentage  points, impacts on earnings in terms of percentage  growth relative  to control  mean.


                                                                          29 
 
Figure 1: Trajectory of Impact from a Wage Subsidy Program in Jordan

                      .4
      Treatment Effect on Employment
           .1        .2
                      0        .3




                            jan2010     jul2010                jan2011   jul2011   jan2012   jul2012      jan2013
                                                                           Time

Source: Groh et al. (2016a). Figure shows month by month impacts of a wage subsidy on employment, along with 95
percent confidence intervals. The two vertical lines shows the start and end of the subsidy period.

Endnotes
                                                            
1
  A complementary approach is meta-analysis, with Card et al. (2016) pooling together ALMP estimates from both
developed and developing countries, including both randomized and quasi-experimental evaluations.
2
  Another category of ALMPs that aims to increase labor demand are public works programs. There have been fewer
recent experimental evaluations of these programs, although evaluations are in progress in Côte d’Ivoire and Sierra
Leone. Blattman and Ralston (2015) and World Bank (2012) survey the existing evidence.
3
  In addition to the 33 month impact reported in Table 1, Alzúa et al. (2016) also report an impact on formal
employment (but not earnings) at 48 months. This is smaller still, at 1.4 percent, and not statistically significant.
Acevedo et al. (2017) also report 12 month impacts, which are positive and significant on employment for women,
and negative and significant on employment for men.
4
  Acevedo et al. (2017) find no impact for either gender at 36 months, but do find stronger impacts for women at 12
months.
5
  Franklin (2015) tests whether merely surveying people about job search leads to changes in behavior, and finds it
does not.




                                                                         30 
 
