                                                     WPS8023


Policy Research Working Paper                       8023




       Entry and Exit, Multi-Product Firms,
            and Allocative Distortions
                           Roberto N. Fattal Jaef




Development Research Group
Macroeconomics and Growth Team
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8023


  Abstract
 This paper proposes a multi-product model of firm dynamics                         analysis accounts for these channels, the traditional focus on
 to understand the implications of allocative distortions for                       long-run gains in Total Factor Productivity from reversing
 the decisions of firms to enter, exit, and supply products to                      misallocation strongly underestimates the welfare gains that
 the market. These margins of adjustment have been largely                          accrue when accounting for transitional dynamics. Cali-
 neglected in the literature yet have direct contributions to                       brating the distortions to China in 1998, the analysis finds a
 welfare and productivity. The paper finds that when the                            welfare gain of 32 percent and a steady-state gain of 10 percent.




  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Growth Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author
  may be contacted at rfattaljaef@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
      Entry and Exit, Multi-Product Firms, and
                          Allocative Distortions∗
                                  Roberto N. Fattal Jaef†




    JEL CODES: O41, O43, D61
    Keywords: misallocation, entry and exit, multi-product, welfare
   ∗ We   thank Andy Atkeson, Francisco Buera, Ariel Burstein, Hugo Hopenhayn, Lee Ohanian,
Richard Rogerson, Luis Serven, and Venky Venkateswaran for helpful comments and suggestions.
We also thank seminar participants at Stanford University, The Society of Economic Dynamics, and
The World Bank’s Research Group. A previous version of this paper circulated as Entry, Exit, and Mis-
allocation Frictions. The views presented here do not represent the views of the World Bank Group
or any of it member countries. All errors are omission are the sole responsibility of the author.
    † The World Bank, Development Research Group. Macroeconomics and Growth Division. 1818 H
st NW MC 3-353, Washington, DC 20433; rfattaljaef@gmail.com
1     Introduction
Resource misallocation across ﬁrms is pervasive in developing countries1 . The ev-
idence shows that an excessive amount of production factors are allocated to un-
productive ﬁrms at the expense of the productive ones, a pattern that deviates from
the optimal prescription of equalizing marginal returns across producers2 . Interpret-
ing the evidence as an outcome of underlying allocative distortions, various studies
have shown that a reversal of these distortions would bring about substantial gains
in Total Factor Productivity ( TFP), hence postulating resource misallocation as a
promising candidate for reconciling the large differences in economic development
that exist across countries. A notable omission in the majority of these studies, how-
ever, is the entry and exit of ﬁrms, and the ﬁrms’ adjustments to the number of
products supplied to the market. These decisions are not only empirically relevant
margins of adjustment at the ﬁrm level3 but also have direct effects on welfare and
TFP. The goal of this paper is to bring these margins of adjustment to the forefront
of the analysis of misallocation, investigating the extent to which allocative distor-
tions affect the product-portfolio composition of ﬁrms and their decisions to enter
and exit production, and quantifying their implications for welfare and TFP.
    We ﬁnd that when the response in the number of varieties is taken into account,
the focus on long-run measures of aggregate productivity growth fails to capture
a signiﬁcant share of the welfare gain that accrues when considering transitional
dynamics. For instance, a liberalization of distortions calibrated to match the pat-
terns of taxation and subsidization across ﬁrms in China in 1998 leads to a 10% im-
    1 Salient examples in the literature establishing this fact are Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and the many

subsequent replications of their methodology to other countries; and Bartelsman et al. (2013) with its
respective set of replications.
   2 Our qualiﬁcation of the prescription to reallocate resources across ﬁrms as optimal is accurate

only under a restrictive but typically imposed set of assumptions, namely competitive factor markets
and costless mobility of resources across ﬁrms. Asker et al. (2014) warn, however, about the potential
efﬁciency in the observation of dispersion in the marginal return to capital in a context where there
are adjustment costs to the mobility of capital across ﬁrms. Throughout the rest of the paper we
shall continue with the initial view of interpreting dispersion in marginal returns as an outcome of
distortions.
   3 Roberts and Tybout (1996), for instance, studied the micro patterns of job turnover in the devel-

oping economies of Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Morocco. They found entry and exit to account
for about one-half of overall job turnover in these economies. Davis and Haltiwanger (1990) found
this share to be about one-third in the United States. In terms of multi-variety production in devel-
oping countries, Goldberg et al. (2010) document the prevalence of multi-product ﬁrms and product
turnover in India



                                                   2
provement in long-run TFP, while the welfare gains accounting for the short-run
dynamics amount to 32%4 . While the motivation in the literature for focusing on the
long-run implications of misallocation frictions stemmed primarily from the inter-
est in thinking about these frictions as drivers of cross-country differences in TFP,
this motivation did not create any concern about mis-measuring welfare because the
static nature of the underlying models implied that there was no distinction between
the short and the long-run. Once entry, exit, and multi-variety production are taken
into account, however, the number of varieties and the distribution of ﬁrms across
productivity levels constitute the dynamic factors that give meaning to the distinc-
tion between short and long run. What our ﬁndings dictate is that the adjustment
that occurs to these dynamic variables along the transition path is essential for fully
capturing the welfare gains from reforms that reverse allocative distortions.
   Our model brings the Bernard et al. (2011) model of multi-variety production into
the Luttmer (2007) model of ﬁrm dynamics. The economy consists of a unit mass of
differentiated products, each of which is a CES composite of a continuum of dif-
ferentiated varieties. Upon entry, ﬁrms are endowed with a ﬁrm-wide productivity
term and a time invariant realization of product attributes for the production of a
variety of each of the products in the unit measure. Firm-wide productivity evolves
stochastically over time, leading to ﬁrm growth over the life cycle conditional on sur-
vival. Product attributes are drawn independently and identically, across goods and
ﬁrms, from a time-invariant probability distribution function. The ﬁrm’s portfolio
of products is limited by a ﬁxed cost of provision. Together with ﬁxed costs of op-
eration, these costs determine whether ﬁrms stay or exit operations and the number
of products they supply to the market. Misallocation across intermediate producers
is created, as in Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), through a distribution of idiosyn-
cratic revenue taxes that are positively correlated with the distribution of ﬁrm-wide
productivity of the ﬁrms. The correlated nature of distortions is intended to make
the model consistent with the empirical observation of unproductive ﬁrms being too
large and productive ﬁrms being too small in developing countries relative to the
United States5 . Since idiosyncratic distortions in the data are measured at the ﬁrm
   4 These numbers follow from calibrating distortions in the model to Hsieh and Klenow (2007)’s

estimate of the regression coefﬁcient between the log of TFPR and the log of TFPQ across ﬁrms in
China in 1998, which amounts to 0.5, and subtracting the same estimate for the United States, which
amounts to 0.1.
   5 This property of the ﬁrm size distribution in developing countries has been extensively docu-

mented in the literature. See, for instance, the works of Hsieh and Klenow (2009), Neumeyer and


                                                3
or establishment level, rather than at the product level, we assume the same degree
of taxation across all products within a ﬁrm.
   The justiﬁcation for the divergence in welfare metrics lies in the increase in the
number of ﬁrms that takes place in the long run equilibrium with distortions. In
a context where entering ﬁrms’ idiosyncratic productivity grows over time condi-
tional on survival, a proﬁle of distortions that taxes the most productive ﬁrms and
subsidizes the least productive ones constitutes a redistribution of proﬁts from the
future to the present. Combined with positive discounting of future proﬁt streams,
this redistribution is less detrimental for the expected proﬁts of entrants than it is
of average proﬁts among incumbents. This relative advantage of entrants’ expected
proﬁtability requires an increase in entry, and hence in the number of ﬁrms, to re-
store the equilibrium. When allocative distortions are removed, then, a process of
ﬁrm decumulation begins along which resources are reallocated away from entry
and ﬁxed operation costs and into the production of goods. This productive real-
location gives a temporary boost to consumption that is not captured in measures
of long run consumption growth. The transition path is also characterized by a re-
allocation of products from low to high productivity ﬁrms, a feature that reinforces
the temporary overshoot in consumption that is allowed for by the withdrawal of
distortions.
   Despite becoming an imperfect measure of welfare, the long-run gains in aggre-
gate productivity were at the core of the motivation for exploring cross-country dif-
ferences in allocative efﬁciency. Hence, in the second part of the quantitative analysis
we seek to establish a tighter connection with the literature by offering a quantita-
tive evaluation of the contributions of entry, exit, and multi-variety production for
the purpose of accounting for cross-country differences in aggregate productivity. In
order to transparently identify the contributions of the new margins, we compare
the long run changes in TFP in three alternative long run allocations where entry,
exit, and multi-variety production are at play sequentially. First, we consider a liber-
alization that reallocates resources across ﬁrms according to the distribution of ﬁrms
across productivity in the distorted allocation. This source of gain, which we label
as static, is the one that Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and the many replications of it
in other countries capture. Next, we relax the assumption of constant distribution
of products and solve for the efﬁcient product-portfolio allocation, while still hold-
Sandleris (2009), Casacuberta and Gandelman (2009), Camacho and Conover (2010)


                                              4
ing constant the number of ﬁrms and the exit productivity thresholds. This alloca-
tion captures the static gains plus the gains from further reallocating more products
away from unproductive ﬁrms and towards productive ones. Lastly, we solve for
the overall gains accounting for the efﬁcient entry and exit decisions.
    We ﬁnd that while the product-reallocation channel of efﬁciency gain reinforces
the productivity improvements from static reallocation, entry and exit decisions tend
to offset it, making the differential change in TFP relative to the static benchmark be
in general ambiguous. The offsetting effect of the number of ﬁrms predominates at
low to middle degrees of distortions, where the misallocation from high to low pro-
ductivity ﬁrms is still weak in terms of harming allocative efﬁciency but is strong in
terms of the ﬂattening of the time-series proﬁle of proﬁts, which drove the increase
in entry. As the log-linear relationship between distortions and productivity gets
more sloped, the relative strengths revert. While ambiguous in general, the majority
of the existing estimates of the elasticity between distortions ( TFPR) and produc-
tivity ( TFPQ) in developing countries fall in the range where the mitigating and
magnifying forces almost cancel out6 . This suggests that while the consideration of
margins of adjustment that affect the number of varieties may not have a radical ef-
fect over the role attributed to resource misallocation in accounting for cross-country
gaps in TFP, it does substantially affect the overall gains to be reaped from efforts to
implement reforms that alleviate countries from allocative distortions.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model, and
characterizes a stationary equilibrium. In Section 3, we calibrate parameter values
and perform the quantitative experiments. We begin with the welfare analysis and
the shift focus to the long-run implications. Concluding remarks are in section 4.


2     The Economic Environment
The model economy embeds Bernard et al. (2011)’s theory of multi-product ﬁrms
into Luttmer (2007)’s closed economy model of ﬁrm dynamics, and introduces mis-
allocation frictions in the form of idiosyncratic taxes operating at the level of the
    6 Hsieh  and Klenow (2007) report slopes of 0.5, 0.4, and 0.1 for China, India, and the United States,
respectively. Chen and Irarrazabal (2015) estimate the elasticity to be between 0.6 and 0.5 in Chile
during the period of 1980-1996. Cirera et al. (2017) report values ranging between 0.4 and 0.6 in
Ghana, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Cote D’ Ivoire. When subtracting the 0.1 estimate for the US, we get
that all of these estimates fall between 0.3 and 0.5 which, as we show later in the paper, is around the
region where the two forces neutralize each other.


                                                    5
aggregate revenue of the ﬁrm. Motivated by the empirical pattern of idiosyncratic
distortions in the data, these frictions are assumed to be positively and log-linearly
related to ﬁrm-wide productivity.


2.1   Household’s Problem
There is a representative household with preferences of the form ∑∞    t
                                                                  t=0 β [ log (Ct )],
where Ct is the single ﬁnal good produced in the economy. Lifetime utility maxi-
mization is done subject to a standard inter-temporal budget constraint of the form:


                              Σ∞
                               t=0 Qt [Ct − Wt L − Tt ] ≤ M0

where Qt denote inter-temporal prices, M0 is the initial endowment of wealth (claims
to the proﬁts and losses from the initial distribution of ﬁrms), and Tt represents the
lump-sum tax/transfer that balances the deﬁcit or surplus from the collection of id-
iosyncratic taxes and subsidies. Notice that by rebating this revenue back to (or tak-
ing it away from) the household, we are ensuring that all the welfare implications of
misallocation frictions manifest solely through their effect on aggregate productiv-
ity, rather than from wasteful consumption of goods from the government. Lastly,
notice that the inter-temporal accumulation of wealth pins down the economy’s in-
                             Q t +1
terest rate, given by Rt =    Qt .



2.2   Technologies
There is a single ﬁnal good in the economy that is produced according to the follow-
ing CES composite of a continuum of measure one of intermediate inputs:
                                                                     σ
                                               1       σ −1        σ −1
                                      Y=           qk    σ
                                                              dk                 (2.1)
                                           0

We assume that there is a representative producer of the ﬁnal good that operates
under perfect competition.
   Each of the intermediate goods is, in turn, another CES composite of a contin-
uum of horizontally differentiated varieties of each product supplied in monopolis-
tically competitive markets by an endogenously determined measure of heteroge-




                                                   6
neous ﬁrms:                                                                          ρ
                                                          ρ −1                     ρ −1
                              qk =       qd
                                          k   (ω , λ)       ρ    dΩ (ω , λ)                      (2.2)

Varieties are differentiated by the ﬁrm-wide productivity level of the producer sup-
plying (ω ) it and the product-speciﬁc productivity attribute (λ) . We explain later
the origin of these idiosyncratic characteristics of the ﬁrms, as well as the decision
process involved in determining the mass of producers and the product-portfolio.
For now, it sufﬁces to note that Ω (ω , λ) denotes the measure of producers with this
productivity mix.
    Proﬁt maximization yields the following demand functions for a variety eω +λ of
a product k:

                                                     ρ−σ
                               qd
                                k ( ω , λ ) = ( Pk )     pk (ω , λ )−ρ Y

where the price index of a good k, Pk , and the price of a given variety of the good k,
pk (ω , λ), are in units of ﬁnal good.
    Price indices, in turn, are given by the following expressions:

                                                                         1
                                                     1                  1− σ
                                                          1− σ
                                      P=                 Pk    dk                                (2.3)
                                                 0

                                                                                    1
                                                                                   1− ρ
                                                          1− ρ
                             Pk =        pk (ω , λ)              dΩ (ω , λ)                      (2.4)

where we are adopting the ﬁnal good as the numeraire, so P = 1.
    Product varieties are supplied in monopolistically competitive markets and are
produced according to a linear production function with labor as the only input:

                                                                   1
                                                         ω +λ    ρ −1
                                qk (ω , λ) = e                          lk ( ω , λ )

    Productivity is determined by ﬁrm-wide and product-speciﬁc terms, eω and eλ
respectively7 . Combined with ﬁxed costs of supplying goods, the latter determines
the portfolio of products supplied by the ﬁrm, while the former generates hetero-
geneity across ﬁrms in factor demands, product provision, and proﬁtability.
   7 Notice  that we are treating the product attribute as part of the productivity of the ﬁrm. As in
Bernard et al. (2011) identical results are obtained if the product attributes enter revenues and prof-
itability through the household’s demand functions.


                                                         7
   In terms of the distortions that generate misallocation in the model, these take
the form of idiosyncratic taxes and subsidies to the ﬁrm’s revenue. We adopt the
assumption that there is heterogeneity in the degree of taxation across ﬁrms but we
assume this rate to be the same across products within a ﬁrm. This is the assump-
tion that we consider suits best the nature of the data from which we calibrate the
functional form of the distribution of distortions. Since ﬁrm-level data are typically
reported at the ﬁrm or establishment level, reported statistics about distributions of
TFPR and TFPQ can only be informative about ﬁrm-wide or establishment-wide,
rather than product speciﬁc, distortions. Thus, the combination of misallocation fric-
tions with the multi-product feature of the model creates another layer of misalloca-
tion across ﬁrms, namely the distribution of products across producers. However it
obliges us to abstract from a channel of misallocation within ﬁrms.
   While we specify a particular functional form governing the degree of relation-
ship between idiosyncratic distortions and physical productivity once we get to the
quantitative analysis, at this stage we require that whatever functional form we im-
pose, it does not create reversals in the positive relationship that exists between pro-
ductivity and proﬁtability in the undistorted equilibrium. That is, while it is cer-
tainly the case that distortions that correlate positively with productivity ﬂatten the
positive relationship between productivity and proﬁtability, we rule out cases where
a relatively unproductive ﬁrm is turned more proﬁtable than a relatively more pro-
ductive one. We ﬁnd empirical support for this assumption in that all of the existing
estimates in the literature of the regression coefﬁcient between the log of TFPR and
the log of TFPQ are far below one.
   Letting τω denote the idiosyncratic distortion corresponding to a ﬁrm with ﬁrm-
wide productivity eω , the price and the labor demand associated with the provision
of variety eλ of a product k solves the following static proﬁt maximization problem:

                                      ρ−σ                1                  ρ −1
                                             1
                                            Y ρ eω +λ
                                       ρ                 ρ
            maxlk (ω,λ) (1 − τω ) Pk                         lk ( ω , λ )     ρ    − wlk (ω , λ)

which yields the following expressions for labor demand, output, revenues, and
proﬁts
                                                                                         ρ
                                  (ω +λ)             ρ   ρ−σ     Y             ρ−1
                  l (ω , λ) = e            (1 − τω ) P                                             (2.5)
                                                                 wρ             ρ




                                                 8
                                                                                         ρ −1
                                  (ω +λ)            ρ    ρ−σ      Y           ρ−1
                R (ω , λ) = e              (1 − τω ) P                                              (2.6)
                                                               w ρ −1          ρ

                                                                                         ρ −1
                v                 (ω +λ)           ρ     ρ−σ      Y          ρ−1                1
              π (ω , λ) = e                (1 − τω ) P                                              (2.7)
                                                               w ρ −1         ρ                 ρ
   Notice that we have suppressed the k subscript denoting the type of good in the
price index of the ﬁrms’ proﬁt functions in anticipation of the fact that, as a result
of the assumptions about the independence of the distribution of product attributes
and the commonality of the ﬁxed cost of provision across products and ﬁrms, goods
are identical to each other. This will become more evident below.


2.3   Product-Portfolio Determination
Firms earn positive proﬁts from the provision of each good. To establish a limit to
the menu of products actually supplied to the market, we assume that such activity
entails a ﬁxed labor-denominated cost of marketing equal to f p . Furthermore, we
assume these ﬁxed costs to be identical across goods and across ﬁrms, and constant
over time. The total proﬁts earned from the provision of a given variety of a product,
then, are equal to:

                                                                                  ρ −1
                           (ω +λ)              ρ   ρ−σ     Y          ρ−1                1
           π (ω , λ) = e            (1 − τω ) P                                            − w fp
                                                         w ρ −1        ρ                 ρ

   Given the assumption of no reversals in the ranking of proﬁts and productivity
induced by the introduction of distortions, the total proﬁts of the ﬁrms are strictly
increasing in ﬁrm productivity and product attributes. Therefore, the ﬁxed cost of
provision implies that there exists a cutoff level such that varieties with attributes
above it are supplied, and varieties with attributes below it are dropped. The cutoff
attribute is the one at which the proﬁts of a given product attribute are equal to zero.
Solving for it in the expression above yields:

                              ¯                                         −1
                            eλ(ω ) = (Π)−1 eω (1 − τω )ρ                     fp                     (2.8)

where Π, deﬁned below, collects all the aggregate variables and parameters that de-
termine the factor of proportionality of ﬁrms’ outcomes with respect to idiosyncratic



                                                   9
variables:
                                                        ρ −1
                                        Y       ρ−1            1
                          Π = Pρ−σ                                                 (2.9)
                                       (wρ )     ρ             ρ

   Firms with higher ﬁrm-wide productivity confront a lower threshold for the at-
tribute that guarantees positive proﬁtability from the provision of a given product
and, hence, are able to supply a wider range of products to the market. Idiosyncratic
distortions interfere with this decision. Firms that are taxed at a positive rate would
ﬁnd it harder to supply products to the market, while ﬁrms that are subsidized will
ﬁnd it easier. This mechanism of transmission of misallocation frictions to aggregate
productivity is new to the literature and is one of the forces that we are interested in
characterizing quantitatively.


2.4   Distribution and Evolution of Idiosyncratic Productivity
Firms are endowed, upon entry, with a realization of ﬁrm-wide productivity and
a continuum of product attributes for each of the product types in the unit mea-
sure. We assume that entrants start off at a ﬁrm-wide productivity level consistent
with the ratio of the average size of entrants to incumbents in the US data, and then
fan out over time according to a stochastic process. Attributes for each product, on
the other hand, are drawn independently and identically from a known distribu-
tion F eλ . Unlike ﬁrm-wide productivity, we assume that the product attribute is
constant throughout the life-cycle of the ﬁrm.
   Firm dynamics are driven by the stochastic process for ﬁrm-wide productivity. I
parameterize such process taking a discrete-time random walk approximation to a
Brownian motion with drift µ and variance σ2 . Following Stokey (2008), I assume
that given current log-productivity ω , next period’s log-productivity could give an
upward jump of size h, with probability α, or a downward jump also of size h, with
probability (1 − α) . The discrete time approximation of the drift and variance of the
process is
                                   µ ∆ t = (2α − 1) h

                                 σ 2 ∆ t = 4α (1 − α ) h2

   The appeal of the discrete time random walk approximation of the Brownian
motion is that it easily maps into the model of Luttmer (2007), who shows that the
resulting stationary distribution from such a stochastic process displays a right-tail

                                           10
of the cumulative distribution function that is of the Pareto type, which constitutes
an accurate characterization of the right tail of the ﬁrm size distribution in the United
States. In our model with multi-product ﬁrms the mapping from ﬁrm-wide produc-
tivity to size is mediated by the product-attribute distribution but, given the latter, it
is still true that there is a tight link between the parameters of the binomial process
and the tail of the size distribution.


2.5    Aggregation within Firms
Let us ﬁrst characterize the aggregation of product-speciﬁc outcomes within ﬁrms.
This is greatly simpliﬁed by the iid assumption of the product-attribute distribu-
tion. Together with the law of large numbers, they imply that averages across the
unit-continuum of products are equal to the corresponding average of each product.
Aggregate productive employment, revenue, and proﬁts within the ﬁrm are thus
given by:


                   L (ω ) = Π (ρ − 1) eω (1 − τω )ρ      ¯
                                                                 eλ dF eλ              (2.10)
                                                        eλ(ω )


                  R (ω ) = wΠ (ρ − 1) eω (1 − τω )ρ          ¯
                                                                     eλ dF eλ          (2.11)
                                                            eλ(ω )


             π (ω ) = wΠ (ρ − 1) eω (1 − τω )ρ      ¯
                                                            eλ dF eλ        − w ∗ fc   (2.12)
                                                   eλ(ω )

     The expressions show the transparent way in which ﬁrm-wide productivity inter-
acts with the product-scope decision of the ﬁrm in turning into observable variables
at the ﬁrm level, such as employment and sales. Conditional on a product portfolio,
determined by the cutoff-attribute of the marginal product supplied to the market
 ¯
eλ(ω ) , more productive ﬁrms employ more workers, generate more revenue, and are
more proﬁtable. This is the standard relationship between productivity and size im-
plied by single product models. With multi-product ﬁrms, the elasticity of ﬁrm-level
variables with respect to ﬁrm-wide productivity gets magniﬁed by the endogeneity
of the product scope of the ﬁrms. More productive ﬁrms also get to produce a wider
range of products, which in turns expands the demand for labor, the sales, and the
proﬁts. By the same token, this same force operates to magnify the distortive effect
of allocative distortions. Not only will ﬁrms with higher taxes produce and earn less


                                           11
from each product, but they shall also provide fewer varieties to the market. This is
a novel layer of misallocation that we are able to take into account by means of our
multi-product structure.


2.6   Entry and Exit
Until now, we have dispensed from carrying a time subscript in the description of the
model, as we were characterizing static decisions for which a time dimension was
irrelevant. To decide about entry and exit, however, ﬁrms are looking ahead into
future proﬁtability so, unless we restrict to stationary allocations, we must bring a
time subscript into the model.
   The value of an operating producer with productivity eω is characterized by the
following equation:

                 o
                υt (ω ) = πt (ω ) − wt f c + Rt (1 − δ) Et υt+1 ω |ω

where πt (ω ) is deﬁned in equation 2.12, with the addition of a time subscript to
the aggregate variables absorbed in Πt . Firms discount the future at the market
interest factor, Rt , augmented by an exogenous death probability δ, orthogonal to
ﬁrm characteristics. The main goal of this shock is to account for the exit of ﬁrms
from across the entire size distribution, a feature that we see in the data but would
be absent in the model if exit were to be purely endogenous.
   The value of the ﬁrm, then, is given by

                                                        o
                             υt (ω ) = max xt (ω ) {0, υt (ω )}

with xt (ω ) encoding the exit decision of the ﬁrm, being equal to 1 if it stays in oper-
ation, and 0 otherwise.
   In terms of entry, prospective entrants compare the value of a labor-denominated
entry cost f e with the value under the entrant’s productivity eωe . Free entry from
an inﬁnite pool of producers ensures that entry costs and expected valuation are
equalized in equilibrium:

                              w t f e = R t (1 − δ ) υ t +1 ( ω e )

Notice that we are assuming a one period time to build before the entrant starts

                                              12
operations.


2.7     Equilibrium and Macroeconomic Variables
The remaining step in the characterization of the equilibrium is to aggregate the out-
comes of the ﬁrm up to the level of the macroeconomy. Key for the aggregation is the
distribution of ﬁrms across ﬁrm-wide productivity, which we denote with Mt (ω ).
This distribution evolves according to the following law of motion:


                                    Mt + 1 ( ω ) = ( 1 − δ ) α Mt ( ω − h )                            (2.13)

                        + ( 1 − δ ) ( 1 − α ) Mt ( ω + h ) + ( 1 − δ ) Me , t I ( ω e )

The expression establishes that a fraction (1 − δ) α of ﬁrms with productivity less
than or equal to ω − h survives the exogenous exit shock and transitions to a pro-
ductivity level that is less than or equal to ω . A fraction (1 − δ) (1 − α) of the mass
of ﬁrms with productivity between ω and ω + h survives the exit shock and jumps
downward to have productivity less than or equal to ω . There is also an inﬂow
of new ﬁrms to this group which is given by the mass of entrants, conditional on
productivity being equal to the productivity level assumed for entry, eωe . Endoge-
nous exit will be driven by the mass of ﬁrms that transition downwards from the
productivity cutoff , (1 − δ) α Mt (ω + h).
    A competitive equilibrium in this economy is: 1) a sequence of aggregate consump-
tion decisions from the household{Ct }∞
                                      t=0 , 2) sequences of prices, labor demands,
value functions, product cutoffs, and exit cutoffs for the producers of varieties,
                                                       ∞
  pk,t (ω , λ), lt (ω , λ) , Vt (ω ), eλt (ω ) , ω t          ; 4) a sequence of ﬁnal good quantities and
                                                       t =0
                                                                               ∞
demand functions for intermediate variety Yt , qd
                                                k ,t ( ω , λ )                        ; 5) a sequence of mea-
                                                                               t =0
sures of ﬁrms{ Mt (ω )}∞
                       t=0 and its law of motion (equation 2.13), 6) a sequence of
entrants { Me,t }∞
                 t=0 , 7) a sequence of prices and transfers { wt , Rt , Pt , Qt , Tt } ; 8) a dis-
tortion proﬁle G (τ |ω ), a distribution of productivity at entry G (ω ), a distribution of
product attributes F (λ), and a stochastic process for ﬁrm-wide productivity; and 9)
an initial wealth of the household M0 such that: a) given 7, 5, and 9, 1 solves house-
hold’s optimization problem, b) given 7, 4 and 8, 2 solves the incumbents’ dynamic
optimization problem, c) given pk,t (ω ), 4 solves the ﬁnal good sector’s proﬁt max-
imization problem, d) Me,t is such that the free entry condition is satisﬁed in every


                                                           13
period, and e) markets clear in every period:


                                L = L p , t + L f c , t + L f p , t + f e Me , t

                                                  Ct = Yt

where L p,t , L f c,t , and L f p,t are the aggregate demands for labor in production, ﬁxed
costs of operation, and ﬁxed cost of provision of products, deﬁned by:

                                        L p,t = Π t ( ρ − 1 ) Λ t                               (2.14)

                                        L f c,t = f c      dMt (ω )

                                                              ¯
                            L f p,t = f p       1 − F e λt (ω )           dMt (ω )

The term Λt stands for the statistic of the joint distribution of productivity and prod-
uct attributes that characterizes aggregates across ﬁrm-level outcomes in the econ-
omy, and is given by


                       Λt =      eω (1 − τω )ρ            ¯
                                                                   eλ dF (λ) dMt (ω )
                                                        eλt (ω )

    A stationary competitive equilibrium is one in which the distribution of productiv-
ity has become stationary, and where aggregate variables and prices have become
constant.


2.7.1   Aggregate Variables

Prior to the quantitative analysis, it is instructive to derive an analytical characteri-
zation of aggregate output and aggregate productivity in the model8 . To derive it,
we start substituting the aggregate component of ﬁrms’ variable proﬁts deﬁned in
equation 2.9 into equation 2.14 for aggregate labor demand in production. Then,
solving for aggregate output we get:
                                                                     ρ
                                         wρ               ρ              Lp
                                     Y = ρ−σ                                                    (2.15)
                                        P                ρ−1             Λ
   8 Once again, to simplify notation, we avoid carrying time subscripts in the notation with the un-
derstanding that the aggregate variables just deﬁned are static in the stationary equilibrium and time-
varying in the analysis of transitions.


                                                      14
   As it is familiar in models of monopolistic competition with CES demand sys-
tems, the price of a variety of product κ produced by a ﬁrm with productivity eω ,
product attribute eλ , and idiosyncratic distortion τω is given by

                                           ρ                  w
                           p (ω , λ) =                        1
                                          ρ−1
                                                  e(ω +λ)   ρ −1
                                                                   (1 − τw )
Firms with higher productivity and higher product attribute offer lower prices. Rev-
enue taxes and subsidies are passed on to the consumer, to the extent allowed by the
elasticity of substitution.
   Plugging the individual prices into the price index for good k, we get

                                                                                       1
                  ρ                                                                   1− ρ
                                                              ρ −1
              P=     w                    e(ω +λ) (1 − τw )          dF (λ) dM (ω )          (2.16)
                 ρ−1              ¯
                                 eλ(ω )

   Notice that the expression justiﬁes the earlier claim that price indices were sym-
metric across products. This is guaranteed by the assumption of an independent
and identically distribution of product attributes and the assumption of a common
ﬁxed cost of provision across products and ﬁrms, which together imply that F (λ)
and eλ(ω ) are identical for all k.
   Exploiting this symmetry and recalling that the price of the ﬁnal good is chosen
to be the numeraire, it follows that the price index of each product k is also equal to
unity, P = 1. Also, substituting into the price index of the ﬁnal good in equation 2.3,
we can solve for the equilibrium wage rate as:

                                              ρ−1           1
                                      w=          ( Λ w ) ρ −1                               (2.17)
                                               ρ

                    Λw =         ¯
                                         eω +λ (1 − τω )ρ−1 dF (λ) dM (ω )                   (2.18)
                                eλ(ω )

where we have subsumed the aggregation of productivities and product attributes
that determine marginal costs into the term Λω .
   We can go back to equation 2.15 and get the following expression for GDP and
TFP in the model:
                                                      ρ
                                            ( Λ ω ) ρ −1
                                         Y=              ∗ Lp                                (2.19)
                                                Λ



                                                 15
                                                          ρ
                                        ( Λ ω ) ρ −1 L p
                                TFP =               ∗                            (2.20)
                                            Λ         L
    Changes in the entry and exit of ﬁrms affect TFP through the consequent change
in the number of ﬁrms and through the demand for labor that goes into entry and
ﬁxed operation costs, which determines L p . Changes in the ﬁrms’ portfolio of prod-
ucts also affect output through changes in L p , because of the labor-intensive nature
of the ﬁxed costs of supplying goods. Furthermore, it affects TFP by shaping the
distribution of products across ﬁrms of different productivities, controlled by eλ(ω ) .


3      Quantitative Analysis
We turn now to the quantitative evaluation of the model. As emphasized through-
out the paper, we are interested in measuring the welfare gains from liberalizations
that eliminate misallocation frictions. We seek to provide a quantitative answer ac-
companied with an understanding of how the various forces at work in the model
contribute to shaping the gains.


3.1     Calibration
We must choose parameter values for the elasticity of substitutions σ and ρ, the sub-
jective discount factor of the household β, the size of the labor force L, and the set of
parameters governing the process of ﬁrm dynamics, entry and exit: entry and ﬁxed
operation costs f e and f c , the size and probability of the jump in the binomial process
h and α, and the exogenous exit rate δ. Furthermore, we must specify values for the
ﬁxed cost of supplying varieties to the market, f p , as well as the shape parameter
of the distribution of product attributes η . We calibrate these parameters working
with the undistorted stationary allocation of the model, taking the United States as
empirical target. Table 1 summarizes the parameter values.
     The strategy of the calibration is as follows. For the elasticity of substitution, we
set ρ = σ = 3, which lies in the middle of estimates of substitutability found in the
trade and industrial organization literature, and is the value chosen by Hsieh and
Klenow (2009) in their measurement of misallocation in the United States, China,
and India9 . Since our assumptions imply no heterogeneity of prices across products,
    9 See   Broda and Weinstein (2006) for a range of estimates of the elasticity of substitution for US


                                                    16
                     Table 1: Parameter Values and Calibration Targets
        Parameter   Value                                             Target
           ρ=σ         3                   Hsieh and Klenow (2009), Broda and Weinstein (2006)
                        1
            β         1.05                                      Interest Rate of 5%
            δ        0.02                    Employment-Based Exit Rate of Large Firms of 2%
            α        0.467              Slope Log of Right Tail of Empl. Based Size Distribution= -0.2
                      0.25
            h          η                      Std Dev. of Employment Growth of Large Firms
           ωe        ω
                    e e =    1           Size of Entrants = 6% of Median Incumbent (Luttmer 2010)
            fc
            fe        0.1                                        Exit Rate of 5%
           fp       210.95                   Av. Fraction of products per ﬁrm=0.0024
           η          2          Distribution of Output-Share by Product in Multi Product Firms


distortions will not create changes in relative prices across products, so only the elas-
ticity of substitution across varieties within a product category matters for aggregate
variables. Thus we set the elasticities of substitution to be identical to each other.
                                                       1
We choose the discount factor so that       − 1 equals a real interest rate of 5%, and
                                                       β
normalize the size of the labor force to be equal to 1.
    In terms of product attributes, we assume these are distributed Pareto, with shape
parameter η and lower bound eλmin = 1. Besides its analytical tractability, this pa-
rameterization is consistent with the behavior of multi-product ﬁrms in the US, in
particular the distribution of output-shares across products within multi-product
ﬁrms. Bernard et al. (2010) report the output-share by rank of the product, for ﬁrms
of various degrees of multiple-good production (4, 6, 8, and 10 products). They run
a regression of log of product rank, and the log of the output share of the product.
They ﬁnd the coefﬁcient of this regression to be equal to 0.5. In the appendix, we
show that this target maps into a parameter value of η = 2 for the Pareto distribu-
tion of product-attributes.
    Our strategy to calibrate the ﬁxed cost of provision of goods f p also relies on
data from Bernard et al. (2010)10 . They show that out of a potential of 1,440 products,
the average number of products supplied by a multi-product ﬁrm is 3.5. Given that
our product space lives in the continuum of measure one, this gives us a target of
3.5/1440 to be matched by the product range of the average multi-product ﬁrm in
the model. Formally, f p is chosen so that:
imports at a 4-digit disaggregation level.
  10 Data taken from Table 1 in Bernard et al. (2010).




                                                           17
                                           ¯
                                  1 − F eλ(ω )       dM (ω )
                                                               = 0.0024
                                        dM (ω )
which amounts to devoting 17% of the labor force to the task of confronting ﬁxed
costs involved in supplying products to the market.
   Despite the empirical merits and the analytical tractability of the Pareto distri-
bution, the lower limit in its support carries the implication that some sufﬁciently
productive multi-product ﬁrms in the model will ﬁnd it proﬁtable to supply all of
the products in the continuum. This is problematic for two reasons. First, according
to Bernard et al. (2010), there is no evidence of such ﬁrms in the data for the man-
ufacturing sector in the United States. Second, it introduces a discontinuity in the
elasticity of ﬁrm size with respect to ﬁrm-wide productivity. To see this, consider the
expression for ﬁrm-wide employment in the undistorted economy that results from
aggregating across products within a ﬁrm with ﬁrm-wide productivity eω under a
Pareto distribution of product attributes and an arbitrary lower bound eλmin :

                                                
                                                                         η              ¯
                   ( ρ − 1)     η              η        eω (1 − τw )ρ              i f eλ(ω ) ≥ eλmin
L (ω ) = (Π)   η
                     ( η −1)
                                   eλmin                                     1− η
                   fp          η−1              eω (1 − τ )ρ eλmin
                                                          w
                                                                                        ¯
                                                                                    i f eλ(ω ) < eλmin

       ¯
Since eλ(ω ) is decreasing in ﬁrm-wide productivity, it can be shown that there exists a
sufﬁciently large but ﬁnite value of eω such that the cutoff-attribute is lower than the
lower bound of the Pareto distribution. In such case, once the full product-space has
been covered, the ﬁrm behaves as if it was a single product ﬁrm, with an elasticity
with respect to ﬁrm-wide productivity that switches from η to 1.
   In spite of these complications, we ﬁnd that a negligible fraction of ﬁrms (0.02%)
in the undistorted stationary equilibrium hits the lower bound and supplies all the
products to the market under our ﬁnal calibration. Thus, the gains in tractability that
are allowed for by the adoption of a Pareto distribution, in particular the transparent
way in which the product-portfolio decision of the ﬁrms magniﬁes the elasticity of
size with respect to productivity, more than compensate the costs, so we keep it as
the choice for parameterizing the distribution of product attributes.
   Having characterized more sharply the aggregate employment level within a
ﬁrm, we can proceed with the description of the strategy to calibrate the parameters


                                                    18
governing the stochastic process of ﬁrm-wide productivity. Taking logs of ﬁrm-wide
employment in the region where the product range is less than one, we get:

                               log [ L (ω )] = η log(Π) + Ψ − η log (eω )

                 ( ρ −1)
where Ψ =
                              η
                  ( η −1)   η −1   collects parameters related to the ﬁxed cost of provision of
                 fp
products, the elasticity of substitution across varieties within a product, and the tail
of the Pareto distribution of product attributes.
    The moment in the data that we target to pin down the step size h is the standard
deviation of the distribution of employment growth rates for large ﬁrms, which in
the US economy is equal to 0.25. It is easy to show that, in the stationary equilibrium
of our model, such variance is approximately equal to11 :

                                            ˆ ∼
                                        Var L        2
                                              = (η h) = 0.252                                      (3.1)

Thus, for a given value of η , the standard deviation of employment growth rates
in the cross-section of large ﬁrms in the United States implies that h = 0.25/η . We
take into account that there exists a small fraction of large ﬁrms supplying all the
products, for which η no longer plays a role. For these, the variance of employment
growth rates is driven entirely by the step size in the process for productivity, so we
set h = 0.25 for such group.
    In terms of the probability of technological upgrading, α, we set it to match prop-
erties of the right tail of the U.S. employment based size distribution. Luttmer (2010)
highlights the linearity of the right tail of the US establishment and ﬁrm size distri-
bution across employment, as well as the stationarity of the distribution over time,
using various sources of US micro-data12 . For a given value of the productivity step
size h and a given value of the exogenous exit probability δ, the slope of the right tail
of the ﬁrm size distribution in the model is determined by α. To ensure that we are
capturing the linear portion of the size distribution, we focus on the slope implied
  11 The exact value for the variance is Var Lˆ = (η h)2 − [η h]2 (2 p − 1)2 . The approximation is exact
in the case of a stochastic process with zero drift, namely p = 0.5. We show below that our calibrated
value of p is 0.467, which allows us to qualify the approximated value of the variance as a close
approximation. The sole advantage of it is that we can independently identify the values of the
parameters of the stochastic process that match their counterparts in the data.
  12 County Business Patterns Database, statistics from the Small Business Administration and the

Business Dynamics Statistics from the census.



                                                   19
by the ratio of the change in the logarithm of the fraction of employment accounted
for by ﬁrms with 1,000 or more and 5,000 or more employees, relative to the log-
difference of the employment levels, which is equal to -0.2 in the data. Formally, we
set p so as to match

                       log [1 − G (5000)] − log [1 − G (1000)]
                                                               = −0.2
                               log(5000) − log(1000)

where G (.) here denotes the cumulative distribution function of the employment
weighted ﬁrm size distribution in the United States. Targeting this slope translates
into a 72% share of employment accounted for by the top 10% largest ﬁrms, which
is consistent with the data for the U.S.’ manufacturing sector.
    Regarding the probability of the exogenous exit shock, this parameter controls
the exit rate among the largest ﬁrms. Thus, we calibrate it to replicate the exit rate
among large ﬁrms in the employment-weighted size distribution which, according
to the Small Business Administration (SBA)13 , is equal to 0.02.
    With respect to the realization of ﬁrm-wide productivity for entering ﬁrms, we
assume that all entrants get a productivity draw of eωe = 1 and then fan-out over
the space of idiosyncratic productivity according to its stochastic process. The target
driving this choice is the average size of an entrant relative to the average incumbent
in the U.S.’ size distribution, which Luttmer (2007) reports to be equal to 6%. The
entry and ﬁxed production costs are set at f e = 1 and f c = 0.1 respectively. Together
with the parameters of the stochastic process for ﬁrm-wide productivity, particularly
the standard deviation of the shocks to idiosyncratic productivity, the choice of f c
and f e imply an exit rate of 5% .
    The last portion of the calibration refers to the distribution of distortions. A
pervasive feature in developing countries is that idiosyncratic distortions exhibit a
strong degree of correlation with the distribution of physical productivities across
ﬁrms. This is a key property of the data, since it is the one that creates a non-trivial
response in the dynamic decisions of the ﬁrms, such as the decision to enter and
exit the economy14 . To honor such relationship, we propose the following log-linear
functional form for the relationship between idiosyncratic distortions and the id-
  13 Thisis the exit rate that applies to ﬁrms larger than or equal to 500 workers in the year 2002.
  14 It
      can be shown that uncorrelated distortions, although damaging for allocative efﬁciency in
terms of products and labor, have neutral effects on entry and exit. We resume this point once we
explore the quantitative performance of the model.


                                                20
iosyncratic ﬁrm-wide productivities:

                                                      1   −γ
                              (1 − τ (ω )) = (eω ) ρ−1

The appeal of the expression is that it provides a transparent mapping between γ,
the slope, and the coefﬁcient of a regression between the log of TFPR and the log of
TFPQ, which is a statistic that is normally reported in empirical papers about mis-
allocation. In order to understand the strength of the mechanism at various degrees
of distortions, we experiment with a range of values of γ. In choosing this range,
we restrict ourselves to values that do not revert the positive relationship between
productivity and proﬁtability. Doing so would carry the counterfactual prediction
of making the most productive ﬁrms be the ones exiting the market endogenously.
   We consider the following values: γ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6}. As a form of ref-
erence, according to Hsieh and Klenow (2007), γ would be roughly equal to 0.1 in
the United States, around 0.5 in China 1998 and about 0.4 in India in 1987.


3.2   Welfare Analysis
This subsection begins the quantitative exploration measuring the welfare gains to
be reaped from liberalizations that eliminate idiosyncratic distortions. We follow the
tradition of thinking about permanent consumption compensations that should be
given to households in order to make them indifferent between different allocations.
The benchmark comparison is between keeping the household at a stationary equi-
librium with distortions, relative to transitioning towards a stationary equilibrium
without frictions. When we investigate long run gains only, the comparison is be-
tween the level of consumption in the distorted steady state against jumping straight
towards the undistorted steady state one. The results are reported in ﬁgure 3.1. The
black line reports the welfare gains accounting for both transitional and long run
gains, while the gray line reports the latter only.
   Given the Pareto optimality of the undistorted allocation, welfare gains are ex-
pectedly increasing throughout the space of distortion slopes. The gains are also
sizable, requiring an increase of up to 55% in permanent consumption to compen-
sate the household if it were to be preserved at a stationary equilibrium with distor-
tions. For instance, at the level of distortions consistent with China in 1998, γ = 0.5,
the welfare gains from liberalization amount to almost 40%. For India in 1987, with

                                           21
                                                    Welfare Gains Liberalization
                                        60

                                        50
                                              Long Run Gain
                                              Welfare Gain
                                        40


                      % welfare gain    30

                                        20

                                        10

                                         0

                                       −10
                                          0   0.1      0.2       0.3      0.4      0.5   0.6
                                                          Distortion Slope


                 Figure 3.1: Welfare Gains From Liberalizing Distortions

γ = 0.4, the gains reach 32%15 .
    The ﬁgure also reveals a signiﬁcant divergence between the welfare gains with
and without consideration of transition dynamics. The gray line, which reports the
welfare gains from steady state to steady state improvements in consumption, shows
that ignoring transition dynamics signiﬁcantly underestimates the overall potential
gains in welfare. Continuing with the examples of China and India, long run gains
are only half as large as the overall gains16 .
    The divergence between the two measures of welfare gain arises as a result of the
temporary gain in consumption that the liberalization of distortions allows in the
early years of the transition path. We show this in ﬁgure 3.2, which reproduces the
time series of consumption along the transition path from liberalizations at the bot-
tom, middle, and top of the range of distortions that we consider: γ ∈ {0.1, 0.3, 0.6}.
  15 All elasticities are read off Table 4 in Hsieh and Klenow (2007) .
                                                                      Albeit at a weaker degree, there is
also evidence of correlated distortions in the United States, which we use as the efﬁcient benchmark
in our calibration. Had we subtracted the estimated elasticity for the US from the estimates for China
and India, the corresponding slopes of distortions would have been 0.3 and 0.2 respectively, leading
to welfare gains of 17% and 10%/
  16 Given the abstraction from physical capital in our model, our ﬁnding that the full dynamics of

TFP matter for the quantiﬁcation of the welfare gains is a veriﬁcation of a more general theoretical
result established in Basu et al. (2012), who show that, to a ﬁrst order approximation and for general
conditions about the production side of the economy, the present value of TFP and the growth rate
of the capital stock are sufﬁcient for characterizing welfare in a country.



                                                               22
                                                          Consumption Dynamics
                                               70
                                                                                  gamma=0.6
                                                                                  gamma=0.3
                                               60                                 gamma=0.1

                                               50



                 % change from distorted SS
                                               40


                                               30


                                               20


                                               10


                                                0


                                              −10
                                                 0   20     40             60    80       100
                                                                 Periods



             Figure 3.2: Consumption Dynamics along Transition Paths

We can see that consumption overshoots upon reform and persists for several peri-
ods above the level at which it converges in undistorted steady state.
   In order to uncover the forces that allow for such temporary boost, ﬁgure 3.3
below shows the time series of the total number of ﬁrms in the economy, the shares
of labor allocated into the production of goods, entry costs, ﬁxed costs of operation
and the ﬁxed costs of supplying goods; and the total number of products per ﬁrm.
The number of ﬁrms, the mass of entrants, and the number of products per ﬁrm are
measured as ratios with respect to their distorted steady state values, while the labor
shares are expressed as absolute deviations from the initial shares.
   The salient feature of the ﬁgure is the process of decumulation of ﬁrms that takes
place in the transition towards the undistorted stationary equilibrium. As the econ-
omy converges to an allocation with fewer ﬁrms, a result that we shall explain in
greater detail below, resources are reallocated away from entry and ﬁxed costs of
operation and into the production of goods. The number of products per-ﬁrm in-
creases sharply, in reﬂection of the efﬁcient reallocation of products towards highly
productive ﬁrms that takes place in response to the reform. However, since the num-
ber of ﬁrms is falling, the total number of varieties and the requirements of labor to
confront ﬁxed cost of provision also fall during the transition, which further rein-
forces the reallocation of labor towards productive activities and further contributes
to sustaining consumption above the undistorted stationary level.

                                                                 23
                               Mass of Firms                                   Mass of Entrants
                   1                                                1
                 0.8                                              0.8
                 0.6                                              0.6
                 0.4                                              0.4
                 0.2                                              0.2
                   0                                                0
                    0     20     40     60     80      100           0    20      40     60       80   100
                        Share of Labor in Production                Share of Labor in Provision of Goods
                0.15                                               0
                0.12                                          −0.01
                0.09
                                                              −0.02
                0.06
                0.03                                          −0.03
                   0                                          −0.04
                    0     20     40     60     80      100         0      20      40     60       80   100
                  Share of Labor in Entry and Fixed Costs                Number Products per Firm
                   0                                              16
              −0.025                                              13
               −0.05                                              10
              −0.075                                               7
                −0.1                                               4
              −0.125                                               1
                    0     20     40     60     80    100            0     20      40     60       80   100

                                      gamma=0.6          gamma=0.3             gamma=0.1


      Figure 3.3: Understanding Sources of Welfare Gain: Transition Dynamics
Note: The number of ﬁrms, the mass of entrants, and the number of products per ﬁrm are measured
as ratio with respect to their distorted steady state values. Labor shares are expressed as absolute
deviations from the initial shares.being




                                                             24
   As mentioned above, the increase in number of ﬁrms in the economy’s distorted
stationary equilibrium is a key property of the model’s response to allocative distor-
tions that explains the divergence in results between measures of welfare gain. As
can be read from ﬁgure 3.3, the number of ﬁrms is between 30 to 70% lower in the
undistorted than in the distorted stationary allocations.
   The rise in the number of ﬁrms in the distorted allocation is a result of the fol-
lowing two forces: an increase in the measure of entrants and a decrease in the rate
of exit. The rise in ﬁrm entry emerges as an outcome of the interaction between two
features of the calibration that are grounded in the data: the stochastic process for
productivity upon entry which, conditional on survival, gives ﬁrms an increasing
pattern of productivity growth over the life-cycle; and the positive relationship be-
tween distortions and idiosyncratic productivity. From the perspective of an entrant,
a proﬁle of distortions that taxes high productivity ﬁrms and subsidizes low produc-
tivity ones creates a redistribution of proﬁts from the future to the present. In the
cross-section of incumbents, this pattern of taxation redistributes proﬁts from high
to low productivity ﬁrms. Since ﬁrms discount future proﬁt streams at a positive
interest rate, the overall decline in expected-proﬁtability of entrants will be lower
than the average decline in proﬁtability among incumbents. In order to restore equi-
librium in the labor market and the balance in the free entry condition, an increase
in entry will follow. It is easy to show that had any of the above-mentioned proper-
ties of the calibration been absent, distortions would have not had any effect on the
number of ﬁrms17 .
   The decline in the exit rate, in turn, is also attributable to the positive relation-
ship between distortions and productivity. By taxing the high productivity ﬁrms,
labor demand is relaxed and factors prices fall. This allows for marginal ﬁrms that
would have been left out of the market to sustain operations proﬁtably. In addition,
these ﬁrms are aided by subsidies to producers in the left tail of the productivity
distribution. Even though the decline in the exit rate carries a decline in aggregate
productivity per-ﬁrm, it also contributes to increasing the number of ﬁrms for, at a
given number of entrants, it sustains a larger number of producers in the stationary
equilibrium.
   A last feature of the transition dynamics that is worth highlighting is the non-
  17 That was the case, for instance, in Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) where the missing ingredient

justifying the neutrality of entry in their model is the lack of ﬁrm dynamics upon entry.



                                                25
monotonicity of the convergence. Two properties of the model play a key role in
generating this pattern: the non-negativity of entry and the productivity distribu-
tion of entrants relative to incumbents. The non-negativity of entry prevents a sud-
den adjustment in the number of ﬁrms. The fastest the economy can reduce the
number of ﬁrms is by shutting down entry, increasing the exit productivity cutoff,
and waiting for the negative drift in incumbents’ productivity and the exogenous
exit shocks to drive ﬁrms out of the market. This explains the smooth decline of the
number of ﬁrms and the protracted increase in the shares of labor allocated to pro-
duction. The point of entry of new ﬁrms in the productivity distribution, in turn, is
the key ingredient for understanding the eventual recovery in the number of ﬁrms.
Newcomers to the market enter at a lower productivity level than the average in-
cumbent. This means that during the periods where there is zero entry, production
gets concentrated at the top of the productivity distribution, leaving a lower mass
of ﬁrms around the marginal productivity cutoff. When entry resumes, it creates an
inﬂow of ﬁrms that takes time to populate the left tail. Until this happens, entry
exceeds exit, so the number of ﬁrms reverses its trajectory and converges to the new
stationary level from below.
   Summarizing, our analysis shows that accounting for the dynamic response in
the economy’s number of varieties through changes in the number and allocation of
products, and the entry and exit of ﬁrms, magniﬁes the welfare gains from alleviat-
ing misallocation far beyond the gains that can be captured by focusing on long-run
measures of consumption growth. Despite the merit that resource misallocation has
in the context of explaining cross-country differences in TFP (merit that we reassess
below with our richer framework), our results motivate the adoption of a broader
measure of welfare when discussing beneﬁts and costs of reforms that are aimed at
alleviating allocative inefﬁciencies.


3.3   Long-Run Implications of Misallocation Frictions
In this section we focus on understanding the long run implications of misallocation
frictions in the context of our model. While the previous section emphasized the
importance of transition dynamics for welfare assessments, the steady state conse-
quences of distortions were at the core of the initial motivation for thinking about
misallocation as a potential driver of the large differences in income and productiv-
ity that exist across countries. For this reason, we here connect with the bulk of the

                                         26
literature by providing a quantitative evaluation of the contribution of entry, exit,
and multi-variety production for the ability of idiosyncratic distortions to play such
role.
   In order to transparently identify the contributions of the new margins, we com-
pare the long run changes in TFP in three alternative long run allocations of our
model were entry, exit, and multi-variety ﬁrms are at play sequentially. More specif-
ically, recall the expression that deﬁnes measured TFP in the model:
                                                      ρ
                                             ( Λ ω ) ρ −1 L p
                                       TFP =             ∗
                                                 Λ         L

                      Λw =        ¯
                                          eω +λ (1 − τω )ρ−1 dF (λ) dM (ω )
                                 eλ(ω )


                        Λ=         ¯
                                          eω +λ (1 − τω )ρ dF (λ) dM (ω )
                                 eλ(ω )

We construct a benchmark allocation where all the gains from liberalizations accrue
due to the efﬁcient reallocation of resources among a given set of producers, and
among a given distribution of products across ﬁrms. This allocation, which we label
static, is the one that resembles the type of gains that are captured in Hsieh and
Klenow (2009) and the many replications thereafter, and the one that we consider
an adequate benchmark to gauge the contributions of entry, exit, and multi-variety
production. To construct it, we set all taxes and subsidies to zero while keeping
                                             ¯
the distribution of cutoff attributes eλ(ω ) for the provision of a product, the number
and distribution of ﬁrms M (ω ), and the share of labor allocated to the production
           Lp
of goods   L,   ﬁxed at their distorted allocation’s level. Then, in order to assess the
contribution of the multi-product structure of production, we construct an allocation
                                                                     ¯
where we allow the distribution of products across ﬁrms eλ(ω ) and the labor share
                 Lp
in production    L    to adjust to the efﬁcient level, while keeping constant the number
of ﬁrms and the distribution of ﬁrms across ﬁrm-wide productivity at the distorted
economy’s allocation. We label this allocation as product-channel. Lastly, we show
the long-run gains in the full model which, when compared to the previous two,
identiﬁes the contribution of entry and exit. Results are shown in ﬁgure 3.4.
   A comparison between the solid black line, corresponding to the static bench-
mark, and the dashed line, corresponding to the gains with consideration of the
product-reallocation channel, shows that the latter margin signiﬁcantly magniﬁes


                                                 27
                                                                  Long Rung TFP Gains
                                                    50
                                                          Full
                                                    45
                                                          Static
                                                    40    Product−Channel




                      % change from distorted SS
                                                    35
                                                    30
                                                    25
                                                    20
                                                    15
                                                    10
                                                     5
                                                     0
                                                    −5
                                                   −10
                                                      0    0.1    0.2       0.3      0.4   0.5   0.6
                                                                     Distortion Slope


Figure 3.4: Long Run TFP Gains from Liberalizing Distortions: the Role of the Num-
ber of Products and the Number of Firms

the improvements in TFP that would emerge in the long run from a liberalization
of misallocation frictions. Subsidies to unproductive ﬁrms and taxes to productive
ones reallocate products from the latter to the former. Because the favored ﬁrms are
relatively less productive, a lower amount of output per product is produced under
a given aggregate allocation of labor to production, reinforcing the decline in TFP in
the distorted allocation and enhancing the gains when these are reversed 18 .
    The consideration of ﬁrm entry and exit, illustrated by the gray line in the graph,
brings a countervailing force to the analysis which makes the overall contribution
of the response in the number of varieties be in general ambiguous. As explained
earlier in the context of understanding transition dynamics, distortions that correlate
positively with ﬁrm-wide productivity induce an increase in entry and a decline in
the exit rate that increases the total number of ﬁrms. This increase is reversed in the
undistorted long-run equilibrium, property which under a CES production structure
constitutes a drag on aggregate productivity.
   18 Given that there is a small fraction of ﬁrms that cannot expand beyond the full range of products,

the total number of products falls slightly in the product-channel allocation when removing allocative
distortions. While this force tends to weaken the TFP gains, it is partially compensated by the increase
in share of labor allocated to the production of goods that is allowed for by the lower demand for labor
that is required to confront the ﬁxed costs of provision. It can be shown, though, that the predominant
force driving the productivity gains in this allocation is given by the efﬁcient reallocation of products
to more productive ﬁrms.



                                                                            28
    The non-monotonicity of the response in TFP in the full model as a function of
the underlying degree of distortions is worth exploring. The ﬁgure shows that the
countervailing effect of entry and exit prevails at liberalizations from low to middle
values of the slope between distortions and idiosyncratic productivity, while it is
dominated by the labor and product reallocation channels at more severe values19 .
To understand this feature of the results, recall that the rise in entry in the distorted
allocation was critically determined by the interaction between an increasing tra-
jectory of proﬁtability upon entry (conditional on survival), a proﬁle of distortions
that taxed productive ﬁrms more heavily, and discounting of future proﬁt streams.
As we move along the range of distortion slopes, the redistribution of proﬁts from
higher to lower productivity values ﬂattens the upward sloping trajectory of proﬁts.
Hence, an additional increase in distortions carries a weaker effect than when distor-
tions were ﬁrst put in place. On the other hand, the damaging effect of distortions on
allocative efﬁciency increases together with the severity of distortions. Thus, there
exists a distortion level beyond which the latter force dominates the former, so that
liberalizing distortions becomes more productivity-enhancing than implied by the
static benchmark20 .
    Going back to the question of how much cross-country differences in allocative
distortions contribute to understanding cross-country differences in TFP, our ﬁnd-
ings indicate that entry, exit, and multi-variety production can enhance the role
attributed to resource misallocation provided we are considering countries with
sufﬁciently high degrees of correlation between idiosyncratic distortions and id-
iosyncratic productivity. Based on existing studies, the majority of the estimates of
the elasticity between distortions ( TFPR) and productivity ( TFPQ) in developing
countries fall in the range where the magnifying forces and the countervailing ones
roughly balance out21 . Had it not been for the consideration of the dynamic impli-
  19 Notice  that there are levels of distortion slopes where the undistorted TFP is even lower than the
distorted one. This feature stresses even further the need to account for transitional dynamics, given
the knowledge that the undistorted allocation is Pareto optimal and, hence, transitioning to it should
deliver higher welfare to the household.
   20 Notice that the argument relies in a sense of continuity in the evolution of the strengths of the two

forces affecting TFP as a function of distortions, a feature that we have only explored numerically.
   21 Hsieh and Klenow (2007) report slopes of 0.5 and 0.4 for China and India, respectively. Chen and

Irarrazabal (2015) estimate the elasticity to be between 0.6 and 0.5 in Chile during the period of 1980-
1996. Cirera et al. (2017) report values ranging between 0.4 and 0.6 in Ghana, Ethiopia, Kenya, and
Cote D’ Ivoire. However, not every study of misallocation reports statistics about the degree of rela-
tionship between distortions ( TFPR) and productivity ( TFPQ), so there are much fewer estimates of
this elasticity than there are estimates of the dispersion.


                                                    29
cations of reforms, the long-run analysis would have mistakenly led us to conclude
that there is not much to be lost, in terms of capturing the full extent of the costs of
misallocation, from ignoring the effect of distortions over the number of varieties in
the economy. The ﬁndings from this section, then, do nothing but reinforce our mes-
sage of motivating the adoption of a broader measure of welfare that internalizes
these dynamic gains.


3.3.1   The Role of Multi-Variety Production

While the analysis above was designed to isolate the marginal effect of entry, exit,
and multi-product ﬁrms, it was not well suited to establish a comparison between
the results of our model with multi-product ﬁrms against those stemming from a
model with single-product units. The reason is that the models are not comparable
unless the calibration of the shock process for ﬁrm-wide productivity is adjusted to
make sure that both models match the same targets in the data. To appreciate this,
recall that the relationship between productivity and size in the multi-product model
is intermediated by the product scope of the ﬁrm. This source of magniﬁcation in
the mapping from productivity to employment dispersion is absent in the single-
product model, hence it must be compensated through an increase in the calibrated
value of the variance of the shock process. This leads us to set h = 0.25.
   We proceed by constructing the same full and static allocations that we did in the
context of the analysis of the benchmark model, comparing the overall magnitude
of the TFP gains across models, and identifying the contribution of entry and exit
relative to the static gains depending on whether the multi-product channel is at
play or not. The results are illustrated in Figure 3.3.1.
   The salient property of the ﬁgure is the remarkable difference in the contribution
of the static gains in shaping the overall improvements in productivity across mod-
els. While the gains under the full model are slightly lower in the multi-product
than in the single-product version, the static gains only amount to at most 15% in
the former, signiﬁcantly below the 50% gain that can be reached in the latter. This
means that, in order to reach similar gains overall, the changes in the number of va-
rieties are playing different roles depending on whether these are entirely driven by
changes in the number of ﬁrms or if they are also driven by changes in the alloca-
tion of products across ﬁrms. Like before, entry and exit contribute negatively to the
long-run changes in TFP that are triggered by a dismantlement of distortions. How-

                                           30
                                                   Multi−Product Model                  Single Product Model
                                            60                                    60
                                            55          Full                      55          Full
                                                        Static                                Static
                                            50                                    50
                                                        Prod. Channel
              % change from distorted SS
                                            45                                    45
                                            40                                    40
                                            35                                    35
                                            30                                    30
                                            25                                    25
                                            20                                    20
                                            15                                    15
                                            10                                    10
                                             5                                     5
                                             0                                     0
                                            −5                                    −5
                                           −10                                   −10
                                              0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6           0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
                                                     Distortion Slope                      Distortion Slope


Figure 3.5: Long Run Gains from Liberalizing Distortions: Multi-Product vs Single-
Product Models

ever, the offsetting effect of these margins is countervailed by the additional gains
that accrue due to efﬁcient product reallocation. Therefore, while abstracting from
the latter would not lead to substantially different magnitudes of TFP gains from
reversals of allocative distortions, changes in the number of varieties would mistak-
enly be attributed to have a negative contribution over these gains if the number of
varieties is affected by entry and exit decisions only.
   The key driver of the difference in the magnitude of the static gains lies in the
change in the distribution of TFPQ that is induced by the ﬁrms’ incentives to adjust
their portfolio of products. When ﬁrms are multi-product, TFPQ at the ﬁrm level is
a combination of the exogenous ﬁrm-wide productivity level and the endogenously
determined number of products supplied by the ﬁrms. Allocative distortions that
correlate positively with ﬁrm-wide productivity induce a reallocation of products
from high to low productivity ﬁrms that compresses the distribution of TFPQ in
the distorted stationary equilibrium. Therefore, when computing the gains from
reallocation holding ﬁxed the distribution of products across ﬁrms, as in the static
allocation, we are holding back the scope for efﬁciency gains by reallocating labor
among ﬁrms that are not too different from each other in terms of their measured
physical productivity22 . This is not the case in the single-product version of the
 22 The   intuition that the properties of the underlying distribution of TFPQ determine the detrimen-


                                                                            31
model, where the dispersion of ﬁrms across the space of TFPQ is not affected by the
existence of allocative distortions (except only through changes in the exit cutoff)
and hence is purely determined by the properties of the shock process. Notice, then,
the importance of having re-calibrated the variance of these shocks.
    Overall, the results of this section shed light on the importance of jointly con-
sidering margins of adjustment that contribute to aggregate productivity through
changes in the number of varieties. It highlights that focusing on entry and exit only
would mistakenly attribute a negative contribution to the variety channel, that may
become overturned once changes in varieties that operate through multi-product in-
cumbents are taken into account. Furthermore, it emphasizes the importance of re-
calibrating the properties of the distribution of idiosyncratic productivity when com-
paring the effect of allocative distortions in models with endogenous TFPQ against
models where this object is exogenous.


4     Concluding Remarks
Allocative distortions have acquired a pivotal role among economists in thinking
about growth. The central hypothesis is that by inducing a sub-optimal allocation of
resources across ﬁrms, this type of distortion could become an important driver of
the large productivity gaps that we observe across countries. While this hypothesis
led to promising results, it focused mostly on accounting for a static allocative chan-
nel through which misallocation can be detrimental to productivity. However, less
attention was given to the goal of understanding the implications of these distor-
tions for other ﬁrm-level decisions that, besides being empirically relevant margins
of adjustment, have direct effects over welfare and productivity. In this paper we
provided an integrated investigation of the effects of allocative distortions for three
particular channels: the entry, exit, and product-provision decisions of ﬁrms.
    We found that the consideration of these dynamic factors motivate the redirection
of the interest away from long-run metrics of welfare, such as TFP, into a broader
deﬁnition of welfare that accounts for transitional dynamics. This is because when
dynamic factors were taken into account, we found sizable gains in welfare materi-
alizing along the transition path from and equilibrium contaminated with allocative
tal effects of a given distribution of distortions on aggregate productivity is formalized in Hopenhayn
(2014).



                                                  32
distortions towards an undistorted allocation. The overall welfare gains more than
doubled the ones that one would have come-up from the consideration of the long-
run effects on TFP only. Given the costly process involved in the implementation of
reforms that liberalize countries from distortive policies and frictions, our analysis
suggests that once the effect of these distortions on entry, exit, and product-provision
decisions of ﬁrms are taken into account, the payoffs from these efforts are higher
than previously thought.
   Despite our proposal to think about broader measures of welfare, our study re-
connected with the original motivation for thinking about misallocation by provid-
ing an assessment of how entry, exit, and multi-product ﬁrms mattered for the ability
of misallocation to generate large long-run losses in TFP. In this respect, we found a
less monotone message, in the sense that while multi-variety provided another layer
of misallocation that magniﬁed the efﬁciency losses from it, we also found that the
correlated pattern of distortions with the underlying distribution of productivity en-
couraged the entry of more ﬁrms into the economy, which partly offset the long-run
costs from these distortions.
   The paper’s approach to modeling misallocation was very stylized. Even though
the resulting tractability allowed me to provide sharp characterizations of the re-
sponse of the economy to such policies and enabled me to make quantitative pre-
dictions, the large welfare gains associated with their removal calls for a deeper in-
vestigation of what the sources of misallocation really are. Several candidates have
already being explored in the literature, such as ﬁnancial frictions, ﬁring costs, and
heterogeneous mark-ups23 , although none of these seems to be accounting for most
of the misallocation that has been documented in the data.
   The model incurred in additional simpliﬁcations that were shown to have a direct
impact on its mechanisms. One such simpliﬁcation consisted of the technology of
entry, treated here as a linear function of labor. Some researchers have modeled
entry as a result of an occupational choice decision where agents select themselves
into working for a wage or undertaking entrepreneurial activities according to their
talent. In this environment, it costs more than just one unit of labor to switch a
worker out of the labor force and start a new ﬁrm. In the formulation of my model,
the entry cost has the interpretation of a sunk cost that is required to set up the
ﬁrm, the proﬁtability of which is determined ex-post from a random productivity
 23 See,   for instance, Veracierto (2001), Buera and Shin (2013), Peters (2016).


                                                     33
draw. The two set-ups share the property that not any “idea” is proﬁtable enough to
become a ﬁrm, although they differ in how costly it is to set it up. Further evidence
allowing to more concretely identify the properties of the process of ﬁrm creation
would be very valuable for all models where the number of producers is determined
endogenously.


References
Asker, J., Collard-Wexler, A., and De Loecker, J. (2014). Dynamic inputs and resource
  (mis) allocation. Journal of Political Economy, 122(5):1013–1063.

Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger, J., and Scarpetta, S. (2013). Cross-country differences
  in productivity: The role of allocation and selection. American Economic Review,
  103(1):305–34.

Basu, S., Pascali, L., Schiantarelli, F., and Serven, L. (2012). Productivity and the
  Welfare of Nations. NBER Working Papers 17971, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

Bernard, A. B., Redding, S. J., and Schott, P. K. (2010). Multiple-product ﬁrms and
  product switching. American Economic Review, 100(1):70–97.

Bernard, A. B., Redding, S. J., and Schott, P. K. (2011). Multiproduct ﬁrms and trade
  liberalization. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(3):1271–1318.

Broda, C. and Weinstein, D. E. (2006). Globalization and the gains from variety. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2):541–585.

Buera, F. J. and Shin, Y. (2013). Financial Frictions and the Persistence of History: A
  Quantitative Exploration. Journal of Political Economy, 121(2):221–272.

Camacho, A. and Conover, E. (2010). Misallocation and productivity in colombia’s
  manufacturing industries. IDB working paper series N0. IDB-WP-123.

Casacuberta, C. and Gandelman, N. (2009). Productivity, exit and crisis in uruguayan
  manufacturing and services sectors. mimeo.

Chen, K. and Irarrazabal, A. (2015). The Role of Allocative Efﬁciency in a Decade of
  Recovery. Review of Economic Dynamics, 18(3):523–550.

                                          34
Cirera, X., Fattal Jaef, R. N., and Maemir, H. B. (2017). Taxing the good ? distortions,
  misallocation, and productivity in sub-saharan africa. Policy Research working pa-
  per; no. WPS 7949.

Davis, S. J. and Haltiwanger, J. (1990). Gross job creation and destruction: Microe-
  conomic evidence and macroeconomic implications. In NBER Macroeconomics An-
  nual 1990, Volume 5, NBER Chapters, pages 123–186. National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

Goldberg, P. K., Khandelwal, A. K., Pavcnik, N., and Topalova, P. (2010). Multiprod-
  uct Firms and Product Turnover in the Developing World: Evidence from India.
  The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4):1042–1049.

Hopenhayn, H. A. (2014). On the Measure of Distortions. NBER Working Papers
  20404, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Klenow, P. J. (2007). Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
  and India. Discussion Papers 07-006, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Re-
  search.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Klenow, P. J. (2009). Misallocation and manufacturing tfp in china
  and india. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4):1403–1448.

Luttmer, E. G. (2010). On the mechanics of ﬁrm growth. Staff Report 440, Federal
  Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Luttmer, E. G. J. (2007). Selection, growth, and the size distribution of ﬁrms. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3):1103–1144.

Neumeyer, A. and Sandleris, G. (2009). Productivity and resource misallocation in
  the argentine manufacturing sector 1997-2002. mimeo.

Peters, M. (2016). Heterogeneous mark-ups and endogenous misallocation. working
  paper, Yale University.

Restuccia, D. and Rogerson, R. (2008). Policy distortions and aggregate productivity
  with heterogeneous establishments. Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4):707 – 720.

Roberts, M. J. and Tybout, J. R. (1996). Industrial evolution in developing countries :
  micro patterns of turnover, productivity, and market structure / edited by Mark J. Roberts

                                            35
  and James R. Tybout. Published for the World Bank [by] Oxford University Press,
  Oxford ; New York :.

Stokey, N. L. (2008). The Economics of Inaction: Stochastic Control Models with Fixed
  Costs. Princeton University Press.

Veracierto, M. (2001). Employment ﬂows, capital mobility, and policy analysis. In-
  ternational Economic Review, 42(3):571–95.




A     Calibrating the Distribution of Product Attributes
This appendix shows how to use the data about the distribution of output shares
in multi-product ﬁrms to calibrate the shape parameter of the Pareto distribution of
product attributes. We restrict attention to the case were ﬁrms are in the interior of
the product space.
    In the model, the output of a ﬁrm with productivity eω producing a good with
product attribute eλ is given by
                                                                 ρ
                                                        ω +λ   ρ −1
                                     q (ω , λ) ∝ e

where the factor of proportionality is a function of prices and other parameters in
the model.
    Under Pareto distribution of product attributes, the total output of the ﬁrm is:

                                                               ρ
                                         ρ
                                               ¯        − η − ρ −1           η
                     Q ( ω ) ∝ ( e ω ) ρ −1 e λ ( ω )
                                                                                ρ
                                                                        η−    ρ −1


Therefore, the output share of a product eω +λ is

                                                          ρ                    ρ
                              q (ω , λ)   η − ρ −1                      eλ   ρ −1
                  x (ω , λ) =           =
                               Q (ω )        η                                       ρ
                                                                    ¯ ( ω ) − η − ρ −1
                                                                   eλ

    The determine the shape of the distribution of this share, its cumulative distribu-



                                                   36
tion function will be given by:

                                                     ρ
  x ( ω ,λ )                               η−      ρ −1          ¯ (ω )
                                                                                ρ
                                                                           η − ρ −1     eλ                −
                                                                                                                     ρ
                                                                                                               η − ρ −1 −1
                                                                 λ                                    λ
               x (ω , λ) dF ( x ) =                          e                          ¯
                                                                                                η e                             d eλ
        ¯)
 x ( ω ,λ                                      η                                       eλ(ω )

                                                                  ⇐⇒
                                                                                                               ρ
                                                                                              ¯           η − ρ −1
               x ( ω ,λ )                            eλ                    ρ                 eλ(ω )
                            x (ω , λ) dF ( x ) =             η−               −1                                         d eλ
                    ¯)
             x ( ω ,λ
                                                     ¯
                                                    eλ(ω )                ρ−1                  −
                                                                                                           ρ
                                                                                                      η − ρ −1 − 1
                                                                                         (eλ )
which implies that the share of a given product’s output over total ﬁrm output is
                                                                                  ρ
distributed Pareto, with shape parameter η −                                    ρ −1   , and lower bound of the sup-
                          ¯
port equal to            eλ(ω ) .   Therefore, the 0.5 estimate Bernard et. al. ﬁnd for the regression
between log of rank and log of output share establishes that

                                                                            ρ
                                                      0.5 = η −
                                                                           ρ−1

    Given our calibrated value of ρ = 3, we infer that η ∼
                                                         = 2.




                                                                    37
