                                                    WPS8010


Policy Research Working Paper                      8010




                                   Brexit
            Trade Governance and Legal Implications
                     for Third Countries

                                Martín Molinuevo




Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8010


  Abstract
 While precise impact of Brexit on the EU/UK trade and                              to the UK. For these agreements to continue to apply, the
 investment agreements with third countries will depend                             UK and the third country will need to amend some aspects
 primarily on the terms of the withdrawal agreement to be                           of the text of the agreement as well as of the lists of com-
 concluded between them, most scenarios suggest an exten-                           mitments. Investment treaties concluded by the UK with
 sive process of amendment of the text and/or commitments                           third countries will remain valid, and no amendment is
 in multilateral and bilateral agreements. At the multilateral                      in principle necessary. Parties could require amendments
 level, the UK will remain a WTO Member, but will no                                to the text of the treaty, due to a fundamental change in
 longer be represented by the EU. The separation of the                             circumstances. LDCs and developing countries who benefit
 UK obligations from the current EU lists of concessions                            from the EU GSP will continue under this regime for the
 and schedules of commitments will require amendments                               remaining EU member, but that GSP framework will no
 that, particularly regarding subsidies and quotas, may lead                        longer be applicable to the UK. The UK may introduce
 to a broader renegotiation process requiring consensus of                          a new GSP regime of its own. In all cases, third coun-
 all interested WTO members. At the bilateral level, the                            tries who consider that Brexit has diminished the value
 status of current EU PTAs with regard to the UK and its                            of their negotiated commitments have the opportunity to
 trading partners remains uncertain: Some elements suggest                          request compensation in sectoral commitments or changes
 that these PTAs may no longer be valid for the UK, or that,                        in the text of the agreements, or ultimately terminate the
 even if legally valid, they will no longer cover the relation-                     agreement The process of amending the trade and invest-
 ship between the UK and the third country. Further, EU                             ment agreements requires comprehensive knowledge of
 agreements focusing on goods only will no longer apply                             their trade and investment flows with the EU and the UK.




  This paper is a product of the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be contacted
  at mmolinuevo@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
             Brexit: Trade Governance and Legal
              Implications for Third Countries
                                              Martín Molinuevo*




JEL Classification: F1 Trade; K33 International Law; F13 Trade Policy, International Trade
Organizations; F02 International Economic Order and Integration; F01 Global Outlook.


Keywords: Trade Agreements; Trade Policy; WTO; Bilateral Investment Treaties; GSP; Brexit;
UK; EC; EU; Economic Integration; International Trade Law.




*
  The author is grateful to Anabel González, Jose Guilherme Reis, Michael Ferrantino, Sebastián Sáez, Gabrielle
Marceau, Alejandro Jara, Roy Santana, Panagiotis Delimatsis, Niall Meagher, and Markus Krajewski for valuable
comments and discussions. Julie DeMoos copyedited the document. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author. They do not necessarily represent the views of the World
Bank Group and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the
governments they represent, or any of the aforementioned individuals or institutions.
1.       Introduction
The United Kingdom (UK) has decided to withdraw from the European Union (EU). The
withdrawal from the Union—the first in its history—will not only have important implications
for the UK and remaining EU members, but also for their partners around the world.1
A key channel through which these third countries will be affected by Brexit is their trade and
investment relationship with the EU and the UK. Trade and capital flows connect the economies
of the EU and UK with the rest of the world, converting, for better or worse, seemingly domestic
policy decisions in events of global economic significance. Further, the change in the EU and
UK’s trade and investment regime will also have legal implications for the rights and obligations
of third countries. The trade flows of the EU and UK with the world are governed by the World
Trade Organization (WTO), as well as through a network of 35 bilateral and regional trade
agreements2 granting reciprocal preferential treatment to over 50 countries across the globe.
Brexit will hence not only have economic effects in the EU’s and UK’s partners through the
potential shifts in actual trade and capital flows, but also legal implications in the rights and
obligations of the EU and UK vis-à-vis third parties, and vice versa.
How exactly these relations with third countries are affected will ultimately depend on the terms
in which the UK and EU agree to part ways.3 In particular, the conditions related to the EU’s and
UK’s relationship with the world through trade or other agreements will greatly depend on the
terms of the withdrawal agreement to be negotiated when the UK invokes Article 50 of the
Treaty on European Union (TEU). As a result, the status and conditions of application of EU and
UK trade and investment agreements with third countries after Brexit is not yet fully known.
However, a number of substantial legal questions arise regarding how the rights of the EU/UK’s
trading partners may be affected by the withdrawal from the EU by one of its major members.
This note discusses the main legal aspects of the trade and investment relationship between the
EU and UK with third countries with the view to identifying the potential courses of action for
the parties to safeguard their trade and investment interests when Brexit takes place. Some
questions that this note addresses include:

        How will the multilateral framework be affected?



1
  For a review of the potential economic impact of Brexit on trade and investment flows, see World Bank, 2016.
2
  “Trade agreements and other agreements with a trade component” as listed by the European Commission at
http://ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/countries-and-regions/agreements/
3
  For the purposes of this analysis, we refer to “third countries” as those that have concluded a trade or investment
agreement with the EU and/or its Members States. Under “trade agreements” we include arrangements pursuant to
the establishment of a free trade area, customs unions, or the reductions or elimination of tariffs; we exclude from
this analysis the relationship of the EU/UK with members of the European Economic Area (namely, Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway) or other arrangements aimed at participating in the EU Single Market (such as with
Switzerland). Trade relations between the UK and non-EU members of the EU Single Market are likely to be
determined in the context of the UK withdrawal agreements.

                                                                                                                        2
        Do trade agreements concluded by third countries with the EU maintain their validity?
         Will they still apply to their trade with Britain, despite Brexit? How about investment
         treaties?
        Will trade and investment agreements continue to apply as they are, or will they be
         amended to reflect the new individual relationship with the UK? What aspects of the
         agreements are more likely to be amended?

2.       Status of Trade and Investment Agreements 
We start by considering whether trade and investment agreements between the UK and third
countries remain in force after Brexit. We then broadly assess whether the existing conditions of
application, set out in the country-specific list of commitments and reservations would be post-
Brexit or whether amendments may be necessary. For this analysis, we focus our attention on the
WTO agreements, preferential trade agreements (PTAs), bilateral investment treaties (BITs), and
the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP). We do not evaluate here the rights and obligations
between the UK and remaining EU Member States, or other economies participating in the EU
single markets.

     a. Validity of current trade and investment agreements after Brexit 
The first question regarding the EU/UK agreements with third countries is whether they will
remain in force when the UK is no longer a Member of the European Union. Will the UK and the
third countries lose the preferential trade conditions that currently link them through trade and
investment agreement? In this section, we explore whether the trade and investment agreements
at the multilateral and bilateral levels to which the UK is a party will remain in force after Brexit.

UK’s WTO membership 
The UK was an original contracting partner to the GATT 1947, and a founding member of the
WTO. As a result, the UK is and will remain a WTO Member, regardless of its relationship with
the EU or other countries. While the precise terms of the UK’s (and EU’s) rights and obligations
will likely require some clarifications after Brexit (see section b below), the WTO agreements
will continue to apply to the UK’s trade with the world.4 For this to change, the UK would have
to withdraw from the WTO in the terms of Article XV of the Marrakesh Agreement, which does
not appear as a likely scenario.5



4
  Conf. Bartels, 2016. In that sense, WTO Director General Roberto Azevêdo has declared that “The UK is a
member of the WTO today, it will continue to be a member tomorrow. There will be no discontinuity in
membership. 'They have to renegotiate [their terms of membership] but that doesn't mean they are not members”,
Sky News, 26 October 2016.
5
  In fact, the International Trade Committee of the House of Commons has ratified the UK’s adherence to the WTO,
and called the UK’s position in the WTO “the foundation stone for all […] future trading relationships after Brexit”
(House of Commons, 2017)


                                                                                                                   3
While there is no doubt of the UK’s membership to the WTO, questions remain about the
membership to the so-called WTO Plurilateral Agreements, in particular to the Agreement on
Government Procurement (GPA). Currently, the EU is a party to the GPA, which in turns binds
the UK. However, it is unclear whether the right and obligations of the GPA would continue to
apply to the UK after Brexit6.

Preferential trade agreements 
The question whether the current network of preferential trade agreements (PTAs) of which the
UK is a party will continue to govern the relationship between the UK and third countries
remains uncertain. On one hand, it may be considered that the UK is a party to such agreement
only to the extent that it is an EU Member State, and that the UK will no longer benefit from
such arrangements after Brexit. On the other hand, it can be argued that the UK is a party to the
EU PTAs in its own right, and will remain a party to the agreement even after Brexit. Even in
this case, however, questions remain about the actual applicability of the agreement to the UK
territory after Brexit. In practice, to ensure the continuity of the PTAs between the UK and the
third country, the two parties will likely need to agree on some amendments to the text as well as
the commitments.

         Continuation of EU PTAs 
It can also be understood that, under international law, the UK is a party to the agreements in its
own right and, and will remain a party to those agreements even after Brexit. The main argument
for this is that the UK has concluded the PTAs in its own capacity as a sovereign state —not just
by the fact of being an EU member state. Most EU PTAs agreements are signed, in addition to
concerned third countries (the Republic of Korea, for example) by the EU and by each individual
EU member state, including the UK. Under the terms of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
the Treaties, the signature by the UK officials expresses the consent of the State to be bound by
the treaty, in the terms of Articles 11 and 12 of the convention. As a result, the EU-South Korea
Free Trade Agreements (FTA) would apply to the UK – South Korea trading relation, not
because the UK is an EU member state, but because the UK concluded, as a sovereign state, a
trade agreement with the Republic of Korea. This is so because most of these PTAs promoted by
the EU include provisions, such as on services, investment attraction and protection, and
regulatory disciplines, that go well beyond the competences of the EU and require the acceptance
by the states that form part of the EU—so-called “mixed agreements” because they affect policy
competences of both the EU and the EU member states.




6
    Similarly, see House of Commons, 2017, and Cameron, 2016.

                                                                                                 4
                Figure 1. Third countries PTAs relations with the UK and EU




Under this interpretation, third countries would see their legal relationship with the UK split
away from the current arrangement with the EU, but would continue on a preferential basis
directly with the UK. Currently trade and investment flows of the third country with the EU/UK
are governed by one single legal relationship with the EU and UK as a whole. After Brexit, the
PTAs between the EU/UK and the third country would de facto entail two different legal
relationships, one with the UK and one with the rest of the EU. Figure 1 depicts these legal
relations.
In such cases, where both the UK and the remaining EU member states “share” one PTAs with a
third country, it may be necessary to clarify how that relationship is structured: whether this will
be set out in one single agreement with three different parties, or two separate bilateral
agreements. The choice of that arrangement will have implications on the administration of the
agreement/s. For example, the administration of the agreements may need separate councils,
consultative bodies, secretariats, dispute settlement bodies, and so on.
Moreover, for some types of obligations, for example allocations under tariff rate quotas (TRQs),
the replacement of an EU-wide obligation with separate obligations to the EU and UK has more
than one possible solution, with the different solutions potentially having important commercial
implications. This issue is discussed in more detail in the section on the UK’s WTO obligations
below.


                                                                                                   5
       Territorial applicability of the agreements  
However, even if the UK remains in fact a party to the agreements, it may be beyond the
agreements’ scope. Most the EU PTAs define their geographical applicability, for the EU and its
member states, not by referring to the territory of the EU and its member states, but rather by
reference to the Treaty of the EU and the TFEU. That is, the territorial scope of the PTAs is
determined by the territories covered by the Treaty of the EU and the TFEU. That is the case, for
example, for the EU-South Korea FTA7, the EU-Cariforum EPA, the EU-Colombia-Peru FTA,
and EU-Canada CETA. That means that, after Brexit, the UK will no longer be covered by
PTAs, even if was interpreted that the UK, as a sovereign state, remains a party to the agreement.

        Exclusion from EU PTAs 
Finally, some commentators have suggested that “agreements between the EU and third
countries [. . .] for example on trade, would cease to apply to the withdrawing state, and it would
thus need to negotiate alternative arrangements” (EPRS, 2016). The main argument lies on the
fact that the EU PTAs are designed as bilateral agreements between the EU and its member
states and the third party and, as such, they only apply to the EU and the States that belong to the
EU. The EU-South Korea Free Trade Agreements (FTA), for example, defines the “EU Party” to
the agreement with a reference to the distribution of competences between the EU and its
member states under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)8.
In this sense, proponents of this interpretation suggest that the agreements apply to the EU
member states in their capacity of EU member states, not as sovereign states. Under this reading,
based on the division of competences between the EU and its member states, the UK will no
longer be a party to the current EU PTAs.
There is greater certainty that goods-only agreements will in fact cease to apply to the UK once
Brexit take place. Agreements covering only trade in goods fall within the exclusive
competences of the EU, and are concluded solely by the EU and the third country, and do not
involve the EU member states directly. These types of agreements are a rarity in current EU
trade policy; a cursory review suggests that the main examples of these agreements are the EU
customs union agreements with Turkey, San Marino, and Andorra.9 Since the UK is not a party
to these agreements, as it is to mixed agreements, and they only apply to the UK because of its
EU membership, these customs unions will no longer apply to the UK after Brexit. As a result,
the trade relations between the UK and Turkey, San Marino, and Andorra will no longer be on a

7
  Article 15.15:1 of the EU-South Korea FTA reads: “This Agreement shall apply, on the one hand, to the territories
in which the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union are applied and
under the conditions laid down in those Treaties, and, on the other hand, to the territory of Korea”.
8
  Article 1.2 of the EU-South Korea FTA reads: “the Parties mean, on the one hand, the European Union or its
Member States or the European Union and its Member States within their respective areas of competence as derived
from the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
(hereinafter referred to as the “EU Party”), and on the other hand, Korea”.
9
  Other examples of EU trade agreements that do not involve the EU member states include the EC-Syria
Cooperation Agreement of 1978, the Interim Partnership Agreement with Fiji and Papua New Guinea of 2009, and a
set of agreements with EFTA countries (Norway, Iceland, and Switzerland) of 1973.

                                                                                                                 6
preferential basis, but it will revert—unless the UK and these parties celebrate another agreement
to the contrary—to the WTO most-favored-nation treatment. Figure 2 reflects these changes.


 Figure 2. Third countries customs unions with the UK and EU




In brief, it remains uncertain whether the network of trade agreements that currently govern
UK’s trade and investment relations with the third countries will continue to apply after Brexit.
In order to ensure continuation of the PTAs, it seems that some kind of understanding between
the UK and the third party, reflected in the current agreement or other text, will be necessary.
While it could be understood that, under international law, the PTAs will remain in force
between the UK and the third parties, the UK would lie beyond the territorial applicability of the
agreements. These include, for instance, the free trade agreements with South Korea, Chile,
Colombia, Mexico, South Africa, and the agreement with Canada not yet in force. In practice,
that would mean that, should the UK and the third country wish to continue the preferential
treatment, they will need to amend some aspects of the PTAs to reflect the new situations.
Furthermore, goods-only agreements, such as the custom union agreements with Turkey, San
Marino, and Andorra, will cease to apply to the UK —unless the parties expressly agree on their
continuation. Table 1 summarizes these findings and provides additional examples.

Table 1. Summary of EU/UK trade and investment agreements after Brexit
                          Remains in
Agreement      Scope                                    Amendments                    Examples
                            force(*)
                                          Textual amendments needed to separate
                                           EU and UK lists of commitments.
                                          Substantial amendments likely needed in
                                                                                        GATT,
            Merchandise,                   commitment on subsidies and quotas.
                                                                                      Agriculture
  WTO       services, IP,     Yes         Could be pursued as rectification or
                                                                                      agreement,
                etc.                       renegotiation by EU/UK depending on
                                                                                        GATS
                                           new conditions.
                                          Third countries could demand broader
                                           renegotiation process.



                                                                                                    7
                                                                                          EU-Turkey
             Merchandise
                                 No        n/a                                             Customs
                only
                                                                                            Union
                                                Need to amend geographical scope            EU-
   PTAs        Merchandise,                     Textual amendments needed to separate    Cariforum
                  services,                       EU and UK lists of commitments.         EPA, EU-
                                  Uncertain
                investment,                     Substantial amendments likely needed in Korea TA,
                   IP, etc.                       commitment on tariff rate quotas.      EU-Colombia
                                                No specific procedure.                       TA
                                                                                        UK-Colombia
                                                Not needed.
                                                                                           BIT, UK
                                                Parties could demand renegotiation of
    BITs        Investment           Yes                                                    Russian
                                                  BIT terms.
                                                                                          Federation
                                                No specific procedure.                      BIT
               Merchandise                                                                Everything
    GSP                              No        n/a
                    only                                                                   But Arms
(*) Refers to the legal relationship between the third country and the UK.

Investment treaties                                
The situation of bilateral investment treaties appears somewhat more straightforward. EU
member states, including the UK, continued to negotiate and conclude investment promotion and
protection treaties with third countries on their own capacity until the entry into force of the
Treaty of Lisbon assigned foreign investment policy as an exclusive competence of the EU (Art.
207 TFEU). The UK, in particular, has concluded over one hundred bilateral investment treaties
since 1975, the last one with Colombia in March 2010. No investment treaty has been concluded
by the EU or its member states since then, although currently negotiations are under way for an
investment agreement with China.
Those investment treaties concluded by the UK with third countries will remain valid. Since the
UK negotiated and signed them in their own capacity and independently of the EU, Britain’s
separation from the EU will not have any direct legal effect on these treaties.

Generalized System of Preferences 
There are currently 98 developing countries who currently benefit from at least one of the GSP
programs of the EU. The three main GSP schemes currently by the EU include: a standard GSP
regime which offers tariff reductions to developing countries; the “GSP+” preferences, offered to
countries that ratify and implement core international conventions relating to human and labor
rights, environment and good governance, that improve on the conditions of the standard GSP;
and the Everything But Arms (EBA) programs that grant duty-free quota-free access to
essentially all products, except for arms and ammunitions to 48 least developed countries
(LDCs).
LDCs and developing countries who benefit from the EU GSP will continue under this regime
for the remaining EU Member. However, since these programs are part of EU’s Common Trade

                                                                                                   8
Policy, the current EU GSP schemes will no longer apply to the UK once Brexit takes place, and
the UK will be able to introduce a GSP regime of its own. Developing countries and LDCs who
benefit from preferential access to the EU single market will hence depend on the terms of an
eventual UK GSP for their exports to the UK.

     b. Conditions of applications of the agreements 
While it appears that most trade and investment agreements currently involving the UK will
remain in force, the question remains of whether the current conditions of application will
continue or whether they may need to be amended as a result of Brexit. In what follows, we
review this situation for the WTO agreements, PTAs, and BITs.

UK’s WTO membership 
As an original contracting party to the GATT and a founding member of the WTO, the UK will
continue to be a member of the WTO after its separation from the EU. However, the EU
currently represents the UK, and all other EU member states, at the WTO fora, negotiating both
in its own and its member states’ behalf. This entails that Britain’s obligation with regard to
trade in goods and services is currently reflected in the EU’s list of concessions and schedules of
commitments. These lists embody the EU’s and UK’s obligations in trade in goods, including on
tariffs, tariff-rate quotas, and subsidies, and trade in services. In particular, they include
exemptions to most favored nation treatment, and commitments with regard to national
treatment, quantitative restrictions, and additional commitments.10
In withdrawing from the EU, the UK will need to record its own list of concessions and
commitments, separate from those of the EU and its member states. In that sense, the WTO’s
chief, Roberto Azevêdo, has expressed that the UK’s “will have to renegotiate” some elements of
its WTO commitments.11 Nevertheless, while it is clear that the current EU/UK lists of trade
concessions will need to be amended, renegotiation is not the only available mechanism to that
end. There are two main channels for modifying schedules of concessions under GATT rules:
     i)      the modification or rectification of schedules (“rectification”): a simplified procedure
             that allows that changes resulting from formal modification or rectification could be
             certified by the Director-General if no objection is raised by any other member,
             provided that those changes are of a purely formal character and do not alter the
             scope of the concessions,12 as set out in 1980 Procedures for Modification and
             Rectification of Schedules of Tariff Concessions; and


10
   Bartels, 2016, offers a comprehensive discussion on the UK legal position in the WTO after Brexit, including the
validity of its schedules of commitments.
11
   Sky News, “Brexit will not cause UK trade 'disruption' - WTO boss”, 26 October 2016.
12
   See 1980 Procedures for Modification and Rectification of Schedules of Tariff Concessions, GATT document
L/4962, of 28 March 1980.


                                                                                                                      9
     ii)     the modification or withdrawal of trade concessions through renegotiation: the main
             procedure for tariff and non-tariff renegotiations under the GATT, which allows for
             interested WTO members to require compensation13, set out in Article XXVIII of the
             GATT. This process is launched when a WTO needs to make substantial
             modifications in their schedules that are likely to diminish the rights of other WTO
             members.
In this context, two initial scenarios appear a priori possible: 1) the EU/UK seek only to rectify
the current EU list, by making two lists out of it with identical substantial content; or 2) the
EU/UK wish to make substantial amendments to their respective lists, thus launching a
renegotiation process. The choice for these two procedures, however, is not necessarily mutually
exclusive, as a rectification process could lead to a renegotiation if a third WTO Member objects
to the proposed amendments. Box 1 offers further details on the rectification and modification
procedures.
 Box 1. Modification vs. Rectification of Concessions
 The GATT Contracting Parties adopted the 1980 Procedures for Modification and Rectification of
 Schedules of Tariff Concessions 27 (Decision on Rectification), which provides that changes resulting
 from formal modification or rectification could be certified by the Director-General if no objection is
 raised by any other Member within a 3 month period. This procedure is subject to the following
 conditions:
      The proposed rectification shall be limited to amendments or rearrangements which are of a
         purely formal character and which do not alter the scope of the concessions.
      The proposed modifications resulting from action under Article II, Article XVIII:7, Article
         XXIV:6, Article XXVII or Article XXVIII, shall be a correct reflection of the modification.
      If objections are raised (e.g., because another member considers the change alters the scope of
         the concession) on any of these grounds, the member wishing to modify/rectify its schedule
         could end up in Article XXVIII of the GATT 1994 renegotiations.
 Source: WTO Secretariat, n/d.


         Rectification of schedules 
While the rectification process would appear more straightforward in terms of procedure, it also
raises some substantial legal questions regarding its feasibility. In principle, it is conceivable that
the UK merely mirrors the current EU schedules, with only formal amendments to reflect that it
is now an individual UK list. It could be expected that UK and the EU may have a preference
for this simpler and straightforward procedure. The limit of this procedure is that the proposed




13
  In this context, Article XXVIII of the GATT requires the modifying party to seek an agreement with any WTO
who has an “initial negotiating right” or a “principal supplying interest”, as well as to consult with any other WTO
member who has a “substantial interest” on the matter, as interpreted in the Understanding on the Interpretation of
Article XXVIII of the GATT 1994.

                                                                                                                   10
changes do not “alter the scope” of the concessions, de facto diminishing the rights of other
WTO Members.
Yet simply duplicating the current EU lists would entail a situation that likely goes beyond the
mere rectification of schedules and does in fact alter the scope of the concessions. While some
aspects of the EU list can be simply copied into a UK list, some commitments don’t lend
themselves to such duplication. For example, it is entirely possible for the UK to replicate the
current bound tariffs for the EU with only clerical corrections in the document; arguably, the
same can be said about the schedules of concessions in trade in services.
However, some aspects of the trade schedules bring some practical challenges to the rectification
process, which suggest that mere rectification may not be feasible or desirable. For instance:
current commitments on reduction of agricultural subsidies are expressed in the form of a
maximum “bound” monetary ceiling (so-called Total Aggregate Measure of Support—AMS) for
each WTO Member. The EU schedule features an AMS value that is the maximum ceiling that
the EU and all EU member states can collectively apply. How would that ceiling apply to two
separate WTO Members? Would both the EU and UK be allowed to have the same value? This
seems unlikely as it implies very large allowable protection for the UK. Can the AMS ceiling be
reduced proportionally—but based in what criterion?
Commitments on tariff rate quotas (TRQs), expressed in volumes, pose similar challenges. The
reproduction of the current EU TRQs in a UK schedule would entail disproportionately high
quotas for the one UK country, which suggest that current TRQs would need to be “divided”
between the EU and the UK. However, there is no precedent on how this should take place: Pro-
rata? Based on what criteria? What period should be used as a basis for the calculation? The
division of the TRQ would also have implication for third countries that are exporting to the EU
or UK under that framework since, depending their export destination, they could see the quota
expanded or reduced, thus affecting their current rights under the WTO agreements. The
situation seems to elicit a discussion that goes beyond an editorial correction, for which a
negotiation would seem necessary.
This suggests that the EU and UK may decide to follow the rectification procedure in order to
“separate” their lists, as a simplified procedure than to open a renegotiation. However, should
any WTO Member consider that their trade concessions are being diminished, it could object to
the rectified schedules within three months from the communication of the rectification. The
objection by a WTO Member would prevent the new rectified schedules to enter into force and
could force the EU and UK to discuss the amendments to the schedules in a broader
renegotiation process.

       Renegotiation 
Alternatively, the UK and EU could open a formal renegotiation process in the terms of Articles
XXVIII GATT and XXI GATS. The renegotiation process is opened at the request of the party
wishing to amend its schedule of trade concessions. This process allows WTO members with a

                                                                                                   11
substantial interest14 to seek additional concessions and commitments in compensation for the
amendments that reduce the scope of the concessions.
 Box 2. Procedures for the Modification of Concessions
 Article XXVIII:4 of the GATT allows members to request the renegotiation of its lists of concessions
 “in special circumstances.” Renegotiations can be requested any time, and the member concerned shall
 request the authorization from other members by sending a notification of its intention of modification
 or withdrawal of tariff concessions. The renegotiation shall be completed within a 60-day period if
 such negotiations involve only a single item or a very small group of items. A longer period of time
 may be granted by members if such negotiations involve a larger number of items.
 A member seeking to modify or withdraw a concession (e.g., increase a particular tariff binding) shall
 negotiate with members having Initial Negotiating Rights (INRs) and Principal Supplying Interest
 (PSI) with a view to agreeing on compensation in order to maintain “a general level of reciprocal and
 mutually advantageous concessions not less favourable to trade than that provided for in this agreement
 prior to such negotiations.” Such compensation is negotiated between the parties primarily concerned
 and could consist, for example, in the reduction of bound tariff rate(s) applicable to another item or
 other items of interest to the party.
 Source: WTO Secretariat, n/d.

Amendments that increase the level of concession (lower bound tariffs, for instance,) may be
introduced with no major challenges, and will likely be welcomed by the WTO memberships. On
the contrary, amendments that are perceived as diminishing the trade concessions (such as higher
bounds tariffs, smaller TRQs, or higher subsidies ceilings) are likely to elicit requests of
compensation by interested WTO Members. Compensation would take the form of greater
concessions in other elements of the lists. If the member requesting modification and the one
member having substantial interest15 seeking compensation cannot reach an agreement during
the negotiation period with the modifying member, the requesting member may implement the
modifications, which will allow the member with substantial interest to withdraw equivalent
concessions initially negotiated with the member that initiated the renegotiation. Article XXI of
the GATS provides for similar steps, with the addition of referring the matter to arbitration if the
modifying member and the affected member are unable to reach an agreement on compensation.
In the case of the EU/UK, it would appear that the amendment of may lead to a process of
modification of schedules. The UK will need to draw its own lists of concessions based,
presumably, on the current EU lists. On the contrary, the EU will also need to amend its
schedules to reflect the fact that the UK will no longer be covered by those lists. As mentioned
earlier, the process of separating the UK rights and obligations from the current EU’s lists is

14
  On the WTO members having a substantial interest, see Box 1 and footnote 14.
15
  Article XXVIII provides explicitly that there is no precise definition of “substantial interest” (SI). It however
clarifies that substantial interest should be understood as covering only those members who have, or in the absence
of discriminatory quantitative restrictions affecting their exports could reasonably be expected to have, a “significant
share” in the market of the member requesting to modify or withdraw the concession (Ad note to Article XXVIII of
the GATT, para. 1.7). In GATT practice SI has normally been granted to those members who accounted for at least
10% of imports of the item for which modifications were being sought (WTO n/d).

                                                                                                                     12
likely to require the (substantial) modification of some concessions, in particular with relation to
quotas and subsidy ceilings in the area of agriculture.
In practice, these issues suggest that Brexit will entail a process of renegotiation, at least with
regard to particular measures in agricultural and fisheries products, for the modification of the
schedules of both the EU and the UK. In any case, it appears that whether the EU and UK
attempt to pursue the rectification of schedules, or request the renegotiations of their
concessions, either procedure will allow a WTO member with an interest in the products
concerned protect their rights vis-à-vis the UK and the EU, by objecting to the rectification,
requesting for compensation, or ultimately withdrawing equivalent concessions.

Preferential Trade Agreements 
In terms of their preferential commitments, PTAs bring about similar challenges to those of the
WTO agreements: even if is understood that the PTAs remain applicable to the UK after Brexit,
the current lists of commitments include elements whose application to the UK and EU
separately need to be clarified. As discussed above, in the case of schedules of concessions in
PTAs, this is particularly the case for commitments on quotas and tariff-rate quotas. PTAs do no
generally include obligations on subsidies.
PTAs do not generally include specific rules on rectification or renegotiation such as those under
the WTO. Instead EU PTAs often include one single provision allowing for “amendments” of
the agreement, including presumably the list of schedules.16 Some agreements, such as the EU-
Korea FTA,17 expressly allow for amendments to the annexes to be decided by a joint Trade
Committee established by the agreement.
It is clear that any third country to an agreement with the EU/UK who considers that their rights
have been affected by Brexit can launch a procedure to seek compensation or additional
commitments by the EU or the UK. Since these agreements do not feature specific rules of
procedure on how these amendments may take place, it is to be assumed that the amendment
procedures will be part of the consultation between the parties. For example, Caribbean
countries, many of whom hold historical and cultural ties with the UK, and a large part of its
diaspora is now established there, may wish to feature stronger trade and investment
commitments with the UK, that were not possible under a broader negotiation with the entire EU
membership.


16
   For instance, Article 334 of the EU-Colombia trade agreement reads: “Amendments.
1. The Parties may agree in writing to any amendment to this Agreement.
2. Any amendment shall enter into force and constitute an integral part of this Agreement according to the
conditions established in Article 330, mutatis mutandis.
3. The Parties may further develop the commitments undertaken in this Agreement, or broaden its scope of
application, by agreeing to amendments to this Agreement or by concluding agreements on specific sectors or
activities, taking into consideration the experience gained during its implementation.”
17
   EU-Korea FTA Article 15.5.


                                                                                                              13
Should renegotiation not be agreeable between the parties, most such trade agreements leave the
option to unilaterally withdraw from it.18 Importantly, since Brexit would entail separate
agreements between the third party and the UK, and between the third party and the EU (See
figure 1 above), the agreement could be terminated for only one of those relationships, while
remaining in force for the other.

Bilateral Investment Treaties 
Unlike EU trade agreements and investment treaties promoted by other countries—notably, the
United States and Canada— BITs concluded by the UK do not generally feature a list of sectoral
commitments or reservations. Hence, the terms or conditions to be assessed for amendment by
the parties concern not specific sectoral obligations, but rather the substantial obligations
featured in the text of the agreement itself. That is, the discussion would relate to the text of the
national treatment clause, rather than the sectoral reservations to national treatment. As a result,
contrary to the situation of PTAs, there appears to be nothing in the investment treaties that
would require an amendment as a result of Brexit. In principle, investment treaties concluded by
third countries with the UK will continue their existence unaltered after Brexit.
However, third countries may consider that Brexit does have an impact on their economic
relationship with the UK, and they could seek the conclusion of the agreement or a renegotiation
of its terms. For instance, companies from third countries that are established in the UK will,
after Brexit, no longer be able to do business in other EU member states with the benefits derived
from the EU Single Market. In these conditions, third countries may consider that the original
rights and obligations set out in the BITs are not proportionate to the new conditions, and could
wish to revise the terms of the investment treaty that links them to the UK.
The parties to the UK investment treaties would need to express to their UK counterparts their
desire to revise the terms of the agreements as a condition for the continuation of the treaty. A
few investment treaties expressly include provisions on amendments,19 which could be triggered.
Amendments to the treaties would be possible even if those treaties do not expressly address the
possibility of amendments to its disciplines, simply by requiring amendments as an alternative to
the termination of the treaty.20



18
   See, for instance, EU-Korea FTA, Article 15.11:3.
19
   Article XIII:2 of the UK-Costa Rica BIT, for instance, reads “El presente Convenio podrá ser modificado en-,
cualquier momento por mutuo acuerdo de las Partes. Las modificaciones resultantes entrarán en vigor una vez que
cumplan con los trámites constitucionales respectivos y se produzca el canje de notas entre las Partes
contratantes.”
20
   The termination of the treaty could be invoked even if the agreement does not foresee this possibility, by invoking
the rebus sic stantibus doctrine of international law. This doctrine allows for a termination on an international due to
a fundamental change of circumstances. This principle is incorporated in the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties (“Vienna Convention” or VCLT), that recognizes the possibility of unilaterally terminating the agreements
if there is a “fundamental change of circumstances” that was “essential” for the conclusion of the agreement and that
it “radically [. . .] transform[s] the extent of [its] obligations” (Art. 62 VCLT)

                                                                                                                     14
3.       Way Ahead for Third Countries 
The cursory review of trade agreements suggests that Brexit will entail an extensive process of
amendment of the text and commitments that currently apply to the UK and its trading partners.
At the multilateral level, the UK will remain a WTO member, but will be need to clarify its
specific terms and conditions. At the bilateral level, the status of current EU PTAs with regard to
the UK and its trading partners remains uncertain, as the applicability of these agreements to a
non-EU member state is not addressed. Some elements suggest that these PTAs may no longer
be valid for the UK, or that, even if legally valid, the will no longer apply to the relationship
between the UK and the third country. Further, good-only agreements, such as the customs union
agreements with Andorra, San Marino, and Turkey will cease to apply to the UK. Some
agreements, however, will continue to apply without the need for amendments, such the bilateral
investment treaties concluded by the UK.
In all those cases, however, third countries who consider that Brexit has diminished the value of
their negotiated commitments have the opportunity to seek amendments to their agreements, in
the form of compensation in sectoral commitments or changes in the text of the agreements.
For the PTAs to continue to apply, the UK and the third country will need to amend some
aspects of the text of the agreement as well as of the lists of commitments. This situation could
be addressed by concluding a totally new agreement, modifying the text and schedules of the
current PTA, or, as a minimalistic option, signing some type of instrument that interprets some
key provisions of the original text, such as the clause on territorial coverage, to adapt it to the
new, bilateral, UK-third country relationship.
This process of amending the trade and investment agreements to accommodate the new
circumstances of Brexit requires a comprehensive understanding of their trade and investment
flows with the EU and the UK. In particular, third countries should be able to link the economic
impact of Brexit in specific sectors, with the terms and commitments of their agreements. A
number of steps can help third countries ensure that the value of their trade and investment
agreements with the EU and UK remains unchanged after Brexit. The following points offer a
preliminary list of key issues that third countries should consider in this regard:

        Trade flows: Third countries should identify in detail their exports to the UK and to the
         EU, and the regimes under which they take places. A thorough understanding of the
         exports to (and imports from) the UK will be necessary for eventual renegotiation of
         commitments under the WTO and PTAs.

        Agricultural and fisheries trade: since WTO disciplines on subsidies, as well as WTO and
         PTA commitments on quotas, fall largely on agricultural and fisheries products,
         agriculture and fisheries are likely to be at the center of any amendment of the WTO
         agreements, as well as PTAs. In these sectors, third countries should be aware, in addition
         to the trade flows, the level of utilization of quotas and the specific EU member state who
                                                                                                      15
       is importing those goods, and the level of subsidies to agricultural and fisheries products
       within each EU member state, and the UK in particular.

      Investment: The exit of the UK from the EU single market will entail that UK-based
       firms, including foreign-owned firms, will no longer benefit from the freedom of
       establishment—and vice versa. Third countries should hence be aware of the investment
       by their firms in the EU and the impact that Brexit may have on their businesses,
       including the potential costs for their investments. WTO discussions on trade in services,
       as well as commitments on establishment under PTAs and BITs will hinge on a
       comprehensive understanding of these investment relations between the third country and
       the EU and UK.

      Terms and conditions of each trade agreement: While the present review offers some
       general conclusions on the status of the trade and investment agreements involving the
       EU and UK, each of these legal instruments as its specific terms both with regard to the
       agreement’s main disciplines as well as the lists of sectoral commitments in goods,
       services, and investment. A detailed understanding of the terms and conditions of the
       specific trade and investment agreements is essential for considering potential
       amendments, in particular in areas of key economic interest, such as agriculture, services
       trade and investment, or movement of individuals.
The specific conditions of Brexit and its impact on trade and investment flows will greatly
depend on the terms of the withdrawal agreement between the UK and the EU—but it will
undoubtedly bring important challenges as well as opportunities to the parties involved and their
partners around the world. The trade and investment agreements linking the EU and UK with
the rest of the world will be a key tool to minimize negative impact and maximize opportunities.
The current analysis suggests that Brexit will entail an extensive process of amendment of the
text and/or the list of commitments of the UK trade agreements at the multilateral and bilateral
level. Third countries can use the opportunity of these talks to promote greater trade and
investments flows with the EU and UK.




                                                                                                16
References 
     Bartels, Lorand, “The UK's Status in the WTO after Brexit”, Available at SSRN:
      https://ssrn.com/abstract=2841747, September 2016.

     Cameron Audrey, 2016, “Brexit: What does it mean for public procurement?”, Insight, 08
      July 2016, available at https://andersonstrathern.co.uk/news-insight/eu-referendum-
      public-procurement-law/ (downloaded March 14, 2016).

     European Parliament Research Service (EPRS), “Article 50 TEU: Withdrawal of a
      Member State from the EU,” February 2016.

     Hoda, Anwarul, “Tariff negotiations and renegotiations under the GATT and WTO:
      procedures and practices,” Cambridge University Press, 2001.

     House of Commons, International Trade Committee, 2017, “UK Trade Options beyond
      2019, 7 March 2017, available at
      http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-
      select/international-trade-committee/inquiries/parliament-2015/uk-trade-options-beyond-
      2019-16-17/ (downloaded March 14, 2016).

     Nicolaides, Phedon, “Withdrawal from the European Union: a typology of effects,”
      Maastricht Journal, vol. 20, pages 209–219, 2013.

     Reuters, “World trade chief says post-Brexit ‘WTO option’ may be unfeasible for UK,”
      June 6th, 2016, available at http://www.reuters.com/article/us-britain-eu-wto-
      idUSKCN0YS1LA (downloaded June 30, 2016).

     Sidley, “Brexit: Trade Implications of the UK’s Vote to Leave the European Union”,
      June 27, 2016, available at http://www.sidley.com/~/media/update-
      pdfs/2016/06/20160627_international-trade-update.pdf (downloaded June 30, 2016).

     Sky News, “Brexit will not cause UK trade 'disruption' - WTO boss”, 26 October 2016,
      available at http://news.sky.com/story/brexit-will-not-cause-uk-trade-disruption-wto-
      boss-10632803 (downloaded February 16, 2017).

     World Bank, 2016, “Trade and investment implications of Brexit,” World Bank Group.
      http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/177291468937534200/Trade-and-investment-
      implications-of-Brexit

     World Trade Organization Secretariat, “WTO Schedules of Concessions and
      Renegotiation of Concessions,” n/d, available at
      https://ecampus.wto.org/admin/files/Course_417/Module_757/ModuleDocuments/NAM
      A-M4-R3-E.pdf (downloaded March 14, 2016).


                                                                                              17
