                                         Introduction

Montenegro and the World Bank Group (WBG) have jointly prepared a robust program of
cooperation for the next four years. In the past 18 months, the World Bank Group has prepared the
Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Montenegro, a comprehensive analytic report outlining
challenges and opportunities that the country is facing on the road to sustained growth and prosperity,
and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF), a document that sets out the goals and priorities for
World Bank Group program in Montenegro for the next four years. Both the SCD and the CPF were
informed by extensive and broad consultations with the government, local communities, private sector,
civil society and international development partners active in Montenegro. In particular, the CPF,
World Bank Group strategy in Montenegro that came into force in June 2016, has been developed on
the basis of the diagnostic and of the government’s own strategic priorities. Bank’s strategy is focused
on two priority areas: Enhancing Macroeconomic and Financial Resilience, and Enabling Inclusive
Access to Economic Opportunities and Jobs.
With the new Government taking office, now is a good time to discuss specific policy reforms
and investments that the World Bank Group could support. While we believe that the agreed
strategy remains valid, it is essential to reconfirm our common understanding of challenges and policy
options so that the World Bank Group can provide timely and efficient support to Montenegro. It is also
useful to agree on an initial set of advisory and financing operations that WBG could launch in the near
term.
The following Policy Notes summarize the key challenges, policy options and ways in which
WBG could provide effective support. These are fully consistent with the recommendations of the
Systematic Country Diagnostic and goals of the Country Partnership Framework, and aim to present a
concise and clear set of proposals for each priority area. The Notes form a consistent document but
each one of them can be used as a stand-alone piece for discussion with the relevant sector
stakeholders. There are three thematic Notes outlining key priority areas – Macro-Fiscal and Financial
Resilience, Private Sector and Jobs, and Environmental Sustainability. Each of these is accompanied by
a series of sector notes that provide additional detail.
Urgent fiscal consolidation is the prerequisite for a meaningful world Bank Group program in
Montenegro. Given the severity of the debt crisis, Montenegro will be unable to restore the confidence
of international investors without rapid and decisive policy reform that would bring the budget into
balance by 2019. The World Bank stands ready to provide advice and budget support in this
challenging task, and to complement it with targeted investments in priority sectors.
To further inform the discussion of specific areas for World Bank Group support, the following
table summarizes the ongoing and proposed WBG operations under each priority area.
Note: Lending envelope for 2016-2020 is US$250-$300 million, of which up to US$90 million for
budget support (45+45). Advisory operations are in italic, IFC operations are in bold.

 Ongoing operations          Country Partnership Framework           Options
                             Indicative lending – ASA &TF

 Macro-Fiscal and Financial Stability

     •   Public Finance          •      Tax Administration (ready)    •   IFC advisory and
         Review                         IFP                               Debt Resolution
                                                                          program
     •   Subnational             •      Budget support (DPLs) for
         Finance Note                   fiscal consolidation          •   Strengthening of
                                                                          Financial Safety Net -
     •   Improving the           •      Health Reform
                                                                          FinSAC
         system of public
         procurement

 Private Sector and Jobs

     •   MIDAS                   •      Sustainable Tourism           •   MSME Development
                                                                          (starting with
     •   HERIC                   •      Skills (HERIC 2)
                                                                          diagnostic)
     •   Justice Reform          •      MIDAS 2
                                                                      •   IFC advisory and
                                 •      Jobs &Competitiveness             investments

                                 •      Digital Economy Project       •   Demands and Supply-
                                                                          s barriers to
                                 •      Justice Functional Review         employment

 Environmental Sustainability

     •   Industrial Waste        •      Energy Efficiency 2           •   IFC advisory and
                                                                          investments
     •   Energy Efficiency
                                                                      •   Advice on
                                                                          environmental
                                                                          management
                                    Policy Notes

Macro-Fiscal and Financial Resilience
Pensions and Social Assistance
Health
Tax Administration
Subnational Government

Private Sector and Jobs
Education and Skills
Connectivity – Transport and ICT
Agriculture and Rural Development
Sustainable Tourism

Environmental Sustainability
Energy Efficiency and Biomass Energy
Industrial and Special Waste
                                                        The Challenge

Montenegro’s current growth model is running out of steam, and public debt is unsustainably
high. In 2016-2018, the economy is expected to grow on average at 3.3 percent due to credit-driven
consumption and public and real estate investments, yet once Bar-Boljare highway construction ends,
growth is expected to fall below 1 percent. Public debt (including guarantees) stood at 79 percent of
GDP in 2015 and will likely exceed 80 percent in the near term, with external debt double that size.


 Figure 1. Fiscal Deficit 2014-2016, percent Figure 2. Public and Publicly Guaranteed Debt,
 of GDP                                      percent of GDP




 Sources: National statistical offices, Ministries of Finance, World Bank staff projections

The fiscal deficit is high, causing further debt accumulation. Driven by public investments in the
Bar-Boljare highway, for which Montenegro took a US$944 million loan (23 percent of the 2014 GDP),
the fiscal deficit reached 8 percent of GDP in 2015. Highway work delays allowed the deficit to drop to
below 4 percent in 2016, but resumption of construction would reverse this effect. On top of it, recent
increases in public sector wages, minimum pensions and social transfers (e.g. new benefit for mothers
of three or more children) added new spending equal to an estimated 2.5 percentage points of GDP
annually to already high public spending.
Without adjustment, the fiscal deficit would persist and public debt (including guarantees)
increase to 83 percent of GDP by 2018. Reducing the deficit will not be easy: government annual
deficit targets were missed by 2-3 percentage points of GDP on average since 2008, due to over-
commitments and contingent liabilities. Debt exposure to the US dollar (US dollar-denominated
highway loan) presents additional risk to public finances, as do public arrears of close to 7 percent of
GDP. To meet its own fiscal rule, the country needs to bring the public debt level down to 60 percent of
GDP. Immediate steps to put the debt on a sustainable path are necessary to reassure markets and
allow for a successful rollover of existing obligations which amount to around 16 percent of GDP a year.


 Figure 3. Government Financing Needs and Table 1. General Government Finance, percent
 Deficit, percent of GDP                  of GDP
                                                                                                            EU small
                                                              2015                             EU28          states*     Montenegro

                                                              Total Revenues                        45.0          39.0          42.2

                                                              Total Expenditures                    47.4          40.0          49.8

                                                              Current Expenditures                  43.2          34.9          40.9
                                                               o/w wage bill                        10.1          10.7          13.2
                                                               o/w interest payment                   2.3          1.8           2.4
                                                              Capital Expenditures                    4.2          5.1           9.0
                                                              Gross Public Debt                     85.2          54.3          66.7
                                                              Public debt with guarantees                                       77.5

 Source: Ministry of Finance, World Bank staff projections.   Source: Ministry of Finance, EUROSTAT
                                                              Note: EU small states include Cyprus, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta
                                                              and Slovenia.

The spending pattern offers significant scope for rationalization, especially in such areas as
public wages and capital spending. Headline public spending has been higher in Montenegro than in
the EU, including almost 10 percentage points of GDP difference in total expenditures with the small
Central and Eastern European states. Combined with spending on pensions of around 11 percent of
GDP, wages account for more than half of total current spending. There are longer-term pressures on
pensions and health care due to an aging population, while early retirement creates further pressures
on fiscal sustainability of the system, but also on the already comparatively low labor force
participation. Additional 2 percent of GDP in spending for the lifetime benefit for mothers of three and
more children introduced in January 2016 crowds out other better targeted spending and reduces
further an already low female labor force participation. Fiscal plans are also vulnerable to potential
cost overruns related to the Bar-Boljare highway construction.

Additionally, there are vulnerabilities in the financial sector. Montenegro’s financial sector is
struggling to recover from the 2008-2009 crisis. A vicious cycle exists of high non-performing loans
(NPLs), high interest rates, low credit growth and low bank profitability, all underpinned by a stagnant
economy. Growing risks in domestic banks and weaknesses in bank regulation and oversight pose fiscal
and financial stability risks.

The banking sector is overcrowded and its governance need to be strengthened. The country of
630 thousand people has 15 banks in operation (one bank per 40 thousand people – close to four times
the ratio in emerging European countries), which struggle with low profitability and deleveraging
concerns of some international banking groups. Lending to related parties remains wide-spread,
especially in domestically-owned banks, which also suffer from weak corporate governance. Although
on a declining trend, non-performing loans (NPLs) remain high (12.6 percent in Q2 2016). The Central
Bank of Montenegro (CBM) has progressively diluted the asset classification rules over the last several
years, thus delaying the recognition of NPLs. Three banks (18 percent of the total banking system
assets) are most vulnerable, yet some continue to increase market share. All had qualified external
audits in 2014. Several financial sector laws were recently passed without proper consultation with
CBM. Weaknesses exist in the oversight and governance of the Investment Development Fund (IDF),
an important non-bank financial institution.

 Figure 4. Domestic credit to private sector Figure 5. Non-performing Loans to Total Loans
 (% of GDP)                                  (%)




 Source: WDI,Central Bank.



                                            Policy Options

Fiscal consolidation equal to 2-3 percent of GDP annually in 2017-19, as a minimum, is
necessary to reverse the alarming public debt trend and arrive at a balanced budget by 2019.
To achieve this, Government needs to take permanent measures on both the revenue and expenditure
sides, e.g., reverse recent increases of social transfers and public sector wages, optimize other
expenditures, prioritize public investments, mobilize new revenues and reduce tax exemptions.
Options and their potential savings are summarized in the following table:
      Policy area                  Immediate savings            Cumulative savings over the medium
                                        % of GDP                             term % of GDP
 Public wage bill            0.5 (basic wage                   2 (staff reduction)
                             harmonization)
 Pensions                                                      2 (rationalize early retirement and reform
                                                               pension indexation/valorization)
 Social benefits             1 (rationalization/substitution   Over 1 (eliminate error of inclusion)
                             of mothers’ benefit)
 Public investment           1 (drop non-strategic projects)   3 (finalize highway section and reallocate
                                                               to environmental acquis)
 Public                      0.5 (centralized procurement)
 procurement
 Tax revenues                0.5 (collection of arrears)       2 (rationalizing exemptions)
 Health                      Improve efficiency, reallocate funds from pharmaceuticals and hospitals to
                             primary care
 Local government            Improve spending and revenue efficiency and clear arrears
There are also challenges with the transparency and the quality of public service provision.
Strengthening public sector governance is a key condition of EU accession, while at the same time fiscal
pressures dictate that better quality of services (e.g. in education, health, social protection, water and
waste water) needs to come hand in hand with reduction in expenditures, calling for greater efficiency
of public service delivery at both local and central government level. Modernizing the public sector and
strengthening checks and balances are key for improved service delivery. (See Policy Notes on Health,
Pension and Social Assistance, Subnational Government and Tax Administration).
To preserve financial stability, Government is advised to urgently address weak banks in line
with 2015 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) recommendations. CBM should conduct
independent Asset Quality Reviews of all banks to review loan classification and provisioning practices,
develop time-bound supervisory action plans requiring capital increase by shareholders, and prepare,
in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and Deposit Protection Fund, resolution plans for
vulnerable banks, aiming to minimize the use of public resources. Recent loosening of regulatory
standards needs to be reversed in order to ensure timely recognition and write-off of NPLs. Actions
could also be taken to enhance corporate governance at a sectoral and bank-specific level, as well as to
strengthen the governance of the state-owned IDF.
To prepare for EU accession, the Government is required to transpose EU directives on bank
resolution, deposit insurance, payment system and accounting. In addition, remaining weaknesses
in the Anti-Money Laundering regime will have to be addressed.



                              World Bank Group Support

Ongoing support. Public Finance Review supports the Government to identify possible measures for
fiscal consolidation.
Improving the system of public procurement in Montenegro advisory project supports the Public
Procurement Administration to develop a performance and monitoring indicators manual and
communication guidelines for small and medium enterprises.
Planned Support/Options. The World Bank can support fiscal consolidation efforts with both
advice and financing. The World Bank could consider a series of two an annual Development Policy
Loans (DPL) of US$45 million each linked to strong prior actions to reduce the fiscal deficit and improve
public finance and financial sector sustainability. In addition, a Tax Administration Project has been
prepared and is ready to be negotiated at Government’s convenience. For additional deficit financing,
the World Bank would recommend discussions with the IMF on a possible complementary program.
In conjunction with fiscal consolidation, support to financial sector strengthening could be
included in the planned series of DPLs. In the absence of a DPL series, World Bank support to
financial sector strengthening will be limited to advisory and technical assistance work.
A possible IFC Corporate Governance (CG) assistance program could focus on a financial sector
level CG assessment and implementation of certification program for non-executive board members
(of the commercial banks and insurance companies). IFC Debt Resolution program could assist
government to improve the pre-insolvency and insolvency regime and stimulate the use of the
insolvency framework while increasing lenders confidence and improving access to finance for new
and existing businesses, particularly SMEs.
IFC Financial Institutions Group advisory may support the banks and Micro financial institutions
through the “ECA - Strengthening Financial Systems” Program to improve the risk management
capacity of individual financial institutions to implement best practices in Risk and NPL management
and to improve the capacity of individual banks to develop their SME banking operations.
The Financial Sector Advisory Center (FinSAC), a technical unit based in Vienna, is already
supporting implementation of key FSAP recommendations aimed at strengthening the Deposit
Protection Fund’s (DPF) legal, regulatory and institutional framework. Additional help could be
provided by the center with technical advice and analytical services on financial stability, crisis
prevention, macroprudential and microprudential framework, bank recovery and resolution, as well
as consumer protection and financial literacy.
                                                        The Challenge

Montenegro’s pension adequacy is at risk of erosion in the long run and is causing severe fiscal
pressures. After the global financial crisis, pension expenditures returned to levels above 10 percent
of GDP, similar to EU’s average. This increase has generated additional deficit being covered by the
state. The main source of increasing costs has Figure 6. Pensions Expenditures and Budget
been (i) rising pension replacement rates and (ii) Transfers for Pensions, percent of GDP
declining real wages. While the current
valorization and indexation pattern (75 percent         14
                                                              Pensions/GDP budget transfer for pensions/GDP
CPI and 25 percent wages for both) has worked           12
well to preserve the real purchasing power of the
pensioners, in the long run it would erode              10

pension adequacy. In order to maintain stable            8

initial replacement rates and real purchasing            6
power of pensioners, the current indexation
                                                         4
pattern needs to be modified.
                                                                             2
Early retirement opportunities further
weakened the pension system. The                           0
                                                              2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
introduction in 2010 of a 5-year general early
retirement option at actuarially neutral                Source: MONSTAT; Pension Fund of Montenegro
decrement (4.25 percent per year) offset the
effect of retirement age increase, given the growing number of early retirees since 2011. Hazardous
and arduous occupations are also eligible for early retirement with extended service period at low
additional cost. Although the number of insured individuals eligible for extended service period is not
large (estimated 3-4 percent of total), the list of occupations is broad and includes professions that are
no longer hazardous. 1 Additional contributions by employers required to pay for accelerated service
period are insufficient to finance their early retirement. Similarly, the 2010 introduction of penalty-
free retirement with accrued 40 years of service is actuarially unfair to later entrants to labor market,
insured individuals with shorter service periods, and taxpayers.
Other recent interventions add fiscal pressure over pension expenses. In the last couple of years,
there were three interventions that added fiscal pressure. First, a temporary early retirement window
between March and July 2015 that allowed employees of bankrupt public companies to retire with 30
years of service (25 for women) regardless of age. The opportunity was seized by some 1,500
employees who would have otherwise stayed active and seek new employment. Second, a decision to
index pensions in 2016 above the standard formula – all pensions from July 2016 got extra 3 percent
increase and minimum pensions as much as 20 percent. Third, the introduction of the motherhood
lifetime benefit (that can be also considered a form of pension) for women with three and more
children may appear as an attractive demographic measure, but leads to important work disincentives

1 The list of occupations includes occupations that are no longer considered hazardous by EU countries such as flight attendants, ballet dancers

and opera singers.
that will in the long run affect the pension system. None of the interventions aims to address any of the
systemic design issues of the pension system.
While the Montenegrin social assistance system performs closer to the ECA average, severe
weaknesses are embedded in it that result in efficiency losses and work disincentives. The social
assistance system delivers both contributory and non-contributory programs, with a level of spending
and key performance indicators similar to the ECA region. However, a closer look at the system reveals
important weaknesses in terms of (i) program coordination with a high level of resources allocated
through categorical programs as opposed to means-tested programs; (ii) various design flaws in the
Family Material Support Program (FMS/MOP), the Benefits for Families with Children, and the
Motherhood Lifetime benefit which results in work disincentives and inclusion and exclusion errors;
(iii) lack of integration between social assistance and employment policies, which is needed to activate
a considerable number of beneficiaries; and (iv) high administrative cost in the delivery of social
protection.
A low portion of resources is delivered through targeted means-tested programs. In 2013,
Montenegro non-contributory programs represented 1.28 percent of the GDP, when the ECA average
was 2.3 percent. Less than half of these resources were delivered through targeted means-tested
programs. The last resource social benefit, the FMS/MOT, represents almost 0.54 percent of GDP and
it is a passport to a series of programs that in total amount almost 0.4 percent of the GDP. The rest goes
to veterans and disability programs. While the FMS/MOT is of low coverage and adequate generosity
for the region, the whole package of programs is quite generous leading to important work
disincentives. The generosity thus comes at the cost of low coverage for the bottom quintile, which is
the lowest among the countries in the region at 20 percent.
The recently introduced Motherhood Lifetime benefit creates the largest work disincentives
and fiscal pressures. This categorical benefit goes to mothers with 3 or more children and is as high
as the minimum wage at €193 per month if unemployed or even more (€336) if employed or retired 2.
As of November 2016, 21,444 women were receiving the benefit, leading to expenses of 76 million
Euros a year. This new program has also introduced a burden on the National Employment Office as a
large number of men and women are coming to register with the expectation to qualify for this program
or a similar program at certain point in time but not really looking for jobs or training opportunities.
The design and implementation of social assistance programs need to promote activation of
beneficiaries. Lack of enforcement of the existing activation features of social assistance programs,
lack of coordination of active labor market programs with social assistance delivery, weaknesses in the
design of social assistance programs that goes from the targeting method to the combination of
programs, and lack of capacity of the public employment services, lead to work disincentives. It is
estimated that about half of the FMS/MOP beneficiaries are of working age, and over a third are able to
work. While these persons have the obligation of being registered with and contact the employment
offices every month, these regulations are not enforced and they do not receive counseling or have
ALMPs tailored to their needs. Moreover, the high levels of informality in the country estimated at 30
percent, as well as the qualitative evidence, suggest that there are inclusion errors as many
beneficiaries must be informal workers.




2   In December 2016, the benefit was reduced to EUR144 and EUR264, respectively.
                                         Policy options

Pension system. To regain the balance of the pension system to make it fiscally and socially
sustainable Government may consider:
• Introducing wage valorization of points and CPI indexation of pensions.
• Tightening early retirement policy to prolong labor market participation (abolishing decrement-
    free retirement with 40 years; rising annual decrement above 4.25 percent; higher late retirement
    bonus; shortening early retirement window to 2 years).
• Narrowing the eligibility to extended service pensions to those working in workplaces that include
    conditions with long-lasting impact on health.
• Abstaining from ad-hoc interventions in the pension system.


Social Assistance. To promote activation and reduce work disincentives that prevail in the system of
social assistance the Government may consider:
• Redesigning the Motherhood Lifetime benefit, or even better substitute it for another program that
    better achieves its objective.
• Introducing new design features in the FMS/MOP to decrease the marginal cost of working while
    on social assistance, and enforcing registration of beneficiaries in NES and participation in training
    and job search activities.
• Increasing coordination of social assistance and labor market programs since, as described in the
    labor market and skills note, many of the active labor market programs do not respond to the needs
    of social assistance beneficiaries. The most important policies actions are strengthening the
    capacity of the public employment services (e.g. introduce profiling methodologies), allowing re-
    entry guarantees to social assistance for beneficiaries receiving on-the-job training or temporal
    employment, establishing one-stop-shops that coordinate social assistance and employment
    services.


To promote efficiency of social assistance programs, improve equity, and recover the path of fiscal
sustainability the government may consider:
    • Re-balancing the resources across social assistance programs with the objective of increasing
       the spending in targeted means-tested programs and decreasing spending in categorical
       programs, in particular the Motherhood Lifetime Support Program. This rebalancing is crucial
       to increase coverage and decrease generosity, and overall to minimize work disincentives.
    • Improving the design of social assistance programs, as they are over-regulated in some aspects
       and under-regulated in other. As a result, the design leads to high administrative cost and large
       inclusion and exclusion errors.
                                             World Bank support

Ongoing support. The World Bank has been continuously supporting the pension reform efforts
in Montenegro. Together with the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy the pension team is updating
the forecasting model for Montenegro (PROST Montenegro), which will serve as a tool for evaluating
policy options. The model will be handed over to the counterparts with adequate training. A report on
early retirement practices in Montenegro including extended service period for hazardous occupations
is scheduled for completion in March 2017.
The World Bank has also been providing analytic support to assess the performance of social
assistance programs individually and as a system of social protection. The technical assistance
has been directed towards the Ministry of Labor and Social Assistance as well as the National
Employment Services. 3 At present, the technical assistance is focusing on evaluating the work
disincentives of the Motherhood Lifetime Support and a functional review of the National Employment
Services.
Planned Support/Options. The WBG can provide further analysis on other pension issues of interest
as needed. The WBG can continue the technical assistance related to social protection to design
features of the system as well as the coordination with employment policies towards activation of
beneficiaries. The financial support towards the re-design of social assistance and labor programs, the
introduction of activation responsibilities for beneficiaries, and the enhancement of social service
agencies to reduce cost of service delivery can be provided within the Investment Project Financing.




3 A series of policies notes produced by the World Bank cover the topics of activation, active labor market programs, and labor market

assessments.
                                                  The Challenge

A rapidly aging population is placing increased fiscal pressures on the health system, and
citizens cite health as a top priority for public investment. Montenegro is close to regional and
upper-middle income country averages in terms of health spending as a percentage of GDP, percentage
of private spending in total health spending, and outputs relative to the level of inputs. But further
improvements in quality and efficiency will be necessary to cope with a rapidly aging population
(Figure 1). In the 2016 Life in Transition Survey, a third of Montenegrin’s cited health as the highest
priority for additional government spending as the increasing share of private spending in total health
expenditure contributes to high unmet needs for medical care (Figure 2). The productivity of primary
health care (PHC) centers varies widely, however, despite reforms to improve efficiency in the sector,
while hospitals continue to be financed through line-item budgets, based on historical allocations. As
in other countries in the region, the health system remains hospital-centric and not well-
integrated, a pattern of service delivery that is particularly inefficient in an ageing population with a
large burden of non-communicable diseases. Inefficiencies in the procurement of pharmaceuticals
remain. Public expenditure on pharmaceuticals increased by 60 percent between 2010 and 2016. The
health system is yet to harness the power of health information systems to monitor the flow of inputs
and outputs/outcomes, manage inventories and contractual obligations and evaluate the performance
of providers, thus controlling costs and accumulation of arrears. A computerized health information
system has been in place since 2004, which links all primary care providers, general hospitals,
pharmaceutical purchasing agency and the reporting of public health information. However, the
system is not effectively networked and does not yet produce good summary information.

        Figure 7: Age dependency ratio, old                   Figure 8: Self-reported unmet needs for
                                                              medical care due to being too expensive
   21                                                        12
   19                                                                                    Croatia
                                                             10
   17
                                                                                         Montenegro
   15                                                          8

   13                                                                                    Macedonia, FYR
                                                               6
   11
                                                               4                         Serbia
    9

                                                               2                         European Union
                                                                                         (28 countries)
             MNE          UMC           ECA (excl. HICs)       0
 Source: World Development Indicators                      Source: Eurostat
                                        Policy Options

Given the current constrained fiscal environment, the forthcoming public finance review in health
identifies preliminary recommendations for the Government’s consideration:
In the short to medium term:
    • Sustain and expand reforms already underway to achieve cost savings on pharmaceuticals,
        while building up monitoring of prescription and dispensing practices. Specifically: (i)
        introduce and implement managed-entry and risk sharing agreements for the high-cost,
        patented drugs; (ii) approach new manufacturers from outside the region and try to facilitate
        their market entry to strengthen competition in generic markets; (iii) strengthen monitoring
        of and introduce control mechanisms on volume of prescribed and dispensed medicines; (iv)
        revise wholesale and retail margins for medicines, including introduction of flat dispensing fees
        to incentivize dispensing lower-cost drugs; (v) strengthen criteria and processes for decisions
        to include high-priced drugs on reimbursement list (e.g., Health Technology Assessment); and
        (vi) prioritize registration of medicines which will increase competition on market.
    • Improve bed utilization through introduction of better control of admissions. Typically, the
        Social Health Insurance Fund would monitor, oversight and advice about rationalized bed use.
In the medium to long-term:
   •   Sustain provider payment reforms already initiated. The provider payment reforms already
       initiated or envisaged are in the right direction: capitation for primary care and case-based
       payments for secondary and tertiary care. Performance pay for primary care doctors was
       subsequently undermined by collective bargaining agreements, and should be reintroduced.
       These reforms need to be implemented and efforts made to move away from restrictive, line
       item budgeting so as to give facilities greater flexibility in making resource allocation decisions.
       It is recommended that the Government continue with and strengthen provider payment and
       purchasing reforms already initiated: (i) capitation and performance at primary level; (ii) DRGs
       at secondary and tertiary levels; and (iii) rationalization of the benefit package (reimbursed
       drugs, sick leave policy, treatment abroad).
   •   Introduce service delivery reforms to address the dual challenges of a rising burden of NCDs
       and an ageing population. Specifically: (i) build up the quality and coverage of primary and
       preventive care, through better screening and treatment of chronic diseases and promoting
       healthy behaviors, for a healthier population and reduced costs over the long term; (ii)
       rationalize the hospital network to reduce excess use of hospital services and convert any
       excess bed capacity into long-term care facilities; (iii) create payment incentives to promote
       coordination of care; (iv) promote greater use of ambulatory care and day-care surgeries;
       (v) strengthen adherence to clinical guidelines and protocols; (vi) improve monitoring of the
       quality of care and outcomes at all levels of the health system through a strengthened and
       integrated information system.
                             World Bank Group Support

Planned support /Options.
In 2015, the World Bank initiated the preparation of a project that would aim to increase efficiency of
health expenditures and improve quality of care for priority NCDs.
The World Bank could resume project preparation and provide an investment loan, possibly with
results-based disbursements, to (1) strengthen capacity for improved health system management
(including pharmaceutical sector management); (2) improve efficiency in health institutions (design
and implement pay-for-performance; increase use of ambulatory surgery and diagnostic capacities);
and (3) improve quality of health care, including through enhanced health information systems and
strengthened accountability for quality.
                                                           The Challenge

 Compared to EU New Member States, Montenegro collects a high percentage of GDP in taxes and
social contributions. Especially high is the collection of VAT despite Montenegro having the lowest
VAT rate. 4 Overall, Montenegro collects around 20.4 percent of GDP in indirect taxes, compared to 14.5
percent of GDP of EU NMS. The high revenue collected as a share of GDP, however, may reflect
underestimation of GDP due to shadow economy, and is not likely to be sustained in the medium and
long-term unless the human, financial and IT resources of the revenue administration are not used
more effectively.
 Sustaining high revenue collection would require substantial improvements in compliance.
Montenegro does not measure compliance and does not have modern compliance management
capacity. The analytical capacity of the MTA needs to be strengthened to identify and monitor
noncompliance risks. Cumbersome business processes have meant low and hampering compliance
management. The registration process is fragmented and the accuracy of taxpayer information needs
to be significantly improved. An outdated and fragmented information technology (IT) system makes
difficult automating business processes and collecting, processing, and analyzing information as well
as using third party data. Tax audit function is not systematically using risk management in audit
selection and modern tools to perform effective audits.



    Figure 9. Total Revenues, 2015                          Figure 10. Time to Comply with Tax Legislation,
    (percent of GDP)                                        2016 (hours per year)
      50
      45
                                                             500
      40                                                     450
      35                                                     400
                                                             350
      30
                                                             300
      25                                                     250
      20                                                     200
      15                                                     150
                                                             100
      10
                                                              50
       5                                                       0
                                                                         Denmark


                                                                              Malta
                                                                           Sweden


                                                                            Austria




                                                                            Croatia
                                                                              Latvia

                                                                   Slovak Republic


                                                                         Germany



                                                                          Portugal



                                                                      Montenegro


                                                                                                                                Macedonia, FYR


                                                                                                                                   Montenegro
                                                                            Greece




                                                                          Slovenia
                                                                      Luxembourg




                                                                             France

                                                                              Spain

                                                                          Romania




                                                                            Poland
                                                                            Cyprus




                                                                         Lithuania
                                                                            Finland
                                                                   United Kingdom




                                                                                                                                       Albania
                                                                       Netherlands




                                                                           Belgium




                                                                          Hungary
                                                                            Ireland




                                                                             Serbia

                                                                               Italy




                                                                                                                                       Kosovo
                                                                            Estonia




                                                                           Bulgaria




                                                                                                                        Bosnia and Herzegovina
                                                                    Czech Republic




       0
           LT   LV   CY   EE   MT   MNE   HR   EU28   SI

     Source: Eurostat, and Montenegro MOF



                                                              Source: 2017 Doing Business, the World Bank Group


Compliance is negatively affected by large and growing stock of arrears. In the end of 2015,
arrears accounted for some 20 percent of GDP and represented nearly 50 percent of revenues collected.
Yet, close to two-third of these arrears are non-recoverable as they are due by taxpayers that are
inactive, have deregistered, or are in a bankruptcy procedure. Most of the arrears are old and

4   Statuary VAT rate in Montenegro is 19 percent (standard) and 7 percent (reduced). VAT rates in the EU NMS range from 20 to 25 percent.
uncollectable, but there is no legal provision to write them off. Despite measures to increase recovery
of arrears, weaknesses in tax registration, enforcement and collection, as well as limitations of the IT
system, represent a serious challenge to compliance.
While cost of compliance have come down lately, compared to other countries in the region,
compliance costs for taxpayers in Montenegro remain significant. Time to comply with tax
legislation (collecting information, completing tax returns, filing, and paying taxes) is one of the
highest in the EU. The number of tax payments is also relatively high and electronic filing is rarely
used in Montenegro—less than 20 percent of the VAT and corporate income tax (CIT) returns are filed
electronically while in most of the EU countries e-filing for these taxes is close to or equal to 100
percent. Electronic payment of taxes is also very low in Montenegro.


                                        Policy Options

Improving the effectiveness of MTA to collect taxes while reducing costs of compliance for
taxpayers will hinge on the implementation of a comprehensive reform program:
•   Enhancing the strategic focus, planning, analytical and monitoring capacity of MTA to support a
    modern compliance management.
•   Investing in training of staff taking into account the need for new competences and aging of the
    current workforce.
•   Improving the legal framework to ensure consistency with MTA operational needs and
    international best practice.
•   Streamlining the registration process—by merging the existing registries and eliminating overlaps,
    the quality of taxpayer information will be improved, which is critical for compliance management.
•   Expanding the use of electronic filing and e-payment to reduce costs of compliance.
•   Increasing the effectiveness of tax audit—by introducing risk management approach and modern
    tools and approaches for conducting audits and thus strengthen compliance.
•   Upgrading IT system and infrastructure to support modernization of core function and ensure
    sustainable increase in compliance and reduction of compliance costs.
•   Strengthening enforcement and collection functions to reduce the stock of arrears and improve
    compliance.
•   Expanding the scope and quality of channels for interaction with taxpayers—internet, call center,
    e-mails, telephone, etc.
•   Introducing service delivery standards and monitor performance.

                              World Bank Group Support

Planned support/Options. The World Bank can support modernization of Tax Administration
with both advice and financing. At the request of the Ministry of Finance, the Revenue
Administration Project has been prepared and is ready for negotiations since 2015. The project aims
to improve effectiveness of operational functions of the tax administration and to reduce the
compliance costs on corporate taxpayers. The project would support tax administration to operate
with a higher capacity streamlining risk-based business processes that contribute to the efficient
collection of taxes and social contributions that are owed from all sources of economic activity.
Increased compliance will generate a more robust revenue stream to provide essential services to
citizens. Improvements in capacity will also support the country's goal for EU accession and economic
integration with EU member states.
                                                  The Challenge

Montenegro, differently from other countries in the Balkans, is highly centralized and the
municipalities have limited functional competences. Major mandated tasks include local road
maintenance, water services, garbage collection and treatment, street lighting, greening, culture and
sports, while not education, social welfare or health services. Consequently, the share of LGUs spending
in GDP was at 4.5 percent in 2014, which is less than 10 percent of the overall consolidated general
government spending.
Despite having a one-tier subnational government system, the population concentration in the
capital is high. There are 23 municipalities, out of which two have not yet formed their basic
institutions (for more than a year), and one-sixth of municipalities have fewer than 5,000 citizens. On
the other hand, with 30 percent of population, it has one of the largest concentration of citizens in the
capital city.
Increasing dependency ratios and low activity rates in North municipalities will continue to
burden local finances. The Northern region will continue to underperform and become more
dependent on pensions and social transfers, while the central and southern regions largely stand to
benefit from improving demographic trends. Overall, the country also suffers from a large inactivity of
population. In municipalities like Rozaje, Andrijevica and Plav, high dependency ratio is followed by
the low activity rates of the working-age population thus further eroding the tax base of municipalities
and creating pressures on fiscal sustainability of the local government units.


 Figure 11. Dependency Ratio, Percent of 15-                 Figure 7. Active Population, Percent of
 64                                                          population




 Source: MONSTAT, EUROSTAT, World Bank staff calculations.
Fragile financial position and low capacity at the municipal level threaten both macroeconomic
stability and equitable service delivery. Some (not all) municipalities exhibit a fragile financial
condition and unsustainable expenditures and debt. Overall, municipalities have low overall direct debt
(4.8 percent of GDP). However, in parallel they generated additional 3.4 percent of GDP in arrears for
taxes and suppliers, while the debt of the local government-owned companies (which is mostly
guaranteed by municipalities) has not been registered. In certain municipalities, unrealistic budgetary
planning and large mismatches between spending commitments and fiscal capacity have led to financial
distress. Overstaffing and excessive payroll expenses in local administrations and municipal public
companies have revealed an implicit social safety net—implemented through the provision of public
employment—as well as poor spending efficiency. Insufficient capacity to repay large arrears on tax
liabilities and salaries and growing debts to banks and suppliers, have raised concerns about public
finance sustainability and creditworthiness of some municipalities

There are large observed differences of fiscal capacity across Montenegrin municipalities, while
an effective exercise of local autonomy requires a strong financial standing in municipal
administration. Large differences in fiscal capacity likely leads to increasing inequality in terms of the
public service delivery across regions which has been also demonstrated by the heterogeneity of social
sector and infrastructure services outcomes. Legislative changes introduced in recent years intended to
improve the potential for raising own-source revenues and to eliminate other traditional, distortionary
local revenues; yet, the implementation was uneven. Capacity for medium term budgeting and spatial
planning is limited, resulting in unplanned and unregulated construction, especially in coastal areas.
Inadequate planning also results in undersupply of public services, especially for vulnerable groups.



                                         Policy Options

Municipalities would need to urgently address their fragility. Several policy actions are
proposed:
•   Broaden the tax bases of own-source revenues and introduce administrative measures to expand
    collection of real estate and other local taxes;
•   Support the debt reprogramming agreements with staff rationalization, hiring freeze, and
    limitation on the growth of nominal wages. In addition, consider merging utilities across smaller
    and distressed municipalities (or arrange for joint service delivery; e.g., water, garbage
    management, and road maintenance).
•   Improve public financial management (PFM) systems to: introduce the medium-term budget
    planning, strengthen budget execution, record commitments and arrears, enforce Fiscal
    Responsibility Act, improve internal audit and control as well as the public procurement process at
    the local level (capacity building).
•   Build capacity for project preparation and implementation (EU, IPA, etc).
                             World Bank Group Support

Ongoing support. Urban Partnership Program, with Austrian funding, will continue to support local
governments in capacity building and financial management (UPP is already supporting 13 of 23
municipalities).
Improving System of Public Procurement in Montenegro supports Public Procurement
Administration to develop a performance and monitoring indicators manual, which includes: 1) quality
control standards; 2) advice on procedures for collecting and monitoring public procurement statistics;
3) extensive guidelines on how to fight fraud and corruption in public procurement. The Project also
aims to develop a set of guidance notes for Small and Medium Enterprises to encourage their
participation in public tenders.
The Bank delivered in 2015 a policy note: Montenegro: Options to Restore Fiscal Sustainability and
Improve Spending Efficiency at Subnational Level that assessed the financial situation in
municipalities and offered a reform roadmap for their operational restructuring and PFM
strengthening.
Planned support/Options. The World Bank can support municipal management and finance
sustainability through the results-based operation. The operation could support financing of key
municipal infrastructure, municipal restructuring and capacity strengthening that would lead to
arrears reduction and improved service delivery through cooperation and joint service delivery and
service-sharing mechanisms. This can be complemented by undertaking Public Expenditure and
Financial accountability assessment (PEFA) for selected municipalities.
                                          The Challenge

With shrinking fiscal buffers, the ability of the economy to absorb shocks and create jobs will
rely almost entirely on the competitiveness of the private sector. Economic growth in
Montenegro is, however, not creating jobs; the country faces high unemployment, low labor
force participation, and high informality. Instead, productivity gains result in higher wages. The
private sector is still relatively small, employing only half of the workers and often in less secure short-
term jobs. SOEs still employ a large share of workers but new hires are rare. To increase the welfare of
its people, Montenegro needs to shift to an inclusive growth model where the private sector generates
most jobs and growth. At the moment, employment rate is one of the lowest in Europe, accompanied
by high levels of informality and unemployment. Only 52 percent of Montenegrins 15 years of age and
older are employed, compared to 65 percent in the EU and the Europe 2020 target of 75 percent. One
in three jobs is informal, and seasonal jobs are largely filled by migrants from abroad. Unemployment
is high for both men and women at 17.6 percent on average (2015) and of long duration (80 percent of
the unemployed have been searching for a job for more than 12 months). New entrants face a particular
challenge (40 percent of the unemployed), and three quarters of them take more than 2 years to find a
job. Inactivity rate is also high, especially among women. There is mismatch between supply and
demand for skilled labor, and people with low levels of education are finding it even more difficult to
find employment. There are also persistent differences between the more vibrant coastal zone and the
poorer northern regions.
There is a critical need to stimulate job creation in the private sector; however, firms exhibit
low levels of competitiveness. Montenegro has one of the lowest ratios of exports of goods to GDP in
the world (below 9 percent) and exports are highly concentrated in metal products with low
technological content. Services exports are higher, but still lower than peer countries, at 34 percent of
GDP in 2015. They are concentrated in three main types: travel, transport and financial services. No
small country (under 10 million people) has achieved high-income status with exports less than 50
percent of GDP. Only 7 percent of firms export their goods, compared with 18 percent in the Balkans
and 29 percent in Estonia. Further, firms’ export survival rates are low: only one out of three export
flows that start in a given year will survive past the first year. Exports are increasingly concentrated by
geographic destination: goods trade with Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia has doubled since 2006, while
trade with the EU27 contracted from two-thirds of the total in 2006/07 to slightly over one quarter.
Russia alone accounts for 27 percent of services exports. Montenegro ranks 42nd on Trading Across
Borders, second lowest in CEFTA.
Low levels of labor and total factor productivity are constraining, from the supply-side, firm
growth and future economic growth. Labor productivity has stagnated since 2008, and the
contribution of total factor productivity (TFP) to economic growth has been negligible (over the 2000-
2013 period) or negative (in 2008-2013), meaning that output growth has been primarily driven by
factor accumulation. Low TFP growth can be attributed to the presence of private sector constrains
that don’t allow firms to upgrade their internal capabilities (e.g., managerial skills, innovation capacity,
technology adoption efforts) or to the presence of distortions, understood as heterogeneity policy
treatment at the firm-level, which doesn’t facilitate the reallocation of factors of production (e.g., labor
and capital) and, therefore, economic activity towards the most efficient firms. ICT usage among private
firms is low, and private firms lag on innovation: R&D investment in the country amounts to only 0.45
percent of GDP, of which three quarters come from the government.
Skills shortages and difficulties to get access to external sources of funding to finance innovation
constrain firm growth. There is a skill mismatch that disproportionately affects innovative firms: 28
percent of the firms that are at the top percentile of the distribution of innovative firms reported that
the main problem with hiring professionals was the lack of relevant skills, and 45 percent noted
difficulties to hire skilled workers. Young workers lack soft employability skills, such as language,
leadership and initiative, critical thinking, as well as advanced hard skills like technical knowledge.
Further, Montenegrin firms claim that they have difficulties accessing to external sources of funding
like credit (despite evidence of high use of trade credit) due to high interest rates and high collateral
requirements. Access to equity finance is also limited.
At the same time, employers are able to hire people informally, in particular for seasonal jobs, for
example in the tourism industry, and thus prefer to rely on migrant workers from other countries,
paying no taxes or social contributions, and sometimes observing no labor standards. This effectively
creates a disincentive to employ the available local labor force, as well as having adverse implications
for budget and pension funds revenues, in addition to putting these informal workers into a vulnerable
position. It is important to address the disincentives on the employee and employer side in parallel to
achieve the maximum effect.
Disincentives for formal work are significant—and in the case of recipients of social assistance
prohibitively high. Work disincentives are highest for low-income earners or those in part-time work
(the latter more likely to be women), and are very high for those receiving social assistance. The main
disincentives for formal work apply to single parents or single-earner couples with children who
receive social assistance and family benefits: for them, a part-time low-paying job would actually
decrease net income, while a full-time job at minimum wage would pay about as much as social
assistance and family benefits with no employment. Furthermore, this group of the population is not
investing in skills upgrades that puts them into a vicious cycle of dependence on the state. As a result,
Montenegro is not using its workforce to full capacity, which is important given the size of the country
and the demographic transition, which will further reduce the working age population.
Business environment hurts firm entry and performance. Product market regulation lags behind
the OECD and smallest EU states. Issues include state control, barriers to investment, and lack of
harmonization with international standards. There is high and widespread public ownership and low
information access for foreign parties. On average, 12 percent of management time is spent dealing
with regulatory authorities; and firms perceive a relatively high level of corruption in the granting of
licenses and permits, and expect to make unofficial payments when dealing with customs, taxes and
regulations.
Despite improvements, governance and rule of law in Montenegro lag behind EU member states
and continue presenting challenges to private sector growth. One of the main factors behind
private sector development in successful small states is institutional quality and good governance. Firm
level data from the 2013 Enterprise Surveys (BEEPS) suggest that, although Montenegro’s regulatory
environment significantly improved, more progress is needed on implementation of reforms and
transparency of procedures. The gap remains largest when it comes to government effectiveness,
regulatory quality, control of corruption, and justice sector performance. Despite reforms to align legal
frameworks with the EU Acquis, the gap between laws on the books and laws in practice remains wide.
Enforcement of contracts is weak and processing of cases is slow and inefficient, which undermines
business confidence.

                                        Policy Options

Private Sector Development. Improve the business environment and level the playing field by
improving the conditions for competition, product market regulation, contract enforcement and
intellectual property rights. Lower regulatory burden by streamlining permits, inspections, and market
regulations. Support contract enforcement and intellectual property rights. Increase communications
and reduce discretion, including through enhanced accountability for regulators and e-government
solutions. Facilitate exit of unproductive firms through entrepreneur-friendly bankruptcy laws.
Boost firm-level productivity and sector growth by facilitating transfer of knowledge (technical,
managerial, and market) to firms, through technology extension services and export development
assistance. Through accelerators, endow innovative start-ups and small and medium-sized enterprises
with funding and increased capacity to build their business (investors, mentors, partners, etc.). In
tourism, assess demand and destination competitiveness, then design interventions to fill gaps.
Improve trade facilitation to expand connectivity. Streamline risk management and post-clearance
audit procedures, and develop an authorized operator program, both of which will simplify and speed
up the import process. Develop measures for improved performance based on a time release study
(forthcoming from the WBG team) that will measure border and inland terminal procedures and
processing/clearance time.
Facilitate private sector investment and job creation in the areas of agriculture and sustainable
tourism. This can be achieved through interventions that address the sector-specific regulatory
framework, firm capabilities and productivity, and market linkages in these sectors. This would
substantially benefit rural communities and vulnerable groups, including women and youth.
Skills, Labor Market Flexibility and Disincentives. Improve education and training systems and
strengthen active labor market policies. Actions could include (i) reforms of VET/Gymnasium
education system, by clarifying expected skill outcomes from each type of education and promoting
collaborations with private sector employers; (ii) better labor market information system to simplify
firm-worker matching and help youth choose the right education track (level of education and field of
study); (iii) reform the Employment Agency of Montenegro to be more efficient and efficacious; and
(iv) roll-out and evaluate innovative capacity building and employability programs that increase access
to global employment opportunities and income generation, in particular among women and youth.
More fundamentally, investment in a stronger general education system, from early childhood
development though adult education, would be an excellent investment in Montenegro’s long-term
competitiveness.
Incentives to work can be promoted through a series of reforms. Reduction of effective marginal
tax rate, in particular for low-wage earners, part-time, and seasonal workers (women, youth and poor)
would make it easier to employ these groups (rather than foreign/informal workers). At the same time,
an effective enforcement of labor standards and other relevant norms would level the playing field
between the local and foreign laborers. Rationalizing/targeting of benefits would reduce the
reservation wage and prompt more people to seek employment. For women, who are even less likely
to participate in the labor market, family-work balance support policies could help. Evidence from
European countries suggests that combining subsidized/free quality childcare, flex-work (telework
and part-time work), and adequate parental leave have a higher impact on female labor force
participation that the sum of the effects of each of these policies.



                              World Bank Group Support

Private sector development
Ongoing support. Montenegro Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project
(MIDAS): MIDAS, Investment Loan Project (US$ 19.04) assisted in establishing the capacity of
Montenegro to implement an Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance in Rural Development (IPARD)-
compatible system, a paying agency, a farm registry, and a pilot IPARD-like grant scheme supporting
investments in agriculture holdings and promoting agri-environmental measures through five rounds
of grants. In September 2016, the World Bank approved an additional financing loan in the amount of
€3.0 million to further strengthen rural areas and increase the country’s preparedness for EU accession
requirements.
Planned support/Options. Montenegro Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening
Project (MIDAS 2) in FY 20, supporting the country in closing Chapter 11 and 12, with a stronger
emphasis on Food Safety requirements, including inspection capacities as well as border controls,
handling animal by-products, developing a more effective vision and strategy for its extension services,
and looking at the fishery sector.
Sustainable Tourism Project (preparation initiated) to increase competitiveness of destinations along
a tourism circuit that would result in increased overnight stays in Montenegro and diversification
within the sector (e.g. bringing tourists from the coastal zone inland). Support the tourism value chain
leads to job generation, growth of local suppliers and MSMEs linked to the tourism industry, including
those in agriculture.
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Project (MSME) (proposed new TA and new
lending operation): TA to do a deeper diagnostics of the binding constraints to productivity and firm
growth. Based on this diagnostic, a new lending operation could be developed focusing on
improvements in MSME policies and the entrepreneurial ecosystem. Such an operation would
contribute to firm upgrading and export diversification through activities such as adoption of
standards, innovation assistance, investment readiness, technology extension and absorption,
increased knowledge, and others as identified in the diagnostic.
Business Environment technical assistance (proposed new TA): technical assistance to improve the
effectiveness of regulatory reforms (through monitoring and evaluation of implementation of
government’s regulatory reforms, strengthening accountability and incentives for regulators, and
strengthening awareness of reforms); expand opportunities for the private sector through public-
private partnerships (PPPs); further cut the regulatory burden on firms (in areas such as permits,
inspections, contract enforcement, intellectual property rights, product market regulation, etc.); and
improve the effectiveness of investment incentives. Within these areas, priorities for such TA would be
agreed on with government. Technical assistance on trade facilitation is currently ongoing through a
regional project.
Ongoing support. Higher Education Research for Innovation and Competitiveness (HERIC),
investment loan project (US$15.98) continues to support reforms to improve higher education
monitoring and service delivery, including in terms of financing and quality assurance, and to increase
cooperation with the private sector through the establishment of a Center of Excellence that resulted
in several international R&D partnerships and business start-ups.
Justice Technical Assistance aims to conduct preparatory work for a possible Functional Review of
the criminal justice system of Montenegro sector-wide survey of the experiences and perceptions of
the justice system's end users (citizens and businesses), institutional stakeholders (lawyers and
prosecutors) and providers (judges, expert associates and staff). The results from the survey supported
implementation of the National Judicial Reform Strategy Action Plan and the Chapter 23 Accession
Action Plan.
Planned support/Options. Jobs and Competitiveness Project: address disincentives in the social
protection system and expand access to employment services by linking employment services with
last-resort social assistance so that the poor would access these services, and addressing information
barriers to accessing productive employment faced by vulnerable groups. In parallel, the project would
support measures to reduce disincentives to employ people in the formal sector by encouraging
registration, enforcing labor standards, and levelling the playing field between local and migrant
workers. These activities may be combined with those listed under MSME development above, in one
project that would also address firm-level competitiveness along with job creation.
Higher Education Research for Innovation and Competitiveness (HERIC) investment lending project
could be expanded as HERIC2 to focus on vocational/post-secondary education reform linking
education results more closely to private sector needs.
Employment and Pension Technical Assistance: propose measures to reduce workers’ disincentives
for work in the design of social assistance and pensions, especially early retirement.


                                         The Challenge

The education sector is not equipping graduates for evolving labor market demand. While job
creation has historically focused on low-skilled sectors such as construction, mining, retail trade, and
tourism; in the last five years most new jobs have been in high-skilled sectors such as finance and other
sophisticated services. Employment grew more than 40 percent among tertiary educated workers,
illustrating the premium placed on higher skill development, but much of the benefits of this expanded
employment went to tertiary graduates who had attended gymnasium secondary schools. It is critical
that Montenegro equip its workforce with adequate and job-relevant skills for the new economy,
including socio-emotional skills for which employers report shortages (e.g. leadership and initiative,
entrepreneurship, creative and critical thinking) 5, and digital skills. This skills development should be
accompanied by efforts to strengthen foundational skills given that, despite progress, more than half


5   ibid.
of Montenegro’s students are not attaining basic proficiency in reading, science and mathematics.
Importantly, inequalities remain in educational outcomes of students by socio-economic status. 6
Although test scores in the OECD’s Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA)
improved between 2006 and 1015, Montenegrin students continue to underperform in science,
mathematics, and reading relative to students in countries around the world. The difference in
the average performance of 15-year-olds Montenegrin students compared against the OECD average is
equivalent to more than 2.5 years of schooling in science, roughly 2.5 years in mathematics, and over
2 years in reading. About half of Montenegro’s students lacked basic proficiency in mathematics and
science, while forty percent lacked basic reading competences according to the PISA 2015 results.
Equity challenges persist as students from the top income quintile learn the equivalent of two years more
schooling than students from the bottom quintile.
Figure 8. Student Performance, 2006 and 2015                                                             Figure 14. Equity Profile, 2015
                                                                                                                                                       ≈ 1 year of
100%




                                                                                                                                                            {
                                                                      Science Science Science Science
                                                                                                            Top 20% ESCS                                     445
                           43%              39%                                                         Bottom 20% ESCS                   387
    75%    49%    49%                              47%
                                   57%
                                                                                                                       Rural                    404
                                                                                                                      Urban                       412
    50%
                                                                                                                      Males                      409

                           56%              60%                                                                    Females                         414
    25%    50%    51%                              52%
                                   42%                                                                  Preschool (Age 0-3)                        415
                                                                                                        Preschool (Age 4-6)                      409
    0%
          2006    2015     2006    2015     2006   2015                                                                        360     390       420        450      480

             Science          Reading       Mathematics                                                     30 points in PISA scale ≈ 1 year of schooling
                                                                                                            ESCS: Economic, Social and Cultural Status
     High Proficiency   Basic Proficiency   Below Basic Proficiency
                                                                                                        Source: OECD; World Bank staff calculations

Relevance and improved outcomes from education remain challenges, particularly in ensuring
that tertiary and vocational education students transition effectively from school to work. The sector
also needs to adapt to support the long-term unemployed by providing opportunities for retraining
and re-entry into the labor market.
Given the data on both high levels of youth unemployment (about 40 percent) 7 and the high
enrollment of secondary technical vocational education and training (TVET) graduates into
tertiary education (about 50-60% of enrolled first-year university students) 8,, there is an
imperative for understanding the ecosystem that has promoted this apparent skills mismatch. TVET
schools currently enroll, by law, two-thirds of the total (enrolled) secondary student population. The
remaining one-third of the student cohort attend the more academically rigorous secondary schools
(Gymnasium). Based on historic norms, the articulation between secondary to tertiary was meant to
promote transition to university only from the Gymnasium schools. Unfortunately, high overall
unemployment levels—38 percent for non-graduates and 19 percent for secondary TVET graduates—
and low skills development among TVET graduates have led to two particular challenges
acknowledged by the Montenegrin Ministry of Education: (i) high levels of enrollment of under-
prepared TVET students in tertiary education—creating quality assurance challenges and financing
burdens for the universities for provision of tertiary education to this expanded student body—and (ii)

6 World Bank based on 2015 PISA results.
7 About 40 percent of individuals between 15 and 24 years old are unemployed compared to 20 percent between 25 and 49 years old and 12
percent in the older cohort of 50 to 64 years old. (World Bank, Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2016)
8 According to data provided by the Ministry of Education, 2016.
relatively high levels of under-employment-un-employment (currently under 10 %) among tertiary
graduates, compared to tertiary graduates in the EU and the Western Balkans.


                                        Policy Options

To address skill constraints, the Government could focus on improving the quality of education
and training systems and strengthening active labor market policies. Actions could include:
   •   Reforms of secondary TVET/Gymnasium education system, by clarifying expected skill
       outcomes from each type of education, supporting efficiencies in both the distribution of
       students across TVET/Gymnasium institutions and programs and in spending across the entire
       sector, and promoting collaborations with private sector employers;
   •   Reviewing the spending norms in the tertiary sector, based on higher education financing
       reforms that are being proposed and which should result in major shifts towards a more
       outcome-driven approach (e.g. employability of the graduates); and
   •   Focus on evaluating education outcomes by mainstreaming graduate tracking and establishing
       a labor market information system to understand program outcomes, simplify firm-worker
       matching and help youth choose the right education track (level of education and field of study).


                              World Bank Group Support

Ongoing support. The WBG has provided support for comprehensive education reforms for more than
fifteen years, spanning from kindergarten and primary school all the way through tertiary education
and post-graduate research and development. Currently, the World Bank is engaged in an ongoing
Investment Loan Project (US$ 15.98) - Higher Education and Research for Innovation and
Competitiveness (HERIC), effective as of May 2012, focused on the improving outcomes from the
tertiary sector by supporting reforms both in higher education financing and quality assurance and in
the promotion of innovation and competitiveness through expanded research capacity and
partnerships. The HERIC project will continue through December 2018, supporting reforms to improve
higher education monitoring and service delivery, and to increase cooperation with the private sector
through the establishment of a Center of Excellence and expanded national research grants, which have
resulted in several international R&D partnerships and business start-ups.
Planned support /Options. Indicative lending program options under the CPF include a project on
Training and Education for Improved Skills, and project on Jobs and Competitiveness. Future
WBG support (potential HERIC2) could focus on building upon the foundations laid by the HERIC
project to support development of vital soft and applied skills and to promote effective school-to-work
transition for graduates of the education system (in particular, of higher education and TVET students).
This could be done by ensuring labor market relevance of education through curriculum revisions,
national strategic planning and policy support for TVET, strengthening the linkages between
occupational standards and educational standards, and further fostering academic/industry
collaboration. In parallel, the development of these proposed activities plus the successful completion
of HERIC would allow TVET and higher education to further improve their relationship with the labor
market, promote greater efficiency and relevance in education spending and program delivery across
all levels of education, and improve the transition from both TVET and tertiary education to
employment.
Connectivity—both virtual and physical—is essential for Montenegro’s economic and social
development and integration into the European Union and beyond. Efficient transport systems move
goods and services, connect people to economic opportunities, increase the attractiveness of the
country as a tourist destination and enable access to healthcare and education services. Likewise,
information and communication technologies (ICT) connect people to knowledge, ideas, and services
that drive economic growth, engage citizens, and create jobs. Coordinated policy making in transport
and ICT creates synergies that further reduce the cost of connectivity.


                                        The Challenge

About 50 percent of the National and Regional road network is in poor condition. Montenegro
has chosen to invest in large-scale new road construction with low economic rates of return while
under-investing in routine and periodic maintenance and rehabilitation that would safeguard
investments with high economic rates of return. This situation is unsustainable and will undermine the
condition of the existing road network and its ability to support economic growth. Improving road
conditions requires addressing the backlog of rehabilitation while ensuring that the rest of the network
receives the necessary maintenance. The average annual rate of total expenditures on National and
Regional roads, based on a large group of OECD and Mediterranean countries, is about 1.7 percent of
GDP; and that for asset preservation is about 0.8 percent. While Montenegro has spent an average of
0.7 percent of its GDP on asset preservation between 2006 and 2013, the annual cost of asset
preservation (including the annual cost of addressing backlog rehabilitation over a 15-year period) is
about 40 million Euros (1.2 percent of GDP), leaving little room for new investment in the next few
years (about 17 million Euros per year). The Bar-Boljare highway project, whose construction started
last year has a low rate of economic return and puts an additional burden on public finances.
Montenegro has been improving regulations on regional connectivity, but barriers persist.
There are still some physical and non-physical barriers to Montenegro’s transport connectivity and
regional integration that need to be addressed. Physical obstacles include road and rail sections
requiring rehabilitation, a few road sections that may require upgrading, and the expansion of terminal
capacity in Podgorica and Tivat airports. Non-physical barriers include delays at border crossings,
limited use of intermodal transport and limited administrative capacity in transport and safety
agencies. Given the limited resources available to the road sector at present, addressing the remaining
needs will require careful prioritization, the use of private resources when possible, but will be a
challenge nonetheless.
Road safety practices need to be improved to reduce fatalities and serious injuries and to converge
to EU averages. Despite recent strong progress, the fatality rate per million inhabitants in Montenegro
is 90 (2015), compared to the EU28 average of 55.
Only 3.6 percent of Montenegrins (1 percent in rural areas) have access to high-speed
broadband connections; broadband rollout in rural areas is constrained. Low population density
network deployment costs are too high in rural areas, which results in the existing demand being
insufficient to justify private investment despite high social returns. Subsequently broadband
penetration in urban areas is up to 4 times higher compared to rural areas. Low investment in
broadband infrastructure results in the slowest broadband connections in the region. Another concern
is affordability of high-speed connections: basic broadband (below 10 Mbps) costs above the
affordability threshold of 5 percent of disposable income (established by the UN’s International
Telecommunication Union), while 10 Mbps connection costs around 10 percent of monthly household
expenses.


                                         Policy Options

Selectivity and prioritization and leveraging private financing are critical given the limited
fiscal space. Addressing the non-physical “soft” barriers mentioned above is not costly and is to a large
extent also required to conform to EU acquis. And they have benefit/cost ratios ranging from 2-7. It is
also consistent with Montenegro support to the Joint Action Plan on trade and transport facilitation
endorsed at the Western Balkan Paris Summit in July 2016. Large physical investments should be based
on detailed feasibility studies (FS) and sound socio-economic principles. While the FS for the Bar-
Boljare highway project indicated unsatisfactory rates of economic returns, the project is under
implementation. This will deprive the economy from the resources that could be used for investments
yielding high economic rates of return in transport and other sectors. In addition, costs could be
reduced through better procurement practices, while sector revenues could also be increased, e.g. from
registration fees and time-based charges using vignettes or distance-based charges using tolling.
Utilizing private resources in financing airport expansions and other transport investments needs to
be considered.
Improving the condition of the National and Regional networks requires strengthening the
planning and management of the asset preservation process, and possibly adopting new practices for
performing maintenance. Introducing a medium term expenditure framework where asset
preservation and new construction are considered at the same time would result in clear multi-year
binding budgets. Ensuring sufficient resources for maintenance and rehabilitation through the
Government’s budget and user fees is necessary to improve and sustain the condition of the networks.
Introducing Road Asset Management System (RAMS) and Output and Performance-based Road
Contracts (OPRC) would allow the Transport Directorate to preserve assets and reduce life cycle costs,
provide better and/or more consistent services levels to users, and reduce the administrative burden
on public road companies and enterprises.
Making roads safer. In order to sustain the improvements in road safety, the Ministry of Interior and
Affairs and the Ministry of Transport and Maritime Affairs need to review the design of ongoing road
safety programs/initiatives to assess the reasons for the reduction in road accidents and fatalities. This
requires establishing a system for diagnosing the cause of each accident, which would in turn enable
the design of targeted measures in each of the four main areas of road safety: engineering design,
enforcement, education and emergency response systems as the need may be. Improving road safety
performance is also one of the main areas identified for improvements under the Berlin process.
Government could improve broadband accessibility by offering financial and policy incentives
to providers. A PPP arrangement could attract private investment into broadband connectivity. A
regulatory review will be equally needed to lighten the bureaucratic and financial burdens related to
the construction process of broadband infrastructure, making it more coherent and efficient. For
instance, by introducing a new procedure for joint infrastructure deployment across different sectors
(a “dig once” policy), by streamlining infrastructure deployment process, introducing requirements for
housing deployments among others.


                               World Bank Group Support

Ongoing support. The Bank Group has completed in September 2015 an update of the Regional
Balkans Infrastructure (Transport) Study (REBiS) that identified physical and non-physical barriers to
regional integration and connectivity. This update was an input in developing the targets for non-
physical barriers in the Vienna Summit. The Bank Group is supporting the South East Europe Transport
Observatory (SEETO) in the implementation of these measures in the Western Balkans 6. The Bank
Group is currently preparing a regional project in trade and transport facilitation building on this
support. The project will initially involve Albania and Serbia and then possible extend to other
countries. The project could address road and rail network efficiency and asset management planning,
border crossing, network resilience and capacity building.
Planned support/Options. IFC could provide a PPP advisory support for terminals in Podgorica and
Tivat airports (structure and execute a PPP transaction advisory mandate) as well as provide financing
to the winning bidder. IFC is also considering a potential investment to Global Ports, a Turkish sponsor
that has the concession of the cargo terminal of Port of Bar, aimed at upgrading of the port facilities, as
well as engaging in Bijela shipyard project to transform the existing shipyard into a yacht service
center.
The Bank Group could provide advisory and financial support to rural broadband deployment,
including a PPP; policy incentives for broadband investment; design and implementation of training
programs for Digital Economy jobs, in particular among unemployed women and youth.
The Bank Group could also offer technical assistance and support in developing road management
systems for rehabilitation and maintenance and could provide financial support for the rehabilitation
of national and regional roads supporting tourism and agricultural development and employment
generation services following up on the Road Policy Note that the Bank prepared in June 2015.
                                        The Challenge

Over the past 8 years, agricultural exports increased by around 4 percent annually; while
imports increased by around 16 percent annually in that same period. The agricultural trade
deficit meanwhile increased threefold to over US$500 million. The growth of the unfavourable trade
balance is due to the highly variable foodstuff demand seasonally related to tourism. However, this is
a potential market that Montenegrin farms and processors need to take advantage of even if the peak
demand might never be fully met.
In spite of its weakness in meeting local demand, agriculture is a major contributor to
employment generation and it also generates around 10 percent of GDP. The 2010 Agriculture
Census data shows that nearly a fifth of the working age population works in agriculture, which
provides 18-22 percent of employment.
Most households practice farming as secondary largely informal supplementary income. This
situation along with the strong seasonal draw by the tourism related service industry, as well as the
substantially older population in rural areas, limits willingness of many farming households to invest
and increase production. While many farms are not likely to significantly grow and adjust to the EU’s
competitive environment, there is significant untapped potential for local artisanal products (various
cheeses and smoked dried meats) and supplying of fresh produce to the summer tourism industry in
summer when production potential is highest.
The small farm size with a highly diversified and low yielding production that prevents
economies of scale, requires effective agglomeration and logistics in order to effectively
compete in the modern European food markets. In order to access potential markets but also to
modernize the sector, Montenegro has steadfastly moved towards EU convergence gradually putting
in place the systems and institutions necessary to access IPA funds but also professionalizing and
improving productivity of agriculture. Convergence towards EU standards allows local producers and
processors to increasingly supply the local hospitality sector in the summer, while providing increased
opportunities for accessing European markets during the rest of the year with higher value niche
products.
Since its independence, Montenegro’s agriculture has seen an increase in productivity with
value added per worker increasing by almost 60 percent. Much of the gains in productivity could
be probably driven not so much by investments and modernization of farms operations but the
departure of working age population to find work in the more prosperous coastal areas. The IPARD
like grant mechanisms developed with Bank funded Montenegro Institutional Development and
Agriculture Strengthening (MIDAS) project assistance first, and continued with the support provided
by the EU through the World Bank (namely the IPARD-like 1 and 2 projects) later, has rekindled
interest in farming by a number of younger rural households who see farming as their economic
mainstay. The rather impressive increase in value added per worker has led to an overall recovery of
the contribution to GDP albeit also because of recent lower overall economic growth. In line with that
statistics, the share in goods exports from agriculture rose from 21 percent (average data of 2009-
2013) to 25 percent (average data 2011-2015), while imports remained steady at about 27 percent.
This change in dynamic puts the sector at a more competitive footing, which in combination with
progression towards EU compliant food safety standards and modernization of primary production
and local processing could provide opportunities for higher growth.


 Figure 15. Agriculture Productivity                       Figure 16. Agriculture Value Added




 Source: MONSTAT, World Bank staff calculations.




                                                   Policy Options

Maintain the policy focus on EU accession with continued support required for meeting
Montenegro’s closing benchmarks of Chapter 11 (Agriculture and Rural Development) and Chapter 12
(Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy) of the EU’s Acquis Communautaire as it relates to
payment systems and food safety. To this end, for meeting its Chapter 11 closing benchmark,
Montenegro has to present an implementation plan: (i) for the establishment of an Integrated
Administration and Control System (IACS) to be fully operational by the date of accession, including
the establishment of the Land Parcel Identification System (LPIS); and (ii) for the setting up of a Paying
Agency to be fully operational by the date of accession. With regard to Chapter 12 Montenegro has to
(i) submit approved national program for the upgrading of establishments for products of animal
origin, including establishments for animal by-products; (ii) provide guarantees for the establishment
of an EU-compliant system for official controls of live animals and animal products, including its
funding; and (iii) continue to set up and develop, in accordance with the acquis, the relevant
administrative structures, in particular as regards food safety controls, and to further increase its
administrative capacities and infrastructures. Further Montenegro should demonstrate that it will
have sufficient administrative capacity to correctly implement and apply all the acquis covered by this
chapter upon accession.
Build stronger links between agriculture and potential of off-farm employment and tourism.
Developing IPARD like measures that help attracting tourism into the hinterland, offering day trips
with hiking, climbing and adventure tourism combined with consuming locally produced specialties
and possibly spending a night on the farm.
Build stronger links with environmental management and preserving water quality with the
introduction of agro-environmental measures as part of the IPARD programing.


                              World Bank Group Support

Ongoing support. Montenegro Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening
Project (MIDAS), Investment Loan Project (US$ 19.04) aims to: (i) to improve delivery of government
assistance for sustainable agriculture and rural development in a manner consistent with the EU's pre-
accession requirements; (ii) to increase the experience of Montenegrin authorities in administering
rural development grants in accordance with EU-IPARD core rules, and (iii) to support a selected
number of agricultural holdings and food establishments in upgrading towards EU standards.
Around 660 farmers, 60 percent of whom live in the poorer north, received IPARD-like grants to
enhance their agricultural production. The project also supported the strengthening of the country’s
Food Safety System, including developing the regulatory framework, building a Border Inspection Post,
and upgrading national reference labs. Since the beginning of the project, in five rounds of grants, 1,465
applications have been received, 747 approved, and all funds available for grants amounting to around
EUR7 million have been contracted, overachieving the target of €5m. As of March 2016, about EUR6.5
million of grant funds have been transferred to beneficiaries, in reimbursement for investments that
had been completed.
Building on the successes of the original MIDAS project, in September 2016, the World Bank approved
an additional financing loan in the amount of €3.0 million to further strengthen rural areas and increase
the country’s preparedness for EU accession requirements. This additional financing will allow for an
expansion of the institutional capacity building achieved to date in order to manage public funds
dedicated to agricultural support.
Planned support/Options. The indicative lending program building on successful experiences in the
agriculture sector include Montenegro institutional development and agriculture strengthening
Project (MIDAS 2) in FY20. The WBG will continue discussion for the preparation of an effective
MIDAS2 project supporting the country in meeting the demanding requirement already identified and
listed above to reach both Chapter 11 and 12 closing benchmarks, with a stronger emphasis on Food
Safety requirements, including inspection capacities as well as border controls (in so far as necessary),
handling animal by-products, developing a more effective vision and strategy for its extension services,
and looking at the fishery sector.
                                        The Challenge

Although tourism is one of the fastest growing         Figure 17: Contribution of Tourism to
sectors in Montenegro, contributing about 25%          GDP in Montenegro, percent
to the country’s GDP, it has not yet reached its
full potential. The constraints to growth include:
(i) a short tourist season (primarily July and
August); (ii) limited accessibility of tourism
offerings outside coastal areas – 97% of tourists
spend their holidays at the coast; and (iii) limited
investments in the marketing and infrastructure
needed to attract tourists to the country’s diverse
offerings.                                                     %
Some of this growth and development has
come as the expense of the protection of the
natural environment – a critical component of
Montenegro’s offering. For instance, only 18
percent of all collected waste water is treated according to standards. In the coastal area, waste water
is mostly discharged directly into the sea, which might adversely impact the water quality in beaches /
bathing waters. Some of the environmental hotspots are also in proximity of highly touristic areas (the
shipyard in Bijela is a mere 20km from the Budva – Kotor tourists centre and the KAP Aluminium plant
in proximity of the lake Skadar). The government acknowledges that development should not be
unfettered, but rather should be planned and balanced to bring sustainable, long term benefits.
Government capacity to leverage private sector capital to support the implementation of the
Sustainable Tourism Development Strategy of the country could be improved. The impact of
aggressive development along the coastal zone may deter tourists and threaten the environmental
sustainability of the area. Resort developments along the Budva coastline are an example of
unsustainable development, which was approved by the Montenegrin Government in the past. Instead,
proactive and targeted public investments should be used to attract and leverage private capital that
supports sustainable tourism and job creation.
Tourism in Montenegro contributes to job creation, but the potential for job-creation is not fully
tapped and should be further unlocked. An ever-increasing portion of local jobs are to be found in
the tourism sector - it employs over 10% of the formal workforce (20 000 jobs).
To maximize the job-creation potential of public and      Figure 18: Contribution of Tourism to
private investments, efforts to promote private sector    Employment in Montenegro
growth – for instance, in sectors such as tourism or
agribusiness – should be linked to infrastructure
development. Job creation will not be maximized if
investment decisions are made in an uncoordinated
way by different line ministries, municipalities and
other organs of the state.
Sustainable tourism requires the underpinning of
an integrated approach to territorial development
– ensuring that infrastructural investments, like
municipal service provision and urban regeneration,
are linked to other strategic priority areas like
promotion     of   private    sector     growth, job
creation, revenue regeneration, environmental
stewardship, and private sector participation.

Increased employment and increased access to economic opportunities will be vital to reducing
poverty in Montenegro. This will require skills development and re-skilling of the workforce –
particularly youth and other vulnerable groups. A growing tourism industry will place increasing
demands on the labor force to provide a new range and higher quality of skills (e.g.
translation/language, guides, online media, etc.). Linking these skills development programs to the
hinterland will allow rural communities and vulnerable groups (such as women and youth) increased
participation in the job market and thereby promote more inclusive and pro-poor growth.
Branding and marketing of Montenegro’s tourism offer are well advanced, but require better
coordination. To extend tourist stays, promote a diversity of offerings and maximize job creation, a
more coordinated institutional response to tourism is required from the tourism sector. This would
require that effective promotion structures are established across spheres of governments, and across
regions – for instance, establishing a stronger country brand and marketing functions within
destination management. The private sector’s marketing capacity may also be enhanced.


                                       Policy Options

Link Sustainable Tourism Development to Territorial & Local Development to ensure
coordination, efficiency in the use of resources, equity in benefits and support by local
communities. Reduce ad-hoc activities and investments by building on the ongoing efforts by the
Ministry of Sustainable Development and Tourism to introduce a new law on planning, to update the
Montenegro Tourism Promotion Strategy and subsequently, by December 2017, also update the
National Territorial Development Plan. Ensure that municipal services and infrastructure investments
(for example in urban regeneration and/or heritage preservation) are be planned in a way that will
promote the growth of tourism and improve local service delivery, leveraging the benefits of such
public investments to achieve a multitude of strategic goals. Coordination and consensus building with
other line ministries and Local Government is required to ensure support in implementing the strategic
vision and build consensus with line ministries, local governments and the public.
Strengthen the capacity local governments to plan for, deliver and maintain the local infrastructure
and services necessary to support tourism development, while also meeting the needs of local
populations. Mobilize the tourism economy to support the generation of reliable streams of local
revenues to be reinvested in the sector.

Foster and promote coordination between agencies to build synergies to maximize results. To
successfully link sustainable tourism to local development, the strengthening of and coordination
among sector stakeholders (government, private sector, and local tourism agencies) is vital. Effective
tourism management and marketing structures (e.g. destination management, among others) are
needed to be able to link tourism and local development. This will support the development of
destinations as a whole, rather than the promotion of isolated tourist attractions.
Increase private sector investment and job creation in the areas of sustainable tourism and
contributing sectors (e.g. Agriculture, Environment, Cultural Heritage). Private investments
should be guided by a sound sustainable tourism vision and policy and supported by targeted public
investments which aim to provide opportunities for rural communities and vulnerable groups,
including women and youth, and preserve environmental assets that play a key role in diversifying
Montenegro’s tourism offering and earnings.
Provide skills training to support job-creation in Tourism sectors. (Re)Training the labor force is
required to ensure that labor skill sets remain relevant and responsive to an evolving tourism sector.
More relevant skills will enhance productivity and efficiency gains for the sector as a whole, but also
make workers more resilient to changes in market demand. Training efforts should be developed with
private sector participation.


                              World Bank Group Support

Planned support/Options. Tourism Based Local Development represents a brand new
engagement in Montenegro that emerged as part of the CPF dialogue. It aims to integrate Tourism and
Local Development building on the experience and international best practices of other similar projects
from across the regions (e.g. Georgia, Albania, Macedonia, Russia). Project could provide a combination
of lending and advisory support. The program is proposed to be cross-sectoral in nature, and works
across government line departments to ensure that the investment benefits are leveraged to achieve
multiple strategic goals, and also to enhance support to the vision and implementation support by other
line ministries (for example the Ministries of Agriculture, Culture and Economy). Additionally, the
proposed project addresses a number of strategic priority areas for the Government of Montenegro:
     • Supports the creation of new jobs.
     • Targets lagging regions and links them to the economic engine of tourism through major public
        investments targeted to improving the market competitiveness of destinations/circuits (road
        upgrades, restoration of cultural heritage sites, façade redevelopment, public space upgrades,
        etc.).
     • Capacity building for multiple stakeholders to ensure the long-term sustainability of
        investments (municipalities, tour operators, hospitality establishments, other public and
        private entities).
The proposed Project would provide support for both Infrastructure Investments and Institutional &
Capacity Strengthening to promote the upgrading of sites and connectivity along identified tourism
circuits to connect and enhance the competitiveness of priority tourism attractions, strengthen the link
between the tourism sector and local development – with a territorial focus on the hinterland – identify
and address barriers to diversifying sources of financing, promoting reform and improving public-
private dialogue.
                                         The Challenge

Environment sustainability in Montenegro is essential (i) to ensure the well-being of the
Montenegrin population and improve further living standards, (ii) to protect the strong natural
heritage that is the foundation for tourism growth and its related economic development and (iii)
to further move Montenegro toward EU accession. Montenegro has made positive strides in
improving environmental sustainability, notably in improving the environmental legal framework and in
starting investments in sanitary waste disposal. Further improvements are required, in particular in
relation the management of air quality, and improvements of waste, water and wastewater management
that can positively affect public health, living standards and tourism potential. Air quality improvement
will require modernisation of energy and heating management, and better waste and wastewater
management will require sustained investment in new and modern infrastructure. With only 18% of
population covered by any form of wastewater treatment, Montenegro has also a significant work and
investments ahead before reaching EU standards.
The country is also facing a number of risks related to the environment, with environmental
hotspots requiring immediate actions, especially with regards to the management of industrial waste
such as the Shipyard in Bijela a mere 20km from the the Budva – Kotor tourists centre or the KAP
Aluminium plant in proximity of the lake Skadart. The country is also at risk from flooding and from
extreme weather events that will require better-coordinated approaches and development of policies
dealing with Disaster Risk Management.
Air quality. The Government has made significant progress in transposing the EU directive on Ambient
Air Quality and has adopted a strategy on Air Quality Management that include an action plan defining
54 measures for improvements. Air quality in urban areas and nationwide assessed in terms of the
concentration of SO2, NO2 and O3 is within the prescribed threshold limit value, with no major
concentration variations on an annual basis. However, there is a high concentration of PM10 and a large
number of exceeded permitted daily concentrations take place during the heating season, mainly due
to the use of solid fuels (coal and wood). Annual mean concentration of PM10 in Pljevlja is twice as high
as in Podgorica or Bar. Concentrations in Niksic are in the middle of the range, and only there a declining
trend in concentrations can be noticed. WHO air quality guidelines level (20 µg/m³) is exceeded in all
cities. In Pljevlja, Niksic and Podgorica, daily mean concentration of PM10 exceeded 50 µg/m³ on 64-177
days in 2013, markedly more often than allowed by EU AQ directive (35 days/year) or recommended by
WHO AQ guidelines (3 days/year).
Recent analysis indicates that over 250 premature deaths and 140 hospital admissions per year, and a
number of other health outcomes are associated with the exposure exceeding the level of particulate
matter recommended by WHO air quality guidelines. More than half of these effects are associated with
elevated levels of pollution in the winter caused mainly by combustion of solid fuels for heating. As a
result, a recent analysis shows that that almost 6 percent of all mortality cases in Podgorica, 12 percent
in Niksic and 22 percent in Pljevlja could be attributed to the existing level of air pollution in these
cities. To reduce health effects of air pollution in cities of Montenegro, a significant decrease of solid fuels
combustion for household heating and cooking is necessary. For instance, there are significant
economically viable opportunities to invest in efficient wood stoves and pellets and chips fired heating
boilers in Montenegro (see the Energy Efficiency and Biomass Energy note for additional details).

 Figure 19. Number of exceedances of daily limit values of PM10 particles




 Source: Environment Protection Agency


Water and waste water management. Low wastewater treatment standards are a serious
impediment to further sustainable development of tourism and have negative impact on health. Only
43 percent of the total population of Montenegro is connected to a public sewage network and
wastewater treatment is extremely low, with 18 percent of all collected wastewater treated according
to standards. In the coastal area, wastewater is mostly discharged directly into the sea, which might
adversely affect the water quality in beaches/bathing waters. The increase in population in the coastal
zone around the summer season, due to tourism is exacerbating the problem when it matters most.
This is linked to the significant investment deficit in the sector, especially with regards to Wastewater
Treatment and is compounded by the overall financial status of the sector. Revenues generated by
water tariffs are not sufficient to cover operation and maintenance costs. As a result, operating costs
are covered by national and local subsidies, and investments are funded by international loans and
grants, complemented by subsidies from both national and local budgets. The efficiency of utilities
performance is also below desired level, with overstaffing an important issue in most water utilities,
the average collection rate at only 72 percent, indicating that utilities have significant difficulty
recovering bills, and nonrevenue water at 59 percent which is higher than regional average. To reach
EU standards and directive requirements, Montenegro will have to invest nearly €640 million, which
can come from the EU funds and own sources.
Industrial and special waste. Poorly controlled industrial waste sites pose a constant threat to public
health and the environment. One of the most important issues is the treatment of industrial waste
generated in the past. Industrial waste disposal sites pose risks not only to immediate environment
and sensitive natural and tourism resources, but also to public health in the surrounding communities
through groundwater contamination and risk of dam failure with release of large waste quantities, like
in Kombinat Aluminijuma Podgorica (stabilization and remediation of red mud basin and industrial
waste landfill). Other critical sites for remediation are Shipyard Bijela (site clean-up and removal of
large quantities of hazardous waste), the ash disposal site of the thermal power plant in Pljevlja and
the mine tailings disposal site in Gradac. The latter is continuously releasing heavy metals into the
Ćehotina River. Montenegro is also lacking infrastructure for adequate management of the ongoing
production of industrial and special waste. Further details are presented in a separate note on this
topic.
Flooding and DRM. Montenegro is vulnerable          Figure 20. Natural Disasters in Montenegro,
to natural disasters, especially floods and         1991-2014
earthquakes. Floods are the most frequent
hazard. According to Emergency Events                                      Storm,
Database (EM-DAT), during the period 1991–                                   8%
2013 there were six destructive floods out of 12
total natural disasters. The country is also                   Wildfire,
prone to extreme temperatures, storms, and                      17%
droughts. A 100y flood event would have the                                         Flood, 50%
potential to result in an economic loss of 10
percent of GDP and impact 9 percent of the                        Extreme
population.                                                     temperature,
                                                                    25%




Changes in the quantity and regime of precipitation influenced by the climate-related hazards
will in a long-term lead to: (i) reduced flows and abundance of water resources; (ii) a higher frequency
and intensity of floods are expected; (iii) movement of vegetation zones, reduced number of species,
drying out of forests and more frequent forest fires. In agriculture, significantly reduced yields due to
sensitivity of crop production to changes in temperature and precipitation reduced available
agricultural land and lower content of organic matter in soil. Climate-related hazards disproportionately
affect lower income cohorts both from the perspective of income loss and from the perspective of coping
with consequence from a disaster.
Montenegro has made substantial progress in transposing EU legislation into national laws.
However, substantial further implementation efforts remain, including those required by the EU climate
acquis. Alignment with EU environmental standards would cost 36 percent of Montenegro’s GDP
(EUR1.43 billion), mostly in the fields of water, waste management and air quality. The most of the costs
will refer to the water sector EUR840 million or 59 percent of total costs, with solid waste management
accounting for EUR368 million.


                                        Policy Options

Prioritize national planning and implementation of the national strategy for transposition,
implementation and enforcement of the EU acquis on environment and climate change and its action
plan for period 2016-2020, based on economic efficiency of social and environmental improvements.
Develop sustainable energy efficiency implementation and financing mechanisms such as energy
service agreements, energy efficiency revolving funds and utility obligation schemes.
Promote increased use of biomass for heating in efficient stoves and boilers through certification
and labeling of biomass fuels and appliances, adoption of a forest roads development plan,
establishment of biomass logistics and trade centers, and provision of financing.
Upgrade and expand Water and Wastewater infrastructure. In the coming period the country will
have to: (i) Secure additional financial sources to invest in upgrading the water and wastewater sector
infrastructure and move it closer to EU standards, and to secure foundations for sustainable
development of tourism, (ii) Improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of water utilities, and (iii)
Implement sound cost recovery principles, as currently water utilities do not generate sufficient
revenues to ensure proper maintenance and sustainability of even existing infrastructure.
Disaster Risk Management. In the last 10 years, the country has not suffered a severe adverse natural
event and risk perception is very low. Better understanding of these risks would allow government to
prioritize actions in short medium and long terms to build resilience in the country.
At the same time, and as these disasters are a contingent liability, the country could start preparing
financial mechanisms to respond more efficiently when disasters of larger magnitude hit the country.
Implement priority industrial waste disposal site remediation. The scope and financial means of the
Bank-funded Industrial Waste Management and Cleanup Project enable Montenegro to remediate the
priority industrial waste disposal sites in the country, develop a national scheme for management of
ongoing industrial and specials waste generation and further work on policies in the field of waste and
industrial pollution management


                              World Bank Group Support

Ongoing support. The World Bank currently finances two operations addressing the Environmental
Sustainability management issues in Montenegro. The Industrial Waste Management and Cleanup
Project (US$68.90 million) has a sector development and technical assistance component that can be
used to support national planning in fields such as waste and chemicals management, and industrial
pollution control.
The Energy Efficiency Project (US$15.67million) could be expanded to support implementation of
the 2nd National EE Action Plan (NEEAP, 2014). Such an EE project could also support the NEEAP key
action on development of alternative financial mechanisms (e.g. through introduction of Energy Service
Agreements (ESA) and NPV based procurement as steps towards development of an Energy Service
Companies (ESCOs) and/or as part of establishment of an energy efficiency fund.
Planned support/Options. A possible Biomass Heating project could be prepared (and potentially
combined with any extension/expansion of the EE project). It could be focused on replacement of old
heat only boilers in multistory buildings with efficient pellet or wood chip boilers, and scaling up
replacement of inefficient wood stoves with efficient ones.
The World Bank can support the implementation of national strategy through advice bringing in
international experience in environmental management and EU pre-accession support on (1)
industrial pollution and waste management; (2) improvements in environmental monitoring and
enforcement and climate policies; (3) energy efficiency, biomass and other renewables; (4) energy
market integration and system planning.
International Finance Corporation could support financially sustainable municipalities to invest in
waste management projects. Where appropriate, IFC will pursue PPPs as other efficient private sector
solutions.
                                                    The Challenge

The Montenegrin economy has high energy intensity measured as energy used per unit of gross
domestic product, remaining 3.3 times higher than the EU28 average. This is primarily due to outdated
technology in the aluminum smelting process and inefficient energy consumption (especially with regard
to heating) among households and the many public buildings. Furthermore, energy expenditures as a
percent of household income in Montenegro are among the highest in the region. 9 Improved energy
efficiency would not only reduce public and private expenditure but also global CO2 and local (NOx, SOx,
particulate matter) emissions.
Investing in energy efficiency boosts the economy and saves fiscal resources. Every €1 invested in
energy efficiency results in €4-5 in other co-benefits (e.g., increased tax revenues, lower operating costs,
reduced unemployment/subsidies, energy security, reduced pollution etc.) Building renovations in
particular can be labor-intensive and create mostly non-exportable jobs, generating up to 27 jobs for
every €1 million invested. The Montenegro EE Project (MEEP) has achieved 35-65 percent energy
savings per building and just the 25 MEEP buildings alone are estimated to save ~€3.5 million in energy
costs over a 15-year period. A significantly scaled up, sustainable buildings EE program would yield
significant budget savings for the Government.




9 Overall household energy expenditures in Montenegro are estimated to represent about 15.3 percent of average household income, the

highest level among the neighboring countries; annual electricity expenditure alone is estimated to average over EUR 600 per household.
Source: Annual household expenditures in the W-B, from Household Budget surveys of W-B countries; Assessment of the Residential Energy
Efficiency Investment Potential in the Western Balkans, 2015, ECO; expenditures for electricity, WB Data
Figure 21. Electricity Consumption Per Capita Figure 9. Energy Intensity in 2012 measured in
                                              Total Final Consumption (in toe) per Unit of
                                              GDP (in 2005 USD)

                 7,000                                                                                                0.350




                                                                                          toe per thousand 2005 USD
                 6,000                                                                                                0.300

                 5,000                                                                                                0.250
kWh per capita




                                                                                                                      0.200
                 4,000
                                                                                                                      0.150
                 3,000
                                                                                                                      0.100
                 2,000
                                                                                                                      0.050
                 1,000                                                                                                0.000
                    0
                           2005   2006   2007    2008      2009   2010   2011   2012
                          Montenegro       BIH          Croatia     Albania     Serbia



Source: World Development Indicators.                                                    Source: IEA World Energy Statistics and Balances.


Biomass energy is underutilized and inefficient. Montenegro has in per capita terms the highest
potential in the Western Balkans to increase woody biomass use for heating. This is a missed opportunity
to develop local economy and create jobs.


Figure 10 Biomass Energy

                         0.6
                         0.5
                         0.4
                         0.3
             toe




                         0.2
                         0.1
                          0
                                   ALB             BIH              CRO         FYROM                                  KOS    MNE   SER   W-B
                     -0.1
                     -0.2

                                            Potential woody biomass supply, per capita (toe)
                                            Actual woody biomass consumption, per capita (toe)
                                            Potential to increase woody biomass consumption, per capita (in toe)

There are significant economically viable opportunities for investments in biomass heating. Up to
266MW of electric heating could be economically replaced with biomass heating in single-family homes
and multistory buildings (estimated 89 percent of current electric heating systems). The needed
investment of ca. €15 to €60 million 10 could save as much ~ 670,000MWh /year, equivalent to ~25% of
MNE’s annual electricity consumption, and would also reduce both local emissions and CO2 emissions by
~330,000 tons/year. Similarly, as much as 360MW in inefficient wood stoves could be replaced with
efficient ones (roughly 36,000 stoves) through an investment of ~€19 million over 10 years. Through

10 The range based on 56 EUR/kW for efficient stove produced in Western Balkans and 200 EUR/kW for efficient stove imported from Western

Europe.
such a program annual energy savings of ~3.4ktoe (or 22,000m3 of wood) and fuel wood cost savings of
~€1 million/year could be achieved. Demand in the market exists as illustrated by the small, grant
supported Energy Wood project which has provided several hundred small loans to households.


                                         Policy Options

Energy Efficiency. Reducing energy intensity and increasing renewable energy production are
essential for enabling sustainable growth as well as reducing public expenditures. Public sector should
continue an action on improving energy efficiency to increase awareness of energy efficiency among
the population and to demonstrate the benefits of energy saving, including reduction of expenditures
and emissions. As noted in Montenegro’s National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP), key actions
would be the development of alternative financial mechanisms, such as an energy efficiency fund, and
utility obligation schemes.
Biomass: The Government should promote the increased and more efficient use of biomass in heating.
Highly economic options would include policies and schemes that promote switching inefficient
heating stoves to efficient ones (e.g. through a significant scale up of the Energy Wood program or a
similar initiative) and switching of oil and coal boilers to wood chips in multistory and public buildings;
in northern Montenegro some opportunities for development of district heating also exist. Certification
and labeling of biomass heating appliances and biomass, adoption of a forest roads development plan,
and establishment of biomass logistics and trade centers would boost the heating appliances market
and the development of domestic supply (of pellets, briquettes and properly dried firewood) and use
of biomass.


                               World Bank Group Support

Ongoing support. Energy Efficiency Project (US$15.67million) could be expanded to support
implementation of the 2nd National EE Action Plan (NEEAP, 2014). Such an EE project could also
support the NEEAP key action on development of alternative financial mechanisms e.g. through
introduction of Energy Service Agreements (ESA) and NPV based procurement as steps towards
development of an Energy Service Companies (ESCOs) and/or as part of establishment of an energy
efficiency fund.
Planned support/Options. A possible Biomass Heating project could be prepared (and potentially
combined with any extension/expansion of the EE project). It could be focused on replacement of old
heat only boilers in multistory buildings with efficient pellet or wood chip boilers, and scaling up
replacement of inefficient wood stoves with efficient ones.
The World Bank can support the implementation of national strategy through advice bringing in
international experience in energy efficiency, biomass and other renewables. The World Bank could
also advise on the establishment of a wholesale power market and potential integration with
neighboring countries through a market coupling. Such support would consider different options, and
its potential impact on consumers, of designing, developing and implementing the wholesale power
market.
                                          The Challenge

Montenegro has made some important progress in the field of waste and industrial pollution
management, particularly in the development of the (environmental) legal framework, but also with
investments in sanitary disposal for domestic waste in Podgorica and Bar/Ulcinje and the issuance of the
first integrated environmental permits for the industrial sector. Further improvements are required to
deal with the still present critical environmental issues and meet EU requirements as stipulated under
Chapter 27 on Environment and Climate Change, which puts specific emphasis on waste management
and industrial pollution control. While alignment with EU environmental standards would require
investments equal to 36 percent of Montenegro’s GDP (EUR1.43 billion), after investment needs in the
water sector at EUR840 million, requirements for improvements in waste management come second at
estimated investments of EUR368 million in the period 2016-2020.
Besides further investment needs in domestic waste management, Montenegro is still lacking
infrastructure for the collection and treatment or disposal of special waste categories such as
hazardous and industrial waste. Arguably even more critical are the historic industrial and hazardous
waste disposal sites in the country, lacking environmental control measures and thus creating
unmitigated sources of contamination for the immediate surroundings and sensitive groundwater and
surface water resources. In Montenegro, 82 percent of the population depends on water supply from
groundwater systems.
Poorly controlled industrial waste sites pose a constant threat to public health and the
environment. The highest risk environmental hotspots in Montenegro have been identified, already,
including the solid waste disposal site and the red-mud basins within the premises of the KAP aluminium
plant which are contaminating groundwater systems connected to Lake Skadar. Of these, the massive
red-mud basins --if not remediated-- need sustained maintenance to prevent deterioration and collapse
with potential disastrous consequences, to people living in the vicinity and Skadar Lake with its
importance for the tourist sector. A second hotspot site is the shipyard in Bijela at the Boka Bay, some 20-
30 kilometres away from tourist centres of Budva, Herceg Novi and Kotor. The shipyard has heavily
contaminated soils and hazardous waste piles, which have locally polluted the Boka Bay seabed, an
important asset for tourism in Montenegro. The Old City of Kotor, together with part of Kotor Bay, is a
UNESCO protected site. Other hotspots sites are the coal ash disposal site in Pljevlja and the mine tailings
disposal site in Gradac. The latter is continuously releasing heavy metals into the Ćehotina River that runs
into Bosnia.
Montenegro has adopted the Industrial Waste Management and Clean-up Project to remediate the
hotspots sites and develop a national system for industrial and hazardous waste management, with $68.9
million World Bank funding. This project became effective in November 2014. Preparation for
remediation has progressed only for the Bijela shipyard with works now (January 2017) ready for
tendering, but to date no clean-up operations have started.
                                         Policy Options

The European Commission, in its 2016 Status Report on Montenegro, noted the substantial efforts
needed for implementation of environmental regulations and enforcement, in particular in water,
nature protection and waste management and for the latter with the legal framework largely in place
puts specific emphasis on implementation of the national waste management strategy and plans.
The OECD in its Third Environmental Performance Review (2015) also commands Montenegro for its
strong legal framework and investments made to develop the first sanitary landfills. It recommends to
focus policy efforts on the further development of regional landfills, improve data collection on both
domestic and industrial waste (currently only based on estimations and verification is mostly lacking);
waste tariff collection to create a financial basis for investments and operations (currently only 56% of
households and 68% of companies pay for waste services) and to develop the infrastructure and
improve market conditions for waste recycling. It further asks attention for the lack of options for
treatment and disposal of medical waste, PCB waste and radioactive waste.
Prioritization of investments is key to implement the existing waste management strategy and
plans. With plans in place, but also limited resources and time until 2020, an important first step is to
prioritize and sequence sector interventions for both the domestic (non-hazardous) waste sector and
the industrial and hazardous waste sector and based on service standards and economic efficiency of
social and environmental improvements. For the domestic waste sector, financial sustainability is key
which requires stable incomes from waste tariffs to fund day-to-day ongoing operations and finance
future investments.
The ongoing Industrial Waste Management and Cleanup Project has the scope and resources to
cover requirements for industrial and special waste management. The Project has been designed
and funded to help addressing the remediation of industrial pollution sites but also has the resources
to support the government, through its technical assistance component, with developing a national
scheme for management of ongoing industrial and specials waste generation and further work on
policies in the field of waste management and industrial pollution control.


                              World Bank Group Support

Ongoing support. Accelerate implementation of the existing Industrial Waste Management and
Cleanup Project (US$68.90 million). This Project, despite having all the resources to remediate the
existing hotspots and support the Government with further sector development has had a poor record
of implementation since effectiveness in November 2014 with only a few percent of funding utilized.
Remediation at the Bijela shipyard is now expected to start before the summer of 2017 but no progress
has been made for the other hotspots. Work on the national scheme for special waste management has
not yet commenced. It is strongly recommended to accelerate implementation by making the project a
national priority and together with the parties involved in project implementation define steps to start
the works at the project sites other than the Bijela shipyard. This would entail: (1) a Government
decision to recognize that public funding is required for the remediation of the Gradac site; (2) entering
an agreement with EPCG for the remediation of the coal ash disposal site in Pljevlja; and (3)
development a remediation plan with all stakeholders including the current private operators of
former KAP facilities for the remediation of the two project sites with the KAP location.
Potential support. The World Bank can further support the implementation of national environmental
strategies through advice bringing in international experience from working in other EU candidate
countries in environmental management and EU pre-accession support for industrial pollution control,
waste management and improvements in environmental monitoring and enforcement.
International Finance Corporation could support financially sustainable municipalities to invest in
waste management projects. Where appropriate, IFC will pursue PPPs as other efficient private sector
solutions.
