CASE STUDY


Saving the Lives of the Most Vulnerable -
With Financial Returns
GHIF: An Innovative Funding Structure Tackles Neglected
Diseases Around the World


January 2017
ABOUT IFC
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution focused exclusively on leveraging
the power of the private sector to tackle the world’s most pressing development challenges. Working with private
enterprises in more than 100 countries, IFC uses its capital, expertise and influence to help eliminate extreme poverty
and promote shared prosperity.

ABOUT THE CASE STUDY
Expanding access to quality and affordable health care is a central element to eliminating extreme poverty and
promoting shared prosperity. The World Bank Group has a goal to end preventable deaths and disability through
Universal Health Coverage (UHC). In many developing countries, governments do not have the capacity to service the
entire population and private health care providers often play a critical role in meeting societal needs.

IFC’s health practice is developing case studies that demonstrate the ability of the private sector towards achieving
global and national health care goals. Through a focus on efficiency and innovation, certain business models can
provide better outcomes at a lower overall cost to society.

WRITTEN BY
This case study was authored by Ann M. Casanova with valuable inputs from IFC colleagues, Pushpinder Bindra, Sergey
Kozhukhov, Chris McCahan, and Elena Sterlin.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A special note of appreciation is extended to GHIF, especially to Dr. Curt LaBelle, Glenn Rockman, and Kabeer
Aziz for sharing their experience and data with us. In addition, the author is grateful for the insights on the cholera
situation in Haiti provided by Dr. Jean Luc Poncelet, Dr. Papa Coumba Faye, and Dr. Mauricio Cerpa, all from the Pan
American Health Organization as well as by Dr. Louise Ivers of Partners in Health, Boston, MA and Harvard Medical
School. The author is grateful for the many insights provided by IFC colleagues. Special thanks to Elizabeth Price for
communications management, Teresa Ogoh for copy-editing, and Borys Mar for the creative design. 

DISCLAIMER
The findings, interpretations, views and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) or of the World Bank or the
governments they represent. While IFC believes that the information provided is accurate, the information is provided
on a strictly “as-is” basis, without assurance or representation of any kind. IFC may not require all or any of the
described practices in its own investments, and in its sole discretion may not agree to finance or assist companies or
projects that adhere to those practices. Any such practices or proposed practices would be evaluated by IFC on a case-
by-case basis with due regard for the particular circumstances of the project.

RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
© International Finance Corporation 2016. All rights reserved.

The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law.

PHOTO CREDITS
GHIF, PAHO/WHO, Jerome Starkey, Maggie Hallahan@MHPV, Kjetil Ree and Toeytoey.
                                                                                       Photo © PAHO/WHO
Table of Contents
An Oral Cholera Vaccine
Stems an Epidemic 	                                                    1

The Genesis of GHIF	                                                   7

How the Guarantee Mechanism Works	                                   11

Ensuring Affordability for the Poorest Populations	                  15

Impact Modeling Approach 	                                           19

The Future for GHIF	                                                 21

The Role of IFC	                                                     23

Conclusion	25




                                                      GHIF: An Innovative Fund | iii
                                                                                                                        Photo © PAHO/WHO




Haitian woman taking Euvichol during a cholera vaccination campaign. Figuers, Sud Department, Haiti, November 9, 2016




iv | GHIF: An Innovative Fund
AN ORAL CHOLERA VACCINE
STEMS AN EPIDEMIC



“Our house flew away,” Ismir Pierre Vannel explained to an Al Jazeera reporter,
“We are not even sure in which direction it went. It took to the sky and
we lay on the ground with our little baby and our children.”1 The fury of
Hurricane Matthew’s 145 mph (230Km/h) winds were no match for the Haitian




                                                                                                                            Photo © PAHO/WHO
communities living under tin roofs. On October 4, 2016, the storm wiped out
entire villages across southwestern Haiti, the poorest nation in the Western
Hemisphere. An estimated 1,600 lives were lost to the storm. The relief efforts
for two million people was an immense challenge for this country of limited
resources. The storm leveled about 200,000 homes, destroyed latrines and
health clinics, razed entire crops, and floodwaters overran villages. People        At midday in Figuers,
lost everything - their homes, food, clothes, and access to safe drinking water.    a rural area in the Sud
                                                                                    Department of Haiti,
Dr. Jean Daniel Legare from Doctors without Borders explained in an interview
                                                                                    nurse Orcel Naika set
with CBS News, “They drank the only water they could find – the water
from the river - that’s how they are getting cholera.”2 In the aftermath of a
                                                                                    up a vaccination post
catastrophe of this scale, the lack of clean drinking water - already a problem     by the shore.
- became exacerbated as the flooding contaminated the drinking water. With          In less than three
an inadequate water and sanitation infrastructure, Haitian doctors warned           hours, her brigade
of a second cholera crisis.                                                         vaccinated more than
                                                                                    250 people against
Cholera, an infectious bacterial disease contracted from drinking contaminated
                                                                                    cholera.
water, can spread like wildfire. Even healthy people who have consumed tainted
water can die within hours. This was not the island nation’s first experience
with the disease. In the seven years since the 2010 earthquake, 9,000 lives have been lost to cholera and another
800,000 people have been infected. The post-storm conditions were ideal for fecal matter, containing cholera, to
leech into the water supply. Fear ripped through villages like shock waves – and those fears were grounded. Days
after the storm, over 1,000 children were sick and suspected of having contracted cholera.

The Haitian government requested international assistance and the World Health Organization (WHO) Global
Task Force for Cholera Control mobilized a response. By October 27, EuBiologics, a cholera vaccine-manufacturing
company had shipped one million doses of the vaccine to Haiti. Dr. Pape Faye of the Pan American Health Organization
(PAHO) said, “Vaccination campaigns were organized. People who lost everything desperately wanted to get the
vaccine. There was great demand for the vaccine.” One month after the storm, about 730,000 people had received

	 AJ+ (Al Jazeera) “Our house flew away.” October 28, 2016.
1


	 Haiti in Ruins after Hurricane Matthew, CBS Evening News, October 11, 2016.
2




                                                                                             GHIF: An Innovative Fund | 1
               one dose of an oral cholera vaccine. By year end, another 40,000 had been vaccinated. The balance was stored to
               defend against future outbreaks. Ideally, two doses should be given (2.6 million doses would have been needed for
               the affected area in Haiti alone) but given the global shortage, one dose has been shown to provide some effective
               protection.

               Dr. Curt LaBelle, Managing Partner of the Global Health Investment Fund’s (GHIF’s) investment management company
               said, “The global supply of cholera vaccines had dropped to such low levels that it was not possible to meet the demand of
               just one country in the event of an outbreak. If we had not invested in 2014 in EuBiologics, a company that manufactures
               oral cholera vaccines, it would not have been able to finish its manufacturing process and scale it up so that they could
               supply millions of doses per year. In fact, EuBiologics had only obtained WHO prequalification approval nine months
               before the storm struck. GHIF’s support facilitated EuBiologics’ efforts to supply the Haitian people with oral cholera
               vaccines to help combat a second epidemic.”

                                                     Cholera and other communicable diseases are largely under control in industrialized
                                                     countries where it represents about seven percent of the burden of disease; however,
                                                     infectious diseases are still serious health concerns in emerging markets. It is 66
                                                     percent of the disease burden in Sub-Saharan Africa alone. Fifteen million people die
                                                     annually from infectious diseases, and these tend to affect vulnerable populations
                                                     where there is limited capacity to pay for treatment. The perception that it wasn’t
Photo © GHIF




                                                     financially viable to invest in research and development of cures for infectious diseases
                                                     predominantly affecting poor people grew over time and dampened production,
                                                     leading to global neglect of a set of diseases suffered by people living in developing
                  “If we had not invested            countries.
                  in 2014 in EuBiologics,
                                                     The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (“BMGF”) believed it could be possible
                  a company that
                                                     to address these diseases and generate reasonable profits. The foundation explored
                  manufactures oral
                                                     various financing models, which could enable sustainable development of low-cost
                  cholera vaccines,
                                                     products. In 2012, under the sponsorship of BMGF, the non-profit Global Health
                  it would not have                  Investment Fund (GHIF) was launched to make these investments.
                  been able to finish its
                  manufacturing process              GHIF is a novel social impact fund established to finance the development of drugs,
                  and scale it up so that            vaccines, and diagnostic tests for diseases that disproportionately burden low and

                  they could supply                  middle income countries. In 2013, IFC played a catalytic role by committing $10
                                                     million of equity in the fund. This enabled GHIF to attract other investors and surpass
                  millions of doses per
                                                     its funding target. By year end, GHIF had attracted a diverse group of investors,
                  year.”
                                                     allowing it to raise $108 million of capital. It began investing in companies in 2014-
                                 Dr. Curt LaBelle
                                                     one of which was EuBiologics, the cholera vaccine maker.

               As of December 2016, GHIF had invested in seven companies for development and manufacture of treatments for diseases
               such as cholera and river blindness, as well as diagnostic tests for tuberculosis, HIV, malaria, dengue, preeclampsia
               and gestational diabetes. GHIF’s most recent investment is financing further development of Tribendimidine, a drug
               to combat soil-transmitted helminth infections. These parasitic worms are among the most common infections found
               in poor communities, and affect nearly 900 million children worldwide. By year end, three portfolio companies had
               commercialized products, three were in clinical trials, and one was in the pre-commercialization stage prior to roll
               out. Another deal should close in the first quarter of 2017, and GHIF expects two additional investments later in
               2017. These investments would fully commit the fund.



               2 | GHIF: An Innovative Fund
GHIF measures results on a “double bottom line” of social impact and financial results. To date, results are positive.
Although three products—cholera vaccine, HIV diagnostic, and the malaria diagnostic—are in the early stages of
commercialization, GHIF-supported companies and projects have already saved an estimated 4,200 lives and improved
quality of life for an estimated 1.5 million people (data as of November 2016). By 2025, it expects to save 140,000
lives and improve 10.9 million lives annually. In terms of financial performance, the fund’s portfolio companies are
generating revenues and increasing in value, and EuBiologics completed a public offering in January 2017. GHIF’s
investors have made unrealized returns comparable to the Standard and Poors (S&P) 500 Index.

More broadly, GHIF’s investments are helping to end a global shortage of cholera vaccines and enabling cheaper,
more effective diagnostic tests for HIV and malaria, providing more accurate results and reducing healthcare costs.
Since a number of GHIF’s investee company’s products help children, KfW Development Bank believes that “GHIF’s
investments can make significant contributions to the goal of cutting child mortality in half by 2030.”3 In addition,
KfW notes that four of these seven investments by GHIF directly address the targets established by the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals.




                                                                                                                                Photo © PAHO/WHO




Children at cholera vaccination campaign site. Figuers, Haiti.


	 KfW Development Bank Project Information. KfW Review of GHIF Performance, December 21, 2016.
3




                                                                                                 GHIF: An Innovative Fund | 3
           KEY SUCCESS FACTORS
           GHIF is demonstrating that it is possible to have social impact and it expects to generate reasonable
           financial returns for investors. The keys to its success are the investor guarantee mechanism,
           affordable pricing, and partnerships.

           PARTIAL LOSS GUARANTEE TO INVESTORS. Given the Fund’s novel approach and lack
           of a proven track record, the investor guarantee mechanism was an essential element in raising capital.
           The Gates Foundation and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) provide
           investors with a partial loss guarantee. In the event of a loss, the guarantors fully assume the first 20
           percent of loss. Above that amount, the guarantors share the risk equally with investors. A total of
           about $65 million of investors’ capital, out of $108 million, is protected through this mechanism,
           significantly improving the risk-return balance of the fund and making it more attractive to investors.

           AFFORDABLE PRICING. GHIF ensures that its social impact goals are achieved through
           “Global Access Commitments,” which legally obligate the investee companies to price their products
           at affordable rates in developing countries. Prices are agreed with GHIF and are well below developed
           world market prices. GHIF believes that companies can sell products very cheaply, and generate
           profits through high volumes, which can still lead to attractive exits through IPOs, acquisitions by
           larger companies, or milestone payments or royalties.

           The most innovative financing example is piloted by Medicines Development for Global Health
           (MDGH), a GHIF investee company that is developing a drug for the treatment of Onchocerciasis,
           also known as River Blindness. The product is expected to be donated to eradication campaigns,
           which might not seem like a sustainable business approach. Still, the company hopes to earn a
           transformative return by auctioning its United States Food and Drug Administration (US FDA),
           Priority Review Voucher (PRV), a priority place in line for US FDA regulatory review of any drug, to
           the highest bidder. Developers can earn a PRV by receiving FDA approval for a new therapy targeting
           neglected tropical diseases or rare pediatric diseases. Several vouchers have recently been sold for
           $200 million or more (See Chapter 4.) Importantly, capital from the sale of a PRV will be set aside
           to procure the drug so that it can be donated in endemic areas. This PRV model is expected to also
           finance Tribendimidine, a drug that combats soil-transmitted helminth infections (parasitic worms).

           PARTNERSHIPS. Success has been built on a series of partnerships with investors, investee
           companies, and organizations in order to complete the manufacturing process, conduct clinical trials,
           and get products to market. J.P. Morgan and the Gates Foundation played a key role in developing
           and structuring the concept. Investors, including IFC, GCC, Merck, AXA, Pfizer and others, played
           a role in providing industry expertise, developing impact metrics, and identifying opportunities.
           GHIF’s “Charitability Oversight Committee”comprised of select stakeholders in the Fund, guides
           management on its social impact goals. Through its relationships with the WHO, Gavi, (formerly
           known as the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations), and others, GHIF helps its investee
           companies navigate the international regulatory and commercialization landscape to ensure supported
           products are readily accessible to public health systems in developing countries. Partnerships have
           been essential to the success of this effort every step of the way.




4 | GHIF: An Innovative Fund
GHIF: An Innovative Fund | 5
                                                            Photo ©GHIF




Malaria testing with Access Bio diagnostic tool in Uganda




6 | GHIF: An Innovative Fund
THE GENESIS OF GHIF

One sunny day in 1993, Bill Gates was reading an article in the New York Times and was shocked to learn that a
deadly diarrheal disease, Rotavirus, was killing half a million children every year. Flabbergasted that such a travesty
could possibly go by unnoticed, he confirmed the phenomenon in a World Bank report. He began to investigate
further and realized that huge market failures - where capitalism does not provide sufficient incentives for the private
sector to invest in life-saving treatments - were at the root of the problem. “Many in the drug industry weren’t
keen on trying to develop a new vaccine just for poor countries because
of the uncertainty they could charge enough to recoup research and
development costs.”4

Gates decided that he had to take action. Inspired by David Rockefeller’s
style of philanthropy, Gates went on to tackle global problems that are




                                                                                                                                                                    Photo ©Kjetil Ree
neglected by the private sector and governments through the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) that he founded in 2000. A decade
into funding grants for research and development on global health,
many products were approaching the final phases of development and
commercialization, and staff began to talk about how to support the                                          Bill and Melinda Gates
next stages.                                                                                                 decided to create a social
GHIF’s Dr. LaBelle explains, “There was an interest in moving projects                                       impact investment fund
that had gotten to an advanced level of development and hand them                                            that ensured a social return
off to another funding source, with the hope that they would become                                          to neglected populations,
self-sustaining - but this had never been tried before and there was a lot                                   and a financial return to its
of doubt that it could be successful.”                                                                       investors.

As BMGF explored possible approaches, initial thoughts were to take a
few specific projects that were under development such as an anti-diarrheal drug, a cholera vaccine, and a tuberculosis
test, and package them into one fund. But it became clear that it would be too difficult to do three deals simultaneously.
Furthermore, this approach would limit the number of opportunities that could be supported. So BMGF thought bigger.
Instead of investing in specific opportunities, they decided that it would be more practical to create a larger vehicle
where they could invest in these projects, as well as other opportunities that would arise over the next five years. By
2010, they started to brainstorm with J.P. Morgan about creating a vehicle that would pair the Gates Foundation
expertise in health with J.P. Morgan’s expertise in structuring traditional investment vehicles to fund global health.

BMGF did not want a traditional investment fund, because they feared that investment priorities would overtake
social impact. It wanted to ensure that it got true impact commitments from its investee companies, so they decided
to use traditional investment tools in new ways. BMGF decided to create a social impact investment fund, having
concluded that it was the best mechanism to ensure a social return to neglected populations, and a financial return
to its investors.

4
    	 The Obscure Bug that Set off Bill Gates, Awakening a Geeky Giant, Humanosphere, September 9, 2011.
	     http://www.humanosphere.org/global-health/2011/09/rotavirus-the-deadly-bug-that-set-off-bill-gates-and-woke-a-geeky-giant/ Last visited on January 26, 2017




                                                                                                                                   GHIF: An Innovative Fund | 7
With the concept in place, BMGF recruited investors. Initially, the thought was to crowdsource funds from hundreds
of individuals and family offices, but they ended up pursuing larger investors. BMGF felt a need to provide investors
with some level of comfort to entice them to join, given the untested ideas on the table. GHIF was new, a social
impact fund for neglected diseases had never been tried before, and there was no track record. Gates decided to
sweeten the deal with a risk guarantee that would partially protect investors from a loss. This was viewed as more
valuable than if Gates had simply become an investor alongside the others.

Even with the guarantee, when GHIF approached investors, it was a hard sell, said Glenn Rockman, a Partner in
GHIF’s investment management company. “You had to sell every investor on the business model and the team that
would be executing it. It was not as easy as had been expected to raise the funds and the process took two years to
meet fundraising targets.”

Bill Gates’ star power was helpful in getting an audience, but it was not enough to close investments. It took a lot
of time and energy to court investors. By 2013, GHIF concluded its fundraising activities with several high profile
institutions, governments, and companies to raise $108 million of capital. Alongside IFC, other investors were AXA,
BMZ (German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development) acting through KfW Development Bank,
Children’s Investment Fund Foundation (CIFF), Grand Challenges Canada, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), J.P. Morgan,
Merck, The Pfizer Foundation, and Storebrand. They committed financing of between US$2 million and US$20
million each to GHIF. Several individual investors and family offices together committed more than $14 million.




                                                                                                                        Photo © GHIF




GHIF visited a site in India to conduct diligence on Tuberculosis




8 | GHIF: An Innovative Fund
GHIF: An Innovative Fund | 9
                                                                                               Photo © GHIF




The maternal health ward at a hospital in Hyderabad, India. BD and DiabetOmics are running a
clinical study on a prospective pre-eclampsia and gestational diabetes diagnostic.




10 | GHIF: An Innovative Fund
HOW THE GUARANTEE MECHANISM
WORKS

The guarantee mechanism that provides downside protection from losses was essential to attracting investors said
Dr. LaBelle. “Even if we were the worst fund and lost every single penny, investors would still get 60 percent of
invested capital back. The BMGF and Sida are the guarantors that fund the downside protection. The guarantors
assume the full risk of loss up to 20 percent of invested capital. Once this is exhausted, then the guarantors
share the losses with investors. Thus, with a fund size of $108 million, just under $65 million is covered by the
guarantee mechanism. We don’t think it will need to be used, but it does provide comfort to investors”

To help investors evaluate risk, GHIF illustrates three different loss sharing scenarios, based on a $100 million
portfolio. Note the actual fund size is US$108 million. Figure 1, below illustrates the three scenarios. In Scenario
A, the worst case scenario, if the portfolio lost all invested capital, the guarantors would contribute up to $20
million to cover all of the first loss. For the remaining 80 percent of losses, investors and GHIF would split those
losses equally on a pari-passu basis. Rather than losing the full $80 million, investors would experience a loss of
$40 million and the other $40 million would be covered by the guarantors.




                                 FIGURE 1: ILLUSTRATIVE LOSS SHARING SCENARIOS
                                           (Assumes a fund of US$100 million)

                         Scenario A                     Scenario B                       Scenario C
                         Worst Case                    Intermediate                   Modest Downside
                          Scenario                   Downside Scenario                    Scenario
                     $0 Returned by GHIF              $40 Milllion Returned by         $90 Milllion Returned by
                     Portfolio Investments           GHIF Portfolio Investments       GHIF Portfolio Investments
    $, Millions
                        Investors Experience             Investors Experience               Investors Experience
                          a $40 Million Loss               a $20 Million Loss                    No Losses


     $100

                                                     $40
     $80                                             million
                                                     Returned by GHIF Portfolio
                                                     Investments

     $60
                     $40               $40           $20                $20
                     million           million       million            million        $90
     $40             Loss-Sharing      Loss          Loss-Sharing       Loss
                                                                                       million
                     Contribution      Experienced   Contribution       Experienced
                     from BMGF         by CHIF       from BMGF          by GHIF        Returned by GHIF Portfolio
                     Sida              Investors     Sida               Investors      Investments
     $20
                     $20 million                     $20 million                       $10 million
                     First Loss Contribution         First Loss Contribution           First Loss Contribution
                     from BMGF /Sida                 from BMGF /Sida                   from BMGF /Sida




                                                                                                     GHIF: An Innovative Fund | 11
Scenario B assumes an intermediate loss of 60 percent. Again the guarantors cover the first $20 million of losses.
The remaining $40 million of losses would be shared between the guarantors and the investors evenly, so that
investors would assume $20 million of losses. Scenario C assumes a modest loss of $10 million of invested capital.
These losses would be fully covered by the guarantors and investors would not experience any loss.


How the Fund Makes Money
Although GHIF was designed to provide affordable financing to support global health product development, it
aims to generate a financial return for investors that is in line with standard market returns. A financial return
would be realized at the time when investment assets held by the fund are sold. This could take the form of an
initial public offering, an acquisition by a larger company, receipt of milestone or royalty payments, or a PRV
sale. For the fund as a whole, after payment of any outstanding fees and expenses have been settled, any profits
are shared between investors and GHIF. At that time, investors will earn 80 percent of the profits. Twenty
percent of the profits will remain in GHIF’s ecosystem and may be reinvested in a second fund that has yet to be
structured.




                                                                                                                                                             Photo © GHIF




AccessBio Biosensor is for quantitative G6PD deficiency testing. It tests for a genetic condition that makes it dangerous to take certain types of malaria
medicines and is necessary for the rollout of a new one-dose cure for p. vivax malaria.




12 | GHIF: An Innovative Fund
GHIF: An Innovative Fund | 13
                                                                       Photo © Jerome Starkey




Kenyan children playing near the river are susceptible to blindness.




14 | GHIF: An Innovative Funding
ENSURING AFFORDABILITY FOR THE
POOREST POPULATIONS

Striking a balance between making its drugs, vaccines, and diagnostic
products affordable, all while generating financial returns, may not
sound like an easy task. After all, affordable products in a developing
world context typically need to be priced in pennies rather than in
dollars.

To ensure social impact, GHIF legally requires investee companies,




                                                                                                                             Photo ©GHIF
through Global Access Commitments, to commit to making their
products available to the developing world at an affordable price.
This is typically cost-plus pricing or capped pricing that is decided
jointly with GHIF. The commitments remain in force in the event              “The returns that could be
that a company is acquired. These commitments have resulted in               made possible from the
the world’s least expensive WHO prequalified oral cholera vaccine.           PRV incentive program can
Previously, the prevailing price for the oral cholera vaccine in             completely transform the
resource-limited settings was $1.85 per dose. After EuBiologics              ability to invest in neglected
entered the market, the average price procured by UNICEF fell to             diseases. Any company
$1.77 per dose in 2016, and the company has committed to offer the           that is pursuing a neglected
vaccine at $1.00 per dose or lower in the future.
                                                                             tropical disease or rare
“This can be tricky because the margins for these products are lower         pediatric indication, could
but the companies are prepared to make these types of commitments,”          potentially benefit from the
said Mr. Rockman. To make the products affordable, companies                 financial windfalls of the
must adopt a low price, high volume business model, or an alternate          voucher program.”
revenue source strategy. While many were skeptical that this could be                            Glenn Rockman
sustainable, GHIF is experimenting with the latter as an innovative
approach for Onchocerciasis.

Onchocerciasis, or river blindness, is designated by the WHO as a neglected tropical disease which affects nearly
37 million people, most of them in Sub-Saharan Africa. The simple bite of a black fly that lives near the banks of
a river can transmit the disease with devastating effects of blindness or impaired vision, severe itching and other
debilitating symptoms. Many affected persons become socially isolated and lose their ability to work and care
for their families. Affected villages tend to suffer poverty and famine. Treatment of the disease has made great
strides, thanks to a generous donation program run by Merck, but tens of millions are still infected or at risk.
A non-profit company called Medicines Development for Global Health (MDGH), has been working on a new
treatment, moxidectin, which could eradicate the disease as well as address other conditions such as scabies and
head lice.




                                                                                          GHIF: An Innovative Funding | 15
According to GHIF’s 2015 Annual Report, “Moxidectin had long been considered a possible game changer in
the treatment and potential eradication of river blindness, but its development had stalled due to the lack of a
viable commercial market.” GHIF went on to invest $10 million to support manufacturing, clinical trials, and
registration process of the drug. If successful, MDGH has committed to deliver moxidectin for river blindness
on a cost recovery basis, in addition to donating large quantities of moxidectin if the Priority Review Voucher
(PRV) payback structure proves successful. While initial estimates of financial returns were modest, the financial
incentives created by FDA’s PRV program can be transformational for this drug.

The PRV is an incentive program introduced in 2007 by the United States Congress to encourage pharmaceutical
companies to develop drugs for neglected tropical diseases, mostly occurring in the developing world, or for rare
pediatric diseases in the United States. Companies engaged in the development of drugs to address these illnesses
are eligible to be reviewed by the FDA on a priority basis. In addition, if the drug is approved by the FDA, the
company will earn a PRV that can be sold to another company that is seeking FDA approval for any drug on a
fast-track basis. The PRV allows the purchaser’s product to be reviewed faster than those in the standard line.
For companies seeking to be first to market, the voucher makes a huge difference, often shaving off four months
of the review process. There is a market demand for the PRVs, and the last PRVs sold have raised over $200
million each, with the highest achieving a $350 million sales price. Curt sees the PRV program as creating a
paradigm shift for funding research of many neglected tropical diseases.

 “Without the PRV, neglected diseases are very difficult to make financial returns because the people that suffer
the conditions can’t even afford basic services let alone access to Western pharmaceuticals,” said Mr. Rockman.
“The returns that could be made possible from the PRV incentive program can completely transform the ability
to invest in that space. Any company that is pursuing a neglected tropical disease or rare pediatric indication,
could potentially benefit from the financial windfalls of the voucher program, so there is nothing precluding any
other investors and many have been pursuing these vouchers,” he said. He does caution, however, that “anything
that is legislated by Congress can always be changed or eliminated so investors have to have a high degree of risk
tolerance.”

GHIF takes this program a step further and agrees with its portfolio companies that they will set aside capital to
bring these drugs to the intended populations with the PRV proceeds. If MDGH is able to obtain a voucher that
will sell at comparable levels, the company could then use those resources to push out the product into the field.
In addition, it will give the company the resources to pursue registration of moxidectin for scabies and head lice.


                                                                                                                      Photo © toeytoey




Pulmonary tuberculosis.




16 | GHIF: An Innovative Fund
GHIF: An Innovative Fund | 17
                                           Photo © World Bank




South African woman that is HIV positive




18 | GHIF: An Innovative Fund
IMPACT MODELING APPROACH

Given the priority of achieving social impact, GHIF takes a comprehensive approach to impact modeling. As it
is evaluating each investee company’s social impact potential, it looks at the condition it is addressing and the
proposed intervention to assess how the product will bring value. For example, Atomo Diagnostics developed a
rapid diagnostic test platform for global health applications such as HIV, malaria, Ebola, dengue fever and others.
While there are already diagnostic tests available on the market, Atomo’s product is distinguished for its ability to
reduce error rates and improve accuracy. Clinical literature has found a rapid diagnostic test error rate ranging
from 10 percent to 50 percent.

An HIV diagnostic test is not complicated, but there are
several steps involved. The healthcare practitioner uses a
lancet to prick the finger, takes a blood sample, applies it
to a test strip and adds a solution to get a determination
of positive or negative. In areas where healthcare workers
are not well trained, common in the developing world, the




                                                                                                                             Photo © Atomo Diagnostics
multiple steps create room for errors, which may result
in a false negative or false positive – results that could be
devastating to the patient.

Atomo developed a device that simplifies all the steps. The
device pricks the finger and automatically draws in the
blood to the test strip, dramatically reducing the test error
rate. With a more accurate test, the patient can get treatment sooner. With a correct diagnosis, the contagion
effect on the general population and healthcare workers can also be reduced. GHIF believes that this tool is very
unique, that it could be adapted to dengue, malaria and other conditions, and that it is scalable. By reducing
errors in tests, eliminating waste, and introducing self-testing, GHIF hopes that this product will also result in
overall savings to health system in several countries.

To measure the potential impact that its products will have on the market, GHIF looks at a variety of factors. It
develops a unique “impact thesis,” or impact objective for each investee company. (See Figure 2). The definition
of how a life is impacted is tailored to the individual product. In the case of Atomo, this is to “improve error
rates on tests for HIV, malaria, and dengue.” GHIF defines this objective according to two impact metrics “lives
improved” and “lives saved.” For Atomo “lives improved” is defined as “patients avoiding inaccurate test results
due to the Atomo test.” “Lives saved” is defined as “patients for whom early, correct diagnosis would avert death.”




                                                                                             GHIF: An Innovative Fund | 19
                                          FIGURE    GHIF
                                                 2: :
                                            FIGURE    GHIFIMPACT  MODELING
                                                           IMPACT MODELING  APPROACH
                                                                           APPROACH



      Investment        Impact thesis          Impact metric                            Definition                           Result Cost per
                                                                                                                             (2025) Metric

                                                Lives improved       Patient avoiding inaccurate test result due to Atomo    1,117,993   $ 5.60
                        Improves error rates
         Atomo          on test for HIV,
                        malaria & dengue
                                                Lives saved          Patient for whom early, correct diagnosis would avert    88,321     $ 70.84




It then estimates target results to be achieved on an annual basis by 2025, or when a company or project reaches
scale. In the Atomo example, it estimates that about one million lives will be improved and that about 85,000
lives will be saved annually when the product sales reach scale.

Although each impact model has its own nuances, lives improved is generally calculated by multiplying the
number of products sold by the local prevalence rate of the target condition. To calculate lives saved, it takes the
number of lives improved and multiplies it by metrics such as case fatality rate or percent of early diagnoses or
treatments that save lives. (See Figure 3)


                                   FIGURE 3: IMPACT RESULTS CALCULATIONS FOR ATOMO


                    19.9 MILLION
                    DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
                    MULTIPLIED BY                                6 MILLION WASTED UNITS
                                                                                                                    1.1 MILLION
                    30%                                          AVOIDED MULTIPLIED BY
                                                                 18.5%      PREVALENCE                               LIVES IMPROVED
                    ERROR RATE




                                                                    8%                                              88,000
         1.1 MILLION LIVES                                                                                          LIVES SAVED
         IMPROVED                                                   EARLY DIAGNOSES
                                                                    THAT SAVES LIVES




GHIF uses sales figures to calculate impact because the investee companies are the manufacturers and do
not control usage. Data is based on actual sales, which becomes a proxy to calculate the number of patients
benefited. Regarding the figures for local prevalence, incidence, case fatality rates, and estimates on future deaths,
these are obtained from the WHO, Gavi, and research organizations.

In order to calculate the cost per metric for lives improved and lives saved for each product, GHIF takes the total
cost of the aggregate number of products sold at scale and divides that by the selected impact metric. GHIF has
identified a few general trends that would be expected. Conditions with high incidence rates and high fatality
rates have a lower cost per life improved and saved. Meanwhile conditions that are not as prevalent, and have a
lower case fatality rate have a higher cost per metric.




20 | GHIF: An Innovative Fund
In terms of overall results, by 2025, which is approximately 10 years from the initial investments, GHIF estimates
that the products in its current portfolio will each year save the lives of 140,000 people and improve the lives of
10.9 million people who are suffering from malaria, HIV, tuberculosis, cholera, onchocerciasis (river blindness),
and pregnancy-related conditions. (See Figure 4). However, the overall impact of these drugs, vaccines, and
diagnostic tests could be much broader given that diseases may be eradicated and successful approvals may also
pave the way to spin off related products that treat other medical conditions. Consequently, these figures could
be conservative estimates and the long-term effects may be much greater. In one month in Haiti alone, nearly
800,000 lives were touched.


                             FIGURE 4: ESTIMATED ANNUAL IMPACT BY 2025



                             Lives Improved                                   Lives Saved

                                                       STH
                                                       Infections                                              Malaria
                                                       (parasitic worms)                                       3,211
           Malaria                                     6,209,178
           1,569,055                                                                                   Cholera
                                                                                                       8,130
                                                                     HIV                              Tuberculosis
           HIV                                                       88,321                           15,789
           1,117,993
                                                                                             Pregnancy
 Pregnancy Conditions                                                                        Conditions
                                             Cholera
 561,187                                                                                     25,149
           Tuberculosis                      694,858
           118,714          Onchocerciasis
                            620,044




THE FUTURE FOR GHIF

In the future, GHIF wants to scale and expand the model. In a year or two, it will review the portfolio and
identify which interventions were most cost effective, as measured by lives saved per dollar, and the impact on
its double bottom line. It anticipates raising capital for a successor fund. The initial investment vehicle sunsets
after 10 years; however, two vehicles could exist simultaneously. In addition, it plans to optimize areas that have
proved successful. Given the enormous needs, GHIF expects that it will continue to focus on drugs, vaccines, and
diagnostics for neglected diseases in emerging markets.




                                                                                            GHIF: An Innovative Fund | 21
                                                                                                     Photo © Maggie Hallahan, MHPV/ OlysetNet




A girl in Senegal is protected while under a mosquito net but one day she may need a malaria test.




22 | GHIF: An Innovative Fund
THE ROLE OF IFC

Prior to the establishment of GHIF, the Gates Foundation and IFC had
joined forces to support a number of projects, thus the relationship was
already well established between two partners with a shared mission to
create impact where it is needed most.

Given that part of GHIF’s mission is making investments in vaccines and




                                                                                                                            Photo ©GHIF
pharmaceuticals for emerging markets, and that IFC had investments
in companies such as Bharat Biotech, an Indian vaccine-manufacturing
company working on an affordable Rotavirus vaccine, IFC’s experience
in the same field was very relevant and attractive to GHIF. Furthermore,            “This innovative Fund
having IFC come on board as a limited partner in the fund was an
                                                                                    is mobilizing financing
endorsement of GHIF, given IFC’s size and reputation. This association
                                                                                    for medical advances
enabled GHIF to attract other investors and surpass the $100 million target.
                                                                                    that could potentially
Typically, IFC does not invest in early-stage ventures without a proven track       save millions of lives,”
record and does not take exposure to product development risk. In this              said World Bank
case, IFC became comfortable with the terms of the investment, since Gates          President Jim Yong
was providing the downside protection.                                              Kim. “It shows that we
                                                                                    can align the needs
In addition to direct financial support, IFC also contributed its expertise in
                                                                                    of investors with the
the structuring of protective covenants and terms for investments that made
                                                                                    need for cures for
them more secure and brought them into conformity with international best
practices. The biggest direct contribution has been on environmental and
                                                                                    diseases which cause
social safeguard issues. GHIF has referred all due diligence review for all         so much suffering in
prospective investments to IFC.                                                     developing countries.”

IFC was interested in doing business with GHIF because it was an
opportunity to invest in an innovative fund for the development of drugs for neglected diseases. GHIF brought
an excellent fit with IFC’s strategy of reducing the overall health burden that developing countries experience, and
where the poorest are especially vulnerable. Furthermore, it complemented IFC’s strategy to deliver quality and
affordable healthcare services and products to improve health outcomes, and implicitly, economic outcomes.

From a development impact perspective, IFC was very interested in the impact of approved drugs, vaccines and
diagnostic tests that would benefit millions of patients, especially vulnerable populations, children, and pregnant
women. Furthermore, IFC was particularly interested in the demonstration effect that a social impact investment
fund could have. If successful, GHIF’s model could be replicated more broadly in the health sector as well as in
other sectors.




                                                                                            GHIF: An Innovative Fund | 23
                                              Photo © PAHO/WHO




Haitian girls at a cholera vaccination site




24 | GHIF: An Innovative Fund
CONCLUSION

GHIF took a chance in the belief that it could change the lives of people suffering from neglected diseases and
do so with financial returns. Without GHIF, many of the drugs, vaccines, and medical devices, would not have
received the late-stage financing necessary to commercialize its products.

Although it is still early in the life of GHIF, there is growing evidence that it is possible to develop treatments
and diagnostic tests that address neglected diseases, while at the same time generating meaningful social impact,
reducing costs to healthcare systems, and delivering competitive financial returns to investors. While there is
no guarantee that the entire portfolio is going to succeed, GHIF is beginning to see tangible evidence of investee
companies that are becoming profitable while creating social benefits.

GHIF hopes to demonstrate the commercial viability of providing health services to underserved populations
through innovation. It is pushing the boundaries of traditional revenue models, all while setting affordable prices
in some of the most difficult markets across the globe. It further hopes to stimulate other entrepreneurs who were
dubious, to pursue their products through alternative avenues, rather than focusing efforts solely on scarce grants.

Perhaps most importantly, GHIF is bringing tangible medical solutions, hope, and dignity to neglected
communities. It is improving their chances of survival and even helping to eradicate some of the worst diseases
on earth.




                                                                                             GHIF: An Innovative Fund | 25
STAY CONNECTED

WEB: www.ifc.org/health

LINKEDIN: www.linkedin.com/company/ifc-health

TWITTER: #ifchealth
For more information about IFC’s investments in health please contact:

Elena Sterlin                                    Chris McCahan
Global Manager, Health and Education             Global Lead, Health Care
Email: Esterlin@ifc.org                          E-mail: cmccahan@ifc.org
Washington, D.C., USA                            Washington, D.C., USA
www.ifc.org/education                            www.ifc.org/health
www.ifc.org/health




2121 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20433
Tel. 1-202-473-1000
