Report on the Observance of
Standards & Codes (ROSC)
Accounting & Auditing (A&A)
MODULE B: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
FOR CORPORATE FINANCIAL REPORTING

B.3 FINANCIAL SECTOR – BANKING
                                       ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE								3
A. OVERVIEW OF THE BANKING SECTOR								4
B. FINANCIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR BANKS						                                                                     5
C. STATUTORY AUDIT AND OTHER FORMS OF INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE			                                                          7
d. AUDIT COMMITTEES										10
E. FILING/ PUBLICATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS						                                                                    10
F. MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT – FINANCIAL REPORTING					                                                                11
G. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE									13
Additional information										14




© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org

                                                                                                                                  2
                                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE



The purpose of this questionnaire is to gain an understanding of the financial reporting requirements for the banks
in a jurisdiction in addition to or instead of the requirements for commercial enterprises1 in general. The term
“bank” in this assessment is used to refer to institutions authorized to receive deposits and to lend money as defined
by the legal framework in the jurisdiction.

There are also questions in relation to the monitoring and enforcement capacity of the local banking supervisor in
respect of financial reporting of banks specifically. Questions are based on the internationally-recognized Core
Principles for Effective Banking supervision issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, in particular
Principle 27 Financial reporting and external audit. The questionnaire is structured as follows:




     A. Overview of the banking sector


     B. Financial reporting requirements
     for banks

     C. Statutory audit and other forms of
     independent assurance

     D. Audit committees


     E. Filing/publication of financial
     statements

     F. Monitoring and enforcement - financial
     reporting

     G. Corporate Governance




How should the questionnaire be completed?

•	 This questionnaire should be completed by counterparts from the banking supervisor.
•	 Where the response to a question is the same for banks as for commercial enterprises or for listed companies2,
   please state this.
•	 If there are additional requirements or expected good practices for banks specifically, state the legal instrument
   or code that establishes the requirement and the date of enactment.




1
    Refer to responses provided in Module B Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises
2
    Refer to responses provided in Module B Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed Companies
                                                                                                                                              3
                                                      ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




Please provide the following information when completing this questionnaire.

Country                                                                                 Organization



Date of preparation                                                                     Telephone number



Individual(s) responsible for preparation                                               Address




Job Title(s)                                                                            Email




A. OVERVIEW OF THE BANKING SECTOR


1. Please provide the following information on the banking sector in the jurisdiction.
                                                                                           Comments
     a. Number of banks3

     b. Total assets

     c. Please state the number or proportion of banks
     which are:
     	      i. foreign-owned
     	      ii. domestic, privately-owned
     	      iii. state-owned/controlled

     d. Are there domestic banks listed on the stock
     exchange (locally or overseas)? If so, please indicate
     the number of listed banks and the stock exchanges.


2. Name the banking supervisor and describe its authority (e.g., comprehensive inspection, compliance and
enforcement powers), indicating the law or other instrument which establishes its authority.




3. Briefly describe the key responsibilities of the banking supervisor in respect of financial reporting for banks (e.g.,
development of prudential standards or contribution to accounting standards, audit oversight etc.).




3
    Please indicate numbers for each type of banking institution as defined by the legal framework in the jurisdiction.
                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




4. Please indicate the source(s) of funding of the banking supervisor, noting the percentage contribution from each
source.




5. Is the banking supervisor required to report on its activities (e.g., issue an annual report)? If so, please indicate the
law or other instrument which establishes the requirement and whether this report is made available to the public.
Provide a copy of the report or link to the website if the report is available online.




B. FINANCIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR BANKS


6. Describe the specific financial reporting requirements for banks in addition to, and/or in lieu of, those applicable
to commercial enterprises and/or listed companies. Where requirements only apply to a category of banks (e.g.,
listed banks) or there are exemptions, please indicate this. In all instances, please state the law or regulation that
establishes a requirement (use the ‘Additional Information’ page at the end of this questionnaire if necessary).

    a. Are IFRS required for the general purpose4 consolidated financial statements of banks? If not,
    please indicate:
    	     i. which accounting standards are required
    	     ii. if IFRS is permitted




    b. Are IFRS required for the legal entity financial statements of banks? If not, please indicate:
    	     i. which accounting standards are required
    	     ii. if IFRS is permitted




    c. Where IFRS are required, please indicate whether it is the full and current version of the standards as issued
    by the IASB or indicate the version and year.




4
 General purpose financial statements are those prepared to meet the needs of a variety of users of financial statements as opposed to those
prepared for regulatory or other purposes e.g., prudential reporting required by the banking supervisor.
                                                                                                                                               5
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




 d. Where IFRS are not required, are there specific financial reporting requirements for the financial statements
 of banks? If so, briefly describe these (e.g., specific disclosures in respect of impairment of assets)




 e. Are general purpose financial statements required to follow a specific presentation (e.g. standardized format,
 chart of accounts)? If so, please describe.




 f. Please indicate the deadline for submitting annual financial statements and indicate to whom they are
 submitted.




 g. Are banks required to prepare a management report/ management discussion and analysis? If so, please
 briefly describe the requirements.




 h. For banks which are part of a group, are all material entities in the group structure required to be disclosed?




 i. Are interim or other periodic financial statements required? If so, please describe:
 	      i. the requirements (for both legal entity and consolidated statements where applicable)
 	      ii. the filing/publishing deadlines
 	      iii. whether an audit or limited review must be conducted
 	      iv. whether the statements are publicly disclosed.




7. If the record-keeping and data integrity requirements for banks differ from those of other commercial enterprises,
please explain briefly what the differences are.




                                                                                                                               6
                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




8. Please indicate whether the reporting guidelines for regulatory/prudential reporting for banks are in addition to
or instead of the accounting standards used for the general purpose financial statements.




9. Are banks required to disclose significant differences between general purpose financial statements and
prudential/regulatory reporting, particularly those relating to differences in valuation practices?




10. Are there any inconsistencies between banking regulations covering financial reporting requirements, and the
provisions of other laws and regulations in the country? If so, please describe the inconsistencies and indicate which
regulation(s) or requirement(s) take precedence.




C. STATUTORY AUDIT AND OTHER FORMS OF INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE


Note that throughout the diagnostic tool, the term “audit” refers to a statutory audit of financial statements which is
defined here as an independent audit of general purpose financial statements mandated by law or regulations issued
by an institution with the legal authority to establish such requirements. In this regard, “auditors” are individuals or
firms which are licensed or certified to perform statutory audits.

11. Are the financial statements of banks subject to statutory audit on an annual basis? If so, please indicate the legal
instrument or regulation that establishes this requirement.




12. Please indicate which body sets the auditing standards used in the audits of banks.




                                                                                                                                7
                                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




13. Are full and current International Standards on Auditing (ISA) as issued by the International Auditing and
Assurance Standards Board (IAASB) adopted in the jurisdiction and required to be followed for the audits of banks?
If not, please indicate which auditing standards are used.




14. If ISA have not been adopted, please indicate whether the local auditing standards or banking regulations require
that audits of banks cover the following5. Select all that apply and briefly describe the requirements.
                                                                                          Requirements
              Loan portfolio


              Loan loss provisions


              Non-performing assets


              Asset valuations


              Trading and other securities activities


              Derivatives


              Asset securitizations


              Adequacy of controls over financial reporting


              Consolidation of and other involvement with
              off-balance sheet vehicles


15. Please complete the following table, in respect of requirements regarding the tenure of auditors of banks. For
each requirement, state the applicable/law regulation which establishes the requirement.
                                                                                          Requirements
     a. Is rotation of the audit partner required? If so,
     state the frequency of rotation.

     b. Is rotation of the audit firm required? If so, state
     the frequency of rotation.

     c. Is a ‘cooling-off ’ period for the auditor (partner or
     firm) required? If so, state the length of time.


5
    These areas are required to be covered according to Essential Criterion 5 of BCP 27: Financial reporting and external audit.
                                                                                                                                                8
                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




  d. Describe any other requirements in respect of the
  tenure of auditors of banks.


16. Further to the requirements for auditing commercial enterprises in general, are there additional requirements/
conditions from the banking supervisor to audit a bank? If so, please describe.




17. Is there a list of approved auditors of banks?




18. Do auditors face any restrictions on providing non-audit services to banks they audit?




19. Indicate the powers of the following with regard to auditor appointments and terminations.
                                                                  Requirements
  Annual general meeting of shareholders


  Audit committee


  Board of directors


  Other (please explain)



20. Does the banking supervisor have the power to reject the appointment of an auditor or terminate the
appointment of an auditor of a bank?




21. Does the resignation/termination of the auditor need to be reported to the banking supervisor? If so, please
describe the procedure.




                                                                                                                                9
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




d. AUDIT COMMITTEES

22. Please describe the requirements for banks, indicating the applicable law or regulation which establishes the
requirement.
 a. Is there a requirement to have an audit committee?




 b. Does the law, other regulation or code, prescribe requirements for the composition of the audit committee
 (e.g., number of independent directors etc.)? Please briefly describe.




 c. Please briefly describe the key responsibilities of the audit committee in respect of financial reporting.




 d. Please describe the competences required in order to serve as an audit committee member (e.g., experience/
 knowledge of financial reporting)




E. FILING/ PUBLICATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS


23. Are banks required to make their financial statements and other relevant reports available to the public? If yes,
please indicate what is made publicly available from the list below. Select all that apply.
      Statement of Financial Position (or balance sheet)              Statement of changes in equity

      Statement of cash flows                                         Auditor’s report

      Notes and disclosures                                           Management discussion and analysis
                                                                      (or management report)
      Income statement (or profit and loss statement)

Other (please explain)




Exemptions (please explain)




Deadline for publication



                                                                                                                              10
                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




24. Please indicate where financial statements of banks can be accessed by the public. Select all that apply. If there is
a cost for accessing financial statements, please indicate the cost.
        Internet (please indicate where e.g. banking
        supervisor’s website, bank’s website)

        In person at the companies’ registry (please
        explain)

        Newspaper

        Official gazette

        Other (please explain)




F. MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT – FINANCIAL REPORTING


25. Does the banking supervisor review financial statements of banks? If so, please complete the following table:
                                                                  Comments
  a. Is there a dedicated unit with responsibility for
  reviewing the financial statements (e.g., checking if
  financial reporting and disclosure requirements are
  met, reviewing auditor’s reports, etc.)?

  b. Name of the monitoring unit(s)


  c. The number of staff dedicated to the monitoring
  activities and the required competences (e.g.,
  financial reporting expertise)

  d. A brief description of the monitoring mechanisms




26. If the banking supervisor performs a review of financial statements of banks, describe the supervisory measures
and sanctions where violations of financial reporting requirements occur. Please indicate all possible supervisory
measures (e.g. fines, loss of licenses etc.) and sanctions (administrative, civil and criminal), as they may relate to the
bank itself, its directors, managers, and auditors.




                                                                                                                               11
                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




27. Please list major cases where enforcement action has been taken over the past five years, if any, for breaches of
financial reporting requirements by banks.




28. Are auditors of banks required to inform the banking supervisor ex-ante if they do not intend to issue a ‘clean’
(i.e. unqualified) audit opinion




29. What supervisory measures (if any) are triggered on the part of the banking supervisor if a bank receives
anything other than an unqualified audit opinion (e.g., qualified audit opinion, disclaimer, adverse opinion, and
matter of emphasis)?




30. Please complete the following table in relation to the powers of the banking supervisor and auditors of banks,
indicating the law or other regulation which establishes the requirement:
                                                                  Requirements
  a. Are there protocols in place for the banking
  supervisor to engage with y auditors of banks, either
  directly or indirectly?

  b. How often does the supervisor meet with the
  auditors?

  c. Does the supervisor have the power to establish
  the scope of external audits?

  d. Does the supervisor have the power to require
  production of any documents relating to the regulated
  bank from the auditor (e.g., management letter)?




                                                                                                                               12
                                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




G. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE


31. Is there a code of corporate governance6 or similar with which banks are required or encouraged to comply? If
so, is compliance with the code voluntary or on a “comply or explain” basis?




32. In addition to the financial reporting requirements established by law or regulation as described in the previous
sections, does the code of corporate governance require or encourage further/different financial reporting practices
(including audit requirements) for banks? If so, briefly describe.




33. What are the consequences (if any) for non-compliance with the code?




6
 Note that the code of corporate governance here refers both to a separate statutory code or regulation issued or recognized by
the banking supervisor.
                                                                                                                                             13
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.3 financial sector – Banking




Additional information


Please indicate the corresponding section and question number if using this page to provide additional information.




                                                                                                                             14
