  A Host Community Perspective from Turkana




JE NNI F ER A L IX-GARCIA   ERHAN ARTUC   HARUN ONDER
The Economics of Hosting Refugees
The Economics of Hosting Refugees
A Host Community Perspective from Turkana
Report No: 113183

Republic of Kenya

The Economics of Hosting Refugees
A Host Community Perspective from Turkana

GMF07
AFRICA

Standard Disclaimer:
This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Recon-
struction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings, interpreta-
tions, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the govern-
ments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of
the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations,
and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Copyright Statement:
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmit-
ting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of
applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Develop-
ment/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will
normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send
a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center,
Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone
978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights,
should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818
H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail
pubrights@worldbank.org.

Attribution:
Jennifer Alix-Garcia, Erhan Artuc, Harun Onder. 2017. The Economics of
Hosting Refugees A Host Community Perspective from Turkana Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.

Cover Art:
The paintings that are displayed at the front and back covers, “Journey
and Hope Continuing” and detail from “Crossing the Gilo River,” were
generously made available by the painter and “lost boy” Bol Aweng, who
fled Southern Sudan in 1987, along with other “lost boys.” While spending
time in the Kakuma Refugee Camp, he developed his art skills using mate-
rial available in the camp. Many of his paintings tell stories based on his
memories and they can be seen at: http://bolaweng.com/
                                                                      vi




                                Acknowledgements




This study was prepared as a background note for the joint World
Bank and UNHCR Report “Yes in My Backyard: The Economics of
Refugees and Their Social Dynamics in Kakuma, Kenya.”

The team producing this report was led by Harun Onder (Senior
Economist, World Bank) and comprised Jennifer Alix-Garcia (Con-
sultant, University of Wisconsin-Madison), Erhan Artuc (Senior
Economist, World Bank), Anne Bartlett (Consultant, University of
New South Wales), Nazanin Behzadan (Consultant, Ryerson
University), Richard Chisik (Consultant, Ryerson University), Aadi-
tya Mattoo (Research Manager, World Bank), Tom Opiyo (Consul-
tant), Sarah Walker (Consultant, University of New South Wales),
and under the guidance of Apurva Sanghi (Program Leader and
TTL of the project, World Bank).

The team received valuable guidance and comments from many
colleagues including Diarietou Gaye (Country Director), Marcelo
Giugale, Carlos Felipe Jaramillo, Saroj Kumar Jha, Theresa Beltra-
mo, Alexander Betts, Chris Blattman, Eric Le Borgne, Michel Botzu-
ng, Colin Bruce, Shanta Devarajan, Xavier Devictor, Quy-Toan Do,
Alan Gelb, Caglar Ozden, Nadia Piffaretti, Kevin Carey, Kanthan
Shankar, Thomas O'Brien, Albert Zeufack, Susan Wong, and
Burton Bollag.

The team would like to thank UNHCR Kenya Country Team, in
particular Raouf Mazou (UNHCR Country Rep, Kenya), Yonatan
Araya, and Dr. John Wagacha Burton, for their valuable support.
Useful comments and suggestions from participants of two stake-
holder roundtables on Kakuma Refugee Camp in Lodwar,
Kenya as well as two KNOMAD workshops in Washington, DC,
are also acknowledged.
vii




      Glossary of terms and abbreviations




      GRIplp   Gross Regional Income per local person
      GRP      Gross Regional Product
      HSNP     Hunger Safety Net Program
      IOM      International Organization for Migration
      IRC      International Rescue Committee
      JRS      Jesuit Refugee Services
      KIHBS    Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey
      LWF      Lutheran World Federation
      NCCK     National Council of Churches of Kenya
      NGO      Non-governmental organization
      UNHCR    United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
      WFP      World Food Program
      WTK      Windle Trust Kenya
                                                                 viii




                                  Table of contents




0.    Lost boys of nowhere                                   1
1.    The city that isn’t                                    7
   1.1. Turkana region                                       7
   1.2. Kakuma Refugee Camp                                 14
2.    The framework                                         19
   2.1. Channels of impact                                  21
   2.2. Assessment strategy                                 24
3.    The economics of encampment                           31
   3.1. Simulation results: prognosis                       31
   3.2. Empirical results: evidence                         36
   3.3. Discussion                                          59
4.    Beyond encampment: what are the options?              63
   4.1. Settlement scenarios                                63
   4.2. Results                                             65
   4.3. Discussion                                          74
      References                                            81
      Appendices                                            83
A. Household survey                                         83
B.    Herd size regressions                                 92
C.    The effect of remittances on consumption in Kakuma    94
D. Formal description of the simulation model              100
ix




                                              List of figures




     1-1 Map Of Kenya                                               8
     1-2 Educational Attainment And Household Wealth Indica-
         tors, Rural Turkana vs. Other Rural Kenya                 11
     1-3 Refugee Population In Kakuma Camp, Annual                 14
     2-1 Channels Of Transmission In Welfare Impact Of Refu-
         gees On Hosts In The Short-Term                           20
     3-1 Real Wages And Incomes Of Locals After Refugee Arrival    35
     3-2 Refugees And Food Aid To Kakuma                           37
     3-3 Retail Price Of Corn In Four Markets                      38
     3-4 Livestock Holdings By Distance From Camp                  40
     3-5 Change In Population Density In Turkana From 1989 To      46
         1999, 2009
     3-6 In-Migrants Into Kakuma And Other Villages Over Time      47
     3-7 Distribution Of Household Head Occupations, HSNP          48
     3-8 Per Capita Predicted Consumption And Distance To Camp     52
     4-1 Employment Dynamics In Turkana Under Different
         Settlement Scenarios                                      66
     4-1 The Effects Of Alternative Integration Policies On Real
         Wages And Incomes In Turkana                              72
     A-1 Final Sample Of Towns For Household Survey                84
                                                                    x




                                            List of tables




1-1    Data From 2005 KIHBS Basic Report                       10
1-2    Comparison Of Average Freight Transport Rate For 20ft
       And 40ft Container                                      13
3-1    Simulation Results: Macroeconomic Effects Of Refugee
       Arrival (Encampment)                                    32
3-2    The Patterns Of Livestock Economy: Kakuma vs.
       Other Towns                                             41
3-3    Correlation Between Livestock Prices And Aid            42
3-4    Summary Statistics Agriculture, Household Survey        43
3-5    Summary Statistics From Household Survey, Housing       45
3-6    Occupation Of Household Head, 2011                      48
3-7    The Effect Of Camp Proximity On Enterprises             50
3-8    Wage Earners And Wages                                  51
3-9    Ordinary Least Squares Regressions Of Consumption
       Per Capita                                              54
3-10   Cash Income And Assets, Household Survey                55
3-11   Heterogeneity In Consumption And Assets                 55
4-1    Simulation Results: Macroeconomic Effects Under
       Partial Integration Scenario (PIS)                      68
4-2    Simulation Results: Macroeconomic Effects Under
       Complete Integration Scenario (CIS)                     69
4-3    Simulation Results: Macroeconomic Effects Under
       Decampment Scenario (DS)                                70
4-4    Macroeconomic Effects Of Complete Integration With
       No Transfers                                            76
A-1    Sampling By Ethnicity Among Refugee Population          83
A-2    Sampling By Ethnicity Among Refugee Population          85
A-3    Summary Statistics Livestock From Household Survey      86
A-4    Summary Statistics Enterprise Household Survey          87
xi




     A-5 Summary Statistics Wage Earnings And Household
          Demographics                                             87
     A-6 Summary Statistics Animals, Lokichogio And Kakuma         88
     A-7 Summary Statistics Farming, Lokichogio And Kakuma         89
     A-8 Summary Statistics Enterprises, Lokichogio And
          Kakuma                                                   89
     A-9 Summary Statistics Wage Work And Household Demo-
          graphics, Lokichogio And Kakuma                          90
     A-10 Summary Statistics Transfers, Lokichogio And Kakuma      90
     A-11 Summary Statistics Income And Assets, Lokichogio And
          Kakuma                                                   91
     B-1 Distribution Of Cattle Herd Sizes By Distance To Kakuma   93
     C-1 Consumption And Consumption Changes In Refugee
          Camp Households                                          94
     C-2 Consumption Quantity Changes, Refugee Data                95
     C-3 Change In Refugee Consumption Quantities Conditional
          On Transfers                                             96
     C-4 Transfer Behavior, Turkana Households                     96
     C-5 Consumption Behavior, Household Survey                    98
     C-6 Consumption Change Regressions, Household Survey          99
                                                 xii




                                 List of boxes




2-1   External Sources Of Data              25
2-2   Simulation Model                      28
3-1   Remittances To Refugees               58
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                      1




                       0. The lost boys of nowhere1




I
  n 1991, thousands of South Sudanese boys walked into
  Kenya. Having fled war in their own countries, about 20 thou-
  sand of these “lost boys” first tried taking refuge in
Ethiopia. With no real options to stay, many were killed on their
walk back to South Sudan or while attempting to swim the crocodile
infested River Gilo, before entering Kenya. Between 7 thousand and
10 thousand were estimated to have made it alive to Kenya at that
time, with no possessions besides the clothes on their backs.

The arrival of these “lost boys” eventually transformed how
the Kenyan Government approached the issue of refugees. The
Government had allowed for the integration of arriving refugees
into the Kenyan population up until that point. The arrival of these
“lost boys” marked the beginning of the encampment strategy in
Kenya. From that point onwards, the refugee screening process
was turned over from the Kenyan government to the United
Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) (Verdirame,
1999). The boys were initially housed in a temporary camp located
closer to the Sudanese border, in the town of Lokichogio. In June of
1992, the camp was relocated farther south to Kakuma Town, in
the central Turkana region, where it has remained since.

Flash-forward 35 years, with more than 180 thousand refu-
gees, the Kakuma Refugee Camp stands as one of the largest
urban settlements on the plains of Turkana. The camp current-
ly houses individuals from different nationalities, primarily Suda-
nese, Somalis and Ethiopians. There is a significant internal econo-
my of goods and services, bolstered by the goods (especially food)
and public services provided by international organizations.


1
  In the local Turkana language Kakuma means “the place of the giant tortoise.”
(The Turkana word for tortoise is akumurae). But in an ironic twist, in Swahili, the
most widely-spoken indigenous East African language, kakuma means “nowhere.”
2                                                              The lost boys of nowhere




    The camp also houses a hospital, and several clinics and schools.
    Markets for goods and services are much better developed within
    the camp than in Kakuma town, located just outside the camp, and
    some report that town residents prefer to go to market in the camp
    (Grindheim, 2013).

    However, all is not well with the camp. In May 2016, the Kenyan
    Government announced plans to shut down the Kakuma Refugee
    Camp along with the Dadaab Refugee Camp, which is on the
    North-East of the country. The plan, however, is not to integrate
    the refugees into the society. On the contrary, it is about sending
    the refugees back home or on to other countries. Although official-
    ly, that decision was primarily motivated by national security
    concerns,2 it also reflected a common resentment towards refu-
    gees. Refugees are often perceived to pose an economic burden for
    the host community, and their presence is thought to lead to
    increases in crime, violence, and drug use, and degrade cultural
    values/norms and environmental assets. As of this writing, the
    government has not implemented its decision to close the camp.

    Kakuma presents a concentrated microcosm of the issues and
    arguments pertinent to a deepening refugee problem in the
    world. In the wake of escalated violence in the Middle East and
    Africa, the ongoing refugee crisis has come front and center, espe-
    cially since it began affecting Europe. As a reaction, an anti-refu-
    gee sentiment has emerged in different parts of Europe, which has,
    perhaps surprisingly, relied on arguments that are similar to the
    ones used in Africa: refugees are a burden to the host economy,
    they bring about security challenges and crime, and they are
    unable to adopt host country values.

    The anti-refugee arguments are more universal than one
    would think. The discourse of burden prevails across years and
    countries no matter how close the host and refugee communities
    in terms of relative economic conditions, cultural background,
    ethnic origin, and religion. Some historians emphasize the striking
    parallels between past and present. For instance, Knox and Kush-
    ner (1999) report that, notwithstanding the idealization that came
    at a later stage, Jewish refugees were treated with ambivalence
    and hostility in many destination countries (Knox and Kushner,
    1999) during the Second World War. The authors add that "people


    2
      The statement by the Kenyan interior minister Joseph Nkaissery cites “reasons of
    pressing national security that speak to the safety of Kenyans in a context of
    terrorist and criminal activities” as the primary motive for the decision. See
    http://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/11/kenya-close-worlds-biggest-refug
    ee-camp-dadaab.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                       3




feel that the country should maintain asylum for genuine asylum
seekers, but they're always in the past, never today."

The host community of the Kakuma refugee camp benefits
from the refugees’ presence. There is a large body of anecdotal
evidence that highlights both positive and negative effects of the
presence of refugee camps on host communities. The jury is out on
various aspects of the impact of refugees, and the need for more
evidence and reliable methods is clear. But this study on the
economic consequences of the refugee presence in Kakuma camp
demonstrates an overall positive impact. More conclusive analy-
ses are needed, but this goal is handicapped by the fact that most
refugee situations take place in areas that are poor in data and rich
in informality.

This study looks into the problems by adopting a host commu-
nity perspective. Are refugees a burden or a boon for locals?
Would locals be better off had the camp never existed? Would they
be better off if the camp were to disappear? What determines the
net benefits of the camp’s presence on the host population in
Turkana? In order to answer these questions, we combined avail-
able sources of data, surveyed the refugees and locals, built a
simulation model, and compared all our findings to come to a
conclusion. Although disentangling and measuring the complex
interactions between refugees and the locals in Turkana proved to
be a daunting task, we believe that our methodologies and findings
provide important contributions to our understanding of the prob-
lem. Our results include the following.

• Refugees have a net positive effect on the welfare of locals. In
  comparing three cases, encampment with aid, partial integration
  with aid, and complete integration with or without aid, we found
  that hosting refugees increases the aggregate income of the host
  community in all cases.

• There are, however, both winners and losers. Those to whom
  refugees present direct competition in the labor market are likely
  to incur losses. The owners of fixed factors of production like
  land and to a certain extent capital will incur gains. Thus, in the
  absence of policies that redistribute income from the latter group
  to the former, some groups will remain unsatisfied.

• The choice of settlement matters: The economic effects of refu-
  gees on host communities depend first and foremost on how
  refugees are settled in the country. Each settlement scenario, e.g.
  encampment, partial integration, and complete integration, has
  its own winners and losers.
4                                                    The lost boys of nowhere




    • Encampment curtails aggregate effects, but concentrate
      them around the camp. Overall, the effects of refugee arrivals
      are miniscule in the long-term when refugee population is small
      compared to the hosts and refugees are spread around the coun-
      try. Encampment, on the other hand, concentrates these effects
      and, although it also reduces the aggregate effects, the effects
      become large locally around the camp.

    • The “lost boys” may never grow up in the camp. With protract-
      ed encampment, many refugees never end up working in their
      lifetime; some are born into the camp never acquire skills,
      others just lose their skills after a prolonged period of forced
      inactivity. The longer they stay, the less likely it becomes they
      will find a job, leaving them with no options but to stay and rely
      on aid for survival.

    • Dependency creates more dependency. With encampment,
      locals also become dependent on aid, albeit indirectly. Behind the
      lively economy centered on the camp lies the fact that it is all
      driven by the transfers received by the refugees, e.g. food aid and
      remittances from family members abroad. Moreover, the pres-
      ence of a large refugee population not allowed to move
      elsewhere creates a situation in which certain local business
      people can extract economic rents (windfall earnings) from
      selling to a “captive” population in an isolated area. Potential
      outside competitors may be kept out by the difficulty of bringing
      goods in to the area and by informal moves to deny them access
      to the local market. This creates dependence on the refugee camp
      and diminishes the incentives among the host population to
      make longer-term investments in human capital development.
      As a result, the two way dependence—that is: refugees’ depen-
      dence on aid and locals’ dependence on refugees—becomes a
      self-reinforcing circle.

    There are many dimensions to hosting refugees that we could
    not cover here. In this study, we solely focused on the economic
    dimension of hosting refugees. This choice was driven by our
    objective to quantify the effects in a meaningful way. There are
    many other aspects of hosting refugees that are equally important,
    if not more so, that we could not address with the data and meth-
    odologies we have. These include, but not limited to, the national
    security dimension of refugee arrivals (do refugees provide a
    Trojan horse for groups that use violence to achieve certain
    goals?), environmental and cultural dimension (what are the
    contributions of refugees for environmental and cultural degrada-
    tion), and political dimension (to what extent do refugees play a
    role in shaping domestic and foreign policy attitudes of different
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                       5




political forces in the country?). A companion report, Refugee
Impacts on Turkana Hosts – A Social Impact Analysis for Kakuma
Town and Refugee Camp, Turkana County, Kenya (2016), investi-
gates a number of ethnographic issues in the Turkana region relat-
ed to hosting refugees. However, even with both studies com-
bined, there remain many gaps to be addressed by future studies.

This study can be read linearly or selectively. In what follows,
the study will first describe the physical conditions of the camp
and the region in which it is located. In the second chapter, we will
introduce our analytical framework and methodologies. Chapter 3
will focus on the impacts of refugee arrivals on Turkana’s econo-
my by presenting the results of our simulations and a lengthy
empirical analysis. Finally, chapter 4 will discuss alternative
scenarios for future policies by simulating the effects of those for
Turkana and Kenya. Appendices provide much more material
including a summary of the results from our household surveys
and a formal description of the simulation model. Those readers
who are primarily interested in the data and information about
Kakuma and Turkana can focus on the first chapter, the second
halves of the second and third chapters, and the appendices A, B,
and C. Those who are solely interested in our economic methodol-
ogy can read the first halves of the second and third chapters,
fourth chapter, and the appendix D. Those who are interested in
none of them can have a look at the pictures.
Turkana Boy © Harun Onder, Lodwar 2016
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                       7




                                         1. The city that isn’t




M
      uch depends on location. Refugee camps are often built in
      relatively underdeveloped regions of host countries. There
      are several reasons for this. First, the opportunity cost of land
is typically small in those areas, i.e. the land does not have a high
value. Second, sources of conflict that transcend national borders
are often close to underdeveloped regions; thus, building the camp
there minimizes the distances refugees need to travel to reach the
camp. Third, underdeveloped regions are often, but not always,
associated with low natural and man-made capital; therefore, by
locating the refugees in such environments, less natural and
man-made capital are devoted to the service of the refugees, which
may in turn diminish potential resentment by the locals. The
downside of such location choices is that these regions are also
limited in their connectivity to main markets. Later in this study,
we show that these limitations shape how refugees affect the host
economy from an economic point of view. Before doing that, how-
ever, in this chapter, we will provide an overview of the camp and
its location.

1.1. Turkana region

The dawn of man occurred over three million years ago in Ken-
ya’s Turkana region.3 Although Turkana was the home of the first
use of tools, it has not remained a beacon of economic growth or
technological development in more recent years. In fact, it is the
poorest region in Kenya today. Nevertheless, this has not prevented
many, particularly those threatened by recurring conflicts in neigh-
boring areas, from taking refuge in these once-bounteous lands.



3
  The earliest use of Stone Age tools is now considered to be near the shores of Lake
Turkana in northwest Kenya. (See Sonia Harmand et al. "3.3-million-year-old stone
tools from Lomekwi 3, West Turkana, Kenya". Nature 521: 310–315, (21 May 2015).)
8                                                                                                                                                                                The city that isn’t



Figure 1-1: Map Of Kenya




                     L o ti k i p i
                                      Plain
                                                               Chalbi
 4°N
                                                               Desert




                                                                                                                                                                                          s
                                                                                                                                                                                      ill
                                                                                                                                                                                      H
                                                                                                                                                                                     sa
                                                                                                                                                                                 is
                                                                                                                                                                                 an
                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                             l
                                             e
                                        Turkw




                                                                                                          s.
                                                                                                     tn
                                                                                                 M
                                                                                             o
                                                                                      d   ot                                                 Lo
                                                                                 N                                                              g   aB
                                      Che                                                                                                             og
                                                                                                                                                        al
                                          ran                                                                                                                       La k
                                                                                                                                                                           Bor
                                                ga
                                                                             Milgis




                                         Hil       ny
                                             ls
                                                                                                                                ’iro
                                                                                                                              Ng                             Bilesha Plain
                                                                                                                   Ewaso




                                                                                                                                                                            ra
                                                                                                                                                                         De
                                                                                                                                                                     Lak

                                                                                            Mt. Kenya
                                                                                            (5,199 m)                             Tana




                                       ara
                                      M

                                                 Ma                                                                                                                Ngange
                                                      u E                                                                                                                 rab
                                                          sca
                                                              rp                                                           Thua                                      Plain eli
                                                                   me
                                                                        nt
                                                                                                      Ya tt
                                                                                                            a     Pla                    Ath
                                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                        tea
                                                                                                                              u



                                                                                                                                                 Galana
                                                                                                               Tsavo




LEGEND
         Cities and Towns                                               Main Roads
         County Capitals (not all are shown)                            Railroads
         National Capital                                               County Boundries
         Rivers                                                         International Boundries


Source: Map Design Unit of The World Bank. The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information shown on this
map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any endorse-
ment or acceptance of such boundaries.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                      9




Turkana County is located in a challenging neighborhood. Posi-
tioned in the North-West of Kenya, Turkana County is bordered by:
(i) Uganda to the West; (ii) South Sudan and Ethiopia to the North
and North-East; and (iii) Lake Turkana to the East. The county
borders West Pokot and Baringo to the South, Samburu to the
South-east, and Marsabit to the East, after Lake Turkana. With an
area of 68,680 km², Turkana is the largest county in Kenya.

The region is home to the Turkana people and other smaller
tribes, whose traditional livelihoods are nomadic pastoralism.
The region is sparsely populated. According to the 2009 census, the
county had a population of 855,399 persons. The population densi-
ty is 12 persons per square km, however densities are well under
one person per kilometer for most parts of the region. It has long
been one of the poorest regions in Kenya – the 2005 Kenya
Integrated Household Budget Survey assessed poverty in the
Turkana region at 94.3%, the worst out of Kenya’s 69 districts. In
participation in education, Table 1-1 shows that the region clearly
deviates from the norm in Kenya: school attendance is 44% for
primary school and less than 2% for secondary school, compared
to the national rural averages of 78 and 16% respectively.

Compared to Kenya averages, Turkana region is significantly
less dependent upon agriculture and more upon livestock. Due
to the arid conditions of the region, participation in farming tends
to be very low (Table 1-1). However, households who do farm tend
to concentrate on sorghum, maize, and beans. According to the
KIHBS, residents of Turkana region are relatively active in the
trade sector, having a slightly higher percentage than the national
average of households engaged in the retail or wholesale sectors. It
is important to note, however, that these statistics may not be an
accurate reflection of the livelihoods of the Turkana people in
particular, given the strong evidence that most household surveys
are not structured to accurately reveal either the wealth or the
livelihoods of pastoral people (Kratle and Swift, 2014). In addition
to the misstructuring of the surveys themselves, in-person discus-
sions in the Turkana region suggests that it is common for pasto-
ralists to deny ownership of animals, even if they are physically
present, which means that any information extracted regarding
these important assets should be considered with some suspicion.

The region has exhibited some improvements over recent
decades; however, these have remained modest compared to
those in the rest of Kenya. Comparing the data from censuses
beginning in 1979 reveals that the Turkana region has experi-
enced improvements in educational attainment in both primary
and secondary school, but not at the same rate as the rest
10                                                                         The city that isn’t




     Table 1-1: Data From 2005 KIHBS Basic Report

                                                                                TURKANA
                                                         URBAN KENYA    RURAL    REGION
      Poverty rate                                        33.7          49.1        94.3
      Household size                                      4.0            5.5        6.5
      School Net Attendance ratio (primary school)        83.2          78.3        44.1
      School Net Attendance ratio (secondary school)      29.9          15.9        1.4
      Proportion of children more than 2 SD (stunting)    25.2          36.7        33.0
      Proportion households engaged in crop farming              68.8               12.2
      Proportion of households owning livestock                  66.0               62.0


      Average number of cattle                                   6.0                 23
      Average number of goats                                    10.9               44.5
      Average number of sheep                                    10.7                14
      Percentage of households in retail or wholesale            65.5               67.5

     Source: KIHBS Basic Report (2005)




        of the country (Figure 1-2). Similarly, Kenya as a whole has experi-
        enced large increases in electrification since 1989, and decreases
        in the proportion of households with a dirt floor, while the Turka-
        na region has had only slight improvements in these indicators.
        Thus, despite some improvements, the region remained lagging
        when compared to the rest of Kenya.

        The transportation system in Turkana County is insufficient.
        The predominantly road-based transportation system in Turkana
        falls short of national averages. The region’s road network is about
        5,496 km including all road classes, translating to approximately
        0.08 km road per square km of land. In comparison, Kenya’s road
        density is 0.27 km per square km, which is about 3.4 times higher
        than Turkana’s. The A1 road between Kainuk and Lokichogio
        (488.5 km), which was constructed in the mid 1980’s to bitumen
        standards, is the backbone of the county’s road transport network.
        Currently, the section between Kainuk and Makutano is in very
        poor condition, while the rest of the road from Makutano, through
        Kakuma to Lokichogio is in fair condition. All the remaining road
        network of 5,007 km (91% of total) is unpaved. There is very limit-
        ed connectivity by air. There are currently no air transport
        services at Lokichogio airport as it is under reconstruction, while a
        few chartered air services are available at Kakuma, Lokitaung,
        and Lokichar airstrips.
   THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                               11




   Figure 1-2: Educational Attainment And Household Wealth Indicators,
   Rural Turkana vs. Other Rural Kenya

                                   a. Primary Education
                      .5



                      .4
Primary education




                      .3



                      .2



                      .1



                      0
                           1980    1990                    2000             2010
                                             Year
                                    Non-Turkana                   Turkana




                                  b. Secondary Education
                 .15
Secondary education




                      .1




                 .05




                      0
                           1980    1990                    2000             2010
                                             Year
                                    Non-Turkana                   Turkana
12                                                                       The city that isn’t




                                              c. Electricity
               .06




               .04
     Electricity




               .02




                    0
                         1980             1990                 2000                  2010
                                                        Year
                                           Non-Turkana                Turkana




                                               d. Dirt Floor
                   .95




                    .9
       Dirt ﬂoor




                   .85




                    .8




                   .75
                         1980             1990                 2000                   2010
                                                        Year
                                            Non-Turkana               Turkana

         Source: WB staﬀ calculations from IPUMs data
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                          13




Table 1-2: Comparison Of Average Freight Transport Rate For 20ft And
40ft Container

                                CONTAINER       DISTANCE        FREIGHT      RATE PER KM
      ORIGIN    DESTINATION       TYPE             (KM)        COST (US$)       (US$)
     Mombasa       Kampala          20ft          1,160          2,700           2.33
      Nairobi      Kakuma           20ft           800           2,500           3.13
     Mombasa       Nairobi          20ft           488            900            1.84
     Mombasa       Kampala          40ft          1,160          3,500           3.02
      Nairobi      Kakuma           40ft           800           3,500           4.38

Source: (East African online Transport Agency, 2016) for Mombasa to Nairobi and Kampala
http://www.eaotransport.com; UNHCR framework contract for Nairobi to Kakuma.




The shortage of proper infrastructure pushes up transporta-
tion fares. Poor infrastructure adds another constraint to the
region’s long distance connectivity to the main supply markets
along with unpredictable road conditions driven by flash floods
and insecurity created by banditry and tribal conflicts. Road
conditions in Turkana during the rainy season have been noted as
one of the primary factors behind the serious disruptions. Table
1-2 shows that it is about 70% more expensive to ship a 20ft
container between Nairobi and Kakuma than shipping it between
Nairobi and Mombasa, when measured in cost per km of travel.

High transportation costs are reflected in commodity prices.
High transportation costs and delays widen the wedge between
consumer prices in Turkana and other well-connected regions of
Kenya. A World Food Program (WFP) study4 estimates that, on
average, commodity prices increase by about 1.3 percent per addi-
tional transport hour from the markets in the producing areas to
the county headquarters in the arid regions. In addition, they
further increase by about 1.8 per cent for every transportation
hour between the county headquarters and the remote markets
off the main transport corridors, A1 road in the case of Turkana.
Matteis (2010) found that the average rate of price increase of
goods between source markets and the Turkana County’s furthest
main market, Lokichogio, was around 40-50 percent with peaks of
up to 80 percent in the case of some commodities such as beans.




4
    Market dynamics and financial services in Kenya’s arid lands, WFP, 2013
14                                                                   The city that isn’t




        Figure 1-3: Refugee Population In Kakuma Camp, Annual

                          200000




                          150000
     Refugees in Kakuma




                          100000




                            5000




                               0
                               1990   1995   2000          2005    2010           2005
                                                    Year

        Source: UNHCR



                1.2. Kakuma Refugee Camp

                The camp has seen many changes over time. The Sudanese “lost
                boys” were initially housed in a temporary camp located closer to
                the Sudanese border, in the town of Lokichogio. In June of 1992,
                the camp was relocated farther south to Kakuma Town, in the
                central division of the Turkana region, where it has remained
                since. By October of 1993, the camp housed 35,000 people, a large
                number especially when compared to the population of Kakuma
                town, which was reported to be less than 6,000 prior to 1992 (Ohta
                2005). The population of the camp has ebbed and flowed over the
                years (Figure 1-3) with the fortunes of the neighboring countries,
                but it has never disappeared. It currently houses over 180,000
                individuals, the majority of whom are Sudanese, although there
                are also Somalis and Ethiopians.

                In its current position, The Kakuma Refugee Camp is more of a
                city than a camp. The Kakuma Refugee Camp is located in Turka-
                na County, some 123 kilometers North-West of Lodwar town and 95
                kilometres South-East of Lokichogio. The Camp consists of four
                sub-camps: Kakuma 1 (the oldest and most densely populated),
                Kakuma 2, Kakuma 3 and Kakuma 4 (the newest). The whole area
                covered by the camp is about 13.5 km2, and it is located approxi-
                mately 2 km on the right hand side of the A1 international trunk
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                         15




road, just after Kakuma town towards Lokichogio. The camp is
actually a “small city” of corrugated iron sheet houses with
mud/timber walls. The population density within the camp is
estimated at between 12,000 – 13,000 persons per square kilome-
ter, which is about 1,000 times that of the host Turkana community.

As a commercial center, Kakuma Refugee Camp overshadows
Kakuma town. According to World Bank (2016), the camp has
more than 2,150 shops, including 14 wholesalers, while the town
has 232 stores. Refugees of various nationalities run their own
shops in the camp, often clustering on the basis of ethnic back-
grounds. Somalis, Ethiopians, and Sudanese tend to own eateries;
the Oromo sell meat; and the Congolese, Burundese, and Rwan-
dese sell vegetables grown in their backyard gardens. While most
of the traders in the camp are refugees, local traders have access as
well and some operate there. The camp has copy shops and busi-
nesses offering international calling and remittance services. It
has restaurants that broadcast soccer matches from around the
world via satellite TV.

The camp is equipped with significant education and medical
facilities. The refugee camp is administered by the United Nations
High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), and is assisted in its
duties by a wide range of organizations, including World Food
Program (WFP); International Organization for Migration (IOM);
Lutheran World Federation (LWF); International Rescue Commit-
tee (IRC); Jesuit Refugee Services (JRS); National Council of Church-
es of Kenya (NCCK); Windle Trust Kenya (WTK); Film Aid Interna-
tional; and Salesians of Don Bosco in Kenya. In 2015, there were 20
primary, 4 secondary, and 11 preschools within the camp. These
numbers have vacillated significantly over time depending upon
the size of the refugee population. At the time of the camp found-
ing, there were around 7 primary, 2 secondary, and 2 pre-schools.
In 2000, 19 schools including 2 secondary schools were estab-
lished, although these were closed following the repatriation of the
South Sudanese refugees. Currently, there is a hospital and at least
6 clinics within the camp. Interviews in the camp revealed, howev-
er, that the hospital and clinics are only sparsely stocked as a result
of illegal trade in their medications both inside and outside the
refugee camp.

Despite having its own bottlenecks, the camp surpasses the
rest of the Turkana region in access to education and medical
services. According to the latest numbers, Turkana county has
four hospitals, nine health centers, and 71 dispensaries, yielding a
doctor population ratio of 1:70,000. There are 338 primary school
centers and 33 secondary school centers in the region. In
16                                                           The city that isn’t




     secondary school, the teacher to student ratio is 1:180 (Republic of
     Kenya, 2015).

     The transport system serving the Kakuma refugee camp is
     significantly better than the average in the county. The Kakuma
     refugee camp road network consists of main and minor camp
     roads, which are all gravel/earth roads. The current network is
     approximately 35 km in total but additional lengths are built as
     and whenever new settlements are established. The camp also
     benefits from its proximity the A1 road transport corridor, and
     being a major demand hub due its large and dense population,
     which facilitates transportation services on the supply side. How-
     ever, although within the camp road density is 2.6 km per km2,
     these roads are generally in poor/very poor condition and charac-
     terized by huge potholes, poor drainage and flooding during the
     rainy seasons, like the rest of Turkana County. Overall, the camp is
     better connected with major markets than most other regions in
     Turkana, which reflects the size of the market, and the intensive
     nature of the aid operations.

     The Kakuma Refugee Camp provides significant, mostly
     unskilled, work opportunities for members of the host com-
     munity. Many local women, as well as a number of local children,
     work in the camp for wealthier refugees, performing such tasks as
     washing dishes and clothes, carrying food during distribution, and
     fetching water. For instance, World Bank (2016) reports that, in
     exchange for carrying around 26 kg of food, women are given 1–2
     bowls of food, usually maize and (wheat) flour or sorghum, which
     can be sold for KSh 100–200 (US$1–2); this option is preferred to
     wages, which would amount to KSh 50 (US$0.50). Sometimes,
     women are given used clothes as wages. Some local people mend
     fences in the camp; a fence-mending job that takes a week to com-
     plete can fetches an income of KSh 1,000 (US$10). The building of a
     new fence, including the collection of shrubs as fence building
     material, carting it to the site, and building the fence, fetches KSh
     3,000 (US$30).

     The refugee camp offers an important market where locals
     can sell goods they produce. These include milk, meat, firewood,
     and charcoal. Locals and Somali business people also sell a range
     of products they bring into the camp, such as pots and pans, cook-
     ing utensils, bed sheets, mattresses, and even beds. Women are
     mostly involved in small businesses focused on food-related prod-
     ucts, like food kiosks, butcheries, milk kiosks, etc. The major
     constraint women face when trying to expand their commercial
     activities relate to a lack of micro-finance and credit facilities—es-
     pecially in a context where women cannot provide collateral.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                    17




Refugees are considered an asset by the local authorities.
Under Kenya’s Devolution process, operative since 2015, Turkana
County economic development authorities recognize that refugees
the county can tap into refugees as a source of skills, resources,
and connections for its own economic development. The Turkana
County Integrated Plan prioritizes economic development
programs that could potentially integrate the refugee and host
communities. (World Bank, 2016)
Turkana Woman © Harun Onder, Lodwar 2016
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                        19




                                              2. The framework




A
     ssessing the welfare implications of refugee arrivals is a
     complex task. The inflow of refugees into a poor region
     generates multidimensional effects. Broadly speaking, these
effects can be grouped into two categories depending on the mech-
anisms through which they manifest themselves: those impacting
through market mechanisms and those impacting through
non-market mechanisms (Figure 2-1). The latter include, but are
not limited to, environmental spillovers from the camps including
land use change and exhaustion of water sources. These may hurt
local consumers and producers alike, and cause health spillovers,
and cultural conflicts.5

On the other hand, market based mechanisms, which are the
main focus of this chapter, feature shocks on both the supply
and demand sides of the domestic economy. For example, the
refugees’ prolonged stay has had a negative impact on the local
consumers by creating increased demand, and higher prices, for
firewood and wood-burned charcoal, among other items. At the
same time, the Kakuma Refugee Camp provides considerable work
opportunities for the local population, a large market for host com-
munity commodities, and increased economic opportunities for
traders in Kakuma town. According to World Bank (2016), the busi-
nesses operating in the refugee camp collectively produce an
estimated US$350,000–400,000 in monthly sales.

Some shall win, others will lose; will the gains beat the losses?
The demand and supply side effects can either complement or
conflict with each other, depending on a number of factors. These


5
 It is important to note from the outset that insights into some of the more subtle,
but no less important, effects on social dimensions, for instance the effects on local
culture and security, are left out of this study solely due to time and resource
constraints faced by this study.
20                                                                                       The framework




Figure 2-1: Channels Of Transmission In Welfare Impact Of Refugees On Hosts In
The Short-Term




                                       Aid, Remittances, Wages




                                      Refugees and Aid Workers
                       MARKET MECHANISMS                              NON-MARKET MECHANISMS




            Demand                            Supply                       Environmental
           Side Effects                     Side Effects                    Degradation
         Aid and remittances           Labor force participation;         Firewood use lead to
         increase demand for             aid packages increase           deforestation; pollution
          goods and services                 supply of food




                                                                         ENVIRONMENTAL AND
         EFFECTS ON PRICE               EFFECTS ON INCOME               PUBLIC GOODS EFFECTS



        Prices of non-tradable         Income loss for producers of       Loss in access to natural
            goods increase           food provided in aid packages,      resources; greater access
                                      income gain for producers in        to public goods through
                                           non-tradable sectors         facilities built for refugees




                                 Welfare Impact on Host Communities
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                             21




factors include the skill types of the locals, tradability of a given
sector, and how refugee settlement is handled. Thus, the net
effects of refugee arrivals should vary for different groups in the
host community. Some will experience gains, and some will incur
losses. From an economic point of view, however, the main ques-
tion is whether the total gains exceed the total losses. If affirma-
tive, with the right redistribution mechanisms, those who incur
losses could be compensated, and thus, all could theoretically gain
from the refugee arrival.6

2.1. Channels of impact

On the supply side, refugee inflow changes the market condi-
tions for food and labor. As far as the food market is concerned,
aid could increase the supply. Refugees often sell in local markets
the aid provided to them by humanitarian organizations in order
to buy non-aid goods. This could depress the prices of aid goods
and their close substitutes, especially in the short-term, if the aid
goods are procured from outside the area and are not fully trad-
able by locals. In the case of Kakuma, both conditions are satisfied:
aid is purchased internationally or from the rest of Kenya, and
difficulties in transportation create supply bottlenecks. Should aid
be purchased locally, and with constraints on trade, the supply
side price impact is unambiguously positive, as the purchase of aid
will reduce the supply available (Binswanger and Quizon, 1988).

In the labor market, if refugee inflow increases the supply of
workers, then wages could be depressed. If refugees are allowed
to work, then the supply of labor will increase and wages will
decrease, especially in the short-term. To the extent that labor is an
important input to production, the decrease in wages may work to
lower the prices of goods that are labor-intensive in production,
like construction. In the case of Kakuma, refugees are not general-
ly allowed to work outside of the camps. A number of refugees
have found employment in translation work for the UN and NGOs,
as well as other positions within the camp structure, though such
employment that has little affect on the local labor market. Howev-
er, refugees may also work informally outside the camp, and thus
provide labor market competition for locals, a complaint that has
often been voiced by the Turkana people (Aukot, 2003).

Increased demand affects all non-tradable goods, like housing
and restaurants. With an increase in refugee presence and



6
    In practice, however, there will be obstacles to the implementation of such mechanisms.
22                                                                      The framework




     humanitarian workers associated with them, the demand for all
     goods and services increases. Prices in non-tradable sectors like
     housing, land, restaurants, hotels and haircutting are sensitive to
     these shocks. Holding the supply fixed, the additional demand will
     raise their prices. This is particularly true in the short-term. For
     instance, because the housing supply cannot react very quickly to
     large increases in demand, prices must adjust as a result of the
     influx of displaced individuals and humanitarian workers. Simi-
     larly, if the supply of tradable goods (goods that can be transported
     and sold in a location different from where they were produced,
     like clothing, meat, and machines) cannot adjust quickly as a result
     of supply bottlenecks, like poor roads, long distances and insecuri-
     ty, their prices will increase as well in the short-term. Given the
     poor road network and limited connectivity of the Turkana region,
     as described in the previous section, it is not unreasonable to
     assume that transaction costs and delays limit the smooth adjust-
     ment of tradable prices and effectively make them locally deter-
     mined in the short-term. The exception to this case is when the
     supply of these goods also increases because refugees provide
     them, like the supplies in the aid packages they receive.

     In the long-term, workers moving in from other regions (“a
     labor reallocation effect”) could magnify or mitigate the
     demand and supply shocks triggered by refugee arrivals.
     Kakuma represents a somewhat unique case since all foreign
     workers are housed in a compound adjacent to the camp, and
     hence do not increase demand for local housing. However, the
     presence of the camp may indirectly affect local housing markets
     to the extent that it attracts workers from the region into the hous-
     ing market in Kakuma town.7 A perceived existence of new
     employment opportunities in areas surrounding the camp, and
     associated increases in wages, may draw individuals from other
     parts of the region (labor reallocation effect), thus putting more
     upward pressure on local prices. In addition to their effects on the
     traditional non-tradables, the demand pressures can also substan-
     tially affect the prices of tradable goods, like food and clothing,
     when trade with other regions is limited.




     7
       Note also that humanitarian workers may present a unique demand-side shock,
     given the large differences in both their tastes and income relative to the local
     population. Aid workers may have particularly large impacts in the market for
     ''luxury'' items, such as household servants, restaurant meals and certain food
     items. In addition, the aid agencies themselves constitute a new source of labor
     market demand, particularly for skilled and semi-skilled individuals.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                      23




Overall, the net effects of refugee inflow on prices are deter-
mined by both supply and demand shocks, which could move
in opposite directions. Given that all of these events described
above occur simultaneously, and that some may have positive and
some negative price effects, prediction of net effects is complicat-
ed. In the market for non-tradables, where demand-side impacts
are likely to dominate other effects, prices will go up in the
short-term. In the long-term, labor flow into the region could undo
some of these price hikes by increasing the supply. In the market
for tradables that face supply rigidity, the price of aid-related
goods is likely to go down if the aid is imported and if the imports
exceed the additional demand generated by the incoming popula-
tion. If aid is locally purchased, or if the additional demand is
greater than the amount of imported aid, prices may increase.

The welfare effects of these shocks are also ambiguous and
distributed heterogeneously across different groups in the
host community. The impact of refugee arrival on an individual’s
welfare depends on whether their purchasing power increases or
not. This result, in turn, depends upon whether they are a net
buyer or net seller of the products that experience price changes,
changes in their wage earnings, and upon the shape of the
demand curve. For those who can benefit from the increased
demand induced by refugees and humanitarian workers, the
overall effect may be positive. These groups potentially include
landowners and suppliers of non-aid tradables and non-tradables.
Net consumers of the types of goods found in the aid basket will
also benefit from lower prices. For those competing with refugees
in labor market, or producing foods found in the aid basket, effects
are likely to be negative.8

The complexity of the problem commands a careful approach.
In summary, refugee arrivals have both positive and negative
effects on market outcomes and on the welfare of different host
community groups. This renders a comprehensive assessment of
impact challenging. In light of this observation, in what follows,
the report develops a novel methodology for assessing the impacts
on each channel of transmission, e.g. price, income, and labor
reallocation effects, as well as the overall welfare effect.




8
  It is important to note that this framework revolves around market prices. For
rural households that do not participate in markets, prices may not be the relevant
mechanism through which to analyze impacts. Households entirely dependent
upon their own production prior to conflict may either remain so, or find
themselves facing prices which favor their entry into the market, thus transitioning
from a state of autarky to one of trade, and vice versa.
24                                                           The framework




     2.2. Assessment strategy

     Assessing the impact essentially means comparing today’s
     situation to a plausible scenario in which the refugees had not
     arrived (a counterfactual), something that has proven difficult
     in the case of Kakuma. Impact, by definition, corresponds to the
     difference between an actual outcome, which is observable, and a
     hypothetical case where the effect does not occur, which is not
     observable. The latter, thus, requires a careful assessment of what
     could have happened if Turkana had not received any refugees.
     Unfortunately, there is very little pre-camp information available,
     and no truly valid counterfactual cases in Turkana– that is, no town
     exactly like Kakuma which did not host a refugee camp between
     1991 and the present, and which was unaffected by the events in
     Kakuma. In the face of this challenge, the analysis in this report
     follows a 4-step approach for assessing the implications of refugee
     arrival and outcomes of alternative policy options going forward:

     1. Empirical base: use a variety of summary statistics from
        surveys, analyses of separate data sources, and an imperfect
        counterfactual (a town similar to Kakuma that did not receive
        refugees) to generate an empirical base.

     2. Simulations: build a theoretical model tailored to Kakuma, use
        the empirical base to calibrate the model, simulate the impact.

     3. Testing the implications: test the implications of the simula-
      tions using econometric techniques; map the results from econo-
      metric analyses and simulations onto each other.

     4. Policy experiments: use the model to simulate the outcomes of
        possible future policy actions.

     The empirical base makes use of prevailing data sources and
     original household surveys implemented for this study.
     Prevailing data sources include household characteristics from
     three Kenyan censuses and a registration census by the Hunger
     Safety Net Program (HSNP), price data from the Famine Early
     Warning System (FEWSNET) and the Livestock Information
     Network Knowledge System (LINKS), refugee counts from UNHCR,
     and aid delivery statistics from WFP. Details of these sources are
     provided in Box 2-1. In addition, household surveys were under-
     taken in both Kakuma refugee camp and in residential areas both
     near to and far from the camp. Slightly different instruments
     were used within the camp (the refugee survey) and for house-
     holds outside the camp (the Turkana survey). Both included mod-
     ules on household demography, income, and perceptions.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                            25




Information on consumption was also collected, albeit in a limited
fashion, only intended to detect short-term changes in consumption.

A number of other towns in Turkana were considered to set up
imperfect counterfactuals. Finding comparable towns to
Kakuma Town proved to be difficult. The candidates needed to
have a similar size to Kakuma in 1989, which then had a popula-
tion of 5887, and were close to the Kitale-Juba highway. Within
Turkana province, there are 4 market towns with such character-
istics: Lokichar (pop 4887), Lokori (pop 5590), Kangatet (pop 5590),
and Lokwal Kalokol (pop 6842). The latter is located off of the main
highway, and Kangatet is too close to Lokori, thus they were elimi-
nated from the sample. Security challenges made it impossible to
arrive at Lokori, and based on discussions with Turkana and
UNHCR staff, it was replaced with Lorugum, located on the main
highway west of Lodwar en the route to Uganda, and halfway
between Lokichar and Kakuma.

 Box 2-1: External Sources Of Data

 This report accesses a wide variety of data sources, which are
 described in detail in this Box, and will be referred to in the remainder
 of the report.

 i. Kenyan Census: We use the Kenyan Census data from years 1979,
 1989, 1999, and 2009 (GOK, 1989, 1999, 2009). Data from
 1989-2009 were linked to geographic information system shapeﬁles
 obtained from the Kenya Open Data initiative website. Household
 covariates for a 10% subsample from these censuses were used in
 some of the background statistics above, where available, and were
 downloaded from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series Inter-
 national website (IPUMs International 2015).

 ii. Hunger Safety Net Program (HSNP): A key source of information on
 the entire Turkana region is the registration census conducted by the
 HSNP (2015). This program is one of a variety of cash transfer
 programs operated by the Kenyan government. HSNP speciﬁcally
 supports the poorest households of Turkana, Mandera, Wajir, and
 Marsabit counties, with the objective of reducing extreme hunger
 and vulnerability. Over 140,000 households were registered in the
 Turkana region, and about 40,000 eventually received support from
 the program (Fitzgibbons 2014).

 The registration dataset intends to be a census of all possible recipi-
 ents of the program, and was undertaken between October of 2012
 and June 2013. The data includes a variety of household covariates,
 including age, gender, education, and occupation of the household
26                                                              The framework




      head, as well as of other family members, livestock holdings, and a
      predicted consumption variable, which HSNP calls a “proxy means
      test.” We use this data both to provide background statistics as well
      as to serve as a sample frame for our own household survey.

      iii. Price data: Data on prices came from two sources. The Famine
      Early Warning System (FEWSNET) provided monthly price data on
      agricultural and some livestock goods from 2000 onwards for 11
      markets throughout Kenya. Unfortunately, however, we could only
      use this data descriptively, since the Turkana markets had signiﬁcant
      numbers of missing observations.

      Livestock prices from 37 markets between 2004 and 2013 came
      from the Livestock Information Network Knowledge System, and
      collaboration between the Government of Kenya, USAID, and the UC
      Davis GLCRSP group (LEWS 2015). This data averages transactions
      for diﬀerent breeds and types of cattle undertaken on market day in
      each market location approximately twice per month.

      iv. UNHCR refugee counts: Annual refugee numbers prior to 2007
      have been taken from published UNHCR sources. Monthly refugee
      numbers between 2007 and 2015 were provided by the UNHCR.

      v. WFP statistics: Similarly, information on food aid deliveries was
      absent prior to 2007. From that date onwards we have monthly food
      aid deliveries to Kakuma in metric tons.


     Lokichogio was included as an additional comparison city;
     however, it serves a different purpose. This town was the origi-
     nal site of what is now the Kakuma refugee camp. From 1989 until
     2011, it served as the base for the substantial infrastructure
     supporting Operation Lifeline Sudan. It therefore provides an
     example of what happens when “aid leaves,” which may be a
     potential future scenario for Kakuma. Overall, the household
     survey for Turkana was implemented in Lorugum, Lokichogio,
     Lokichar and Kakuma, all located in a very arid region, but also
     close to a key resource needed for successful pastoralism – rivers.
     They serve as an important base of operations for many pastoralist
     households. More information on the selection of the household
     sample in provided in the Appendix A.

     Simulations were performed by using a multi-sector general
     equilibrium model. In order to capture price, income, and labor
     reallocation effects of refugee arrivals both in the short-term and
     in the long-term, the analysis constructs a model that builds on
     Artuc et al (2008) and Artuc et al (2010). The initial economic envi-
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                       27




ronment features different geographic regions, one of which is
Turkana (based on its population share) one non-tradable sector in
each region, and a common tradable sector whose price is given
independently. Both refugees and host community members have
skilled and unskilled members, who are imperfect substitutes in
production of all goods. All workers earn wages that are equal to
their marginal productivities. There is also a fixed factor of
production in each region (land) that is owned by locals. The
economic rents to this factor (i.e. extra profits due to market
distortions) are shared by the locals (non-refugee).

This framework pays special attention to mobility of labor
across geographic regions and sectors. In the simulation model,
the host community members, and if permitted: the refugees, can
rationally change jobs across sectors or move to a different region.
Such a move is possible at any point in time. The decision to move
is based on a comparison between the cost of movement, which is
paid only once at the time of movement, and the expected change
in the person’s lifetime income after that. More details on the
features of the model are provided in Box 2-2, and the structure of
the model is summarized in the appendix.

Simulations help the analysis on two fronts: first, they help to
capture the labor reallocation effect, and second, they help
disentangle the short and medium term outcomes. Economic
and social impact analyses of refugee arrivals have typically over-
looked the labor reallocation effects. This is partially because such
effects are difficult to capture in partial equilibrium approaches
that are often used to identify how income or price are affected.
However, as demonstrated by Artuc et al (2010), to move from
calculation of wage effects to welfare effects, one needs to take
account of the constant inter-industry gross flows of workers
observed in the data. These gross flows are large and have signifi-
cant effect on welfare calculations. Indeed, due to these flow
effects, the short-term outcomes, during which the supply side of
the economy is not settled into a new equilibrium yet, could be
significantly different than the long-term effects, when all adjust-
ments are completed and the economy reaches a new steady-state.
Therefore, thanks to these simulations, the analysis can project
both the transition paths of prices, real wages, lifetime income,
and labor reallocation across industries and regions, and the
permanent shifts in them.

Empirical assessment follows a pragmatic approach. The
choice of empirical approach is to a large extent driven by the
availability of data. Given constraints in that, the analysis adheres
to using a variety of summary statistics, analyses of separate data
28                                                                 The framework




     sources, and an imperfect counterfactual. For instance, whereas
     simple comparison of population densities over time is used for
     assessing the labor reallocation effects, regressions that take
     advantage of the spatially stratified nature of the price data are
     used for detecting the price effects in livestock markets. More
     detailed description of estimation approaches will be described in
     the section where they are used.

      Box 2-2: Simulation Model

      The simulation model used in this report comprises a small open
      economy with 41 symmetric sub-regions, one of which is Turkana.
      This split is based on computational convenience, and the analysis
      does not aim to capture any regional diﬀerences among other regions
      in Kenya. Thus, for all practical purposes, the model has “Turkana”
      and the “rest of Kenya” as main regions.

      There are two types of workers: skilled and unskilled. They are imper-
      fect substitutes in a simple Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES)
      production function: when more workers of a certain type are
      employed, marginal productivity of that type decreases, but that of
      the other type increases.

      Local workers and refugees are perfect substitutes provided that
      they are the same type, e.g. both skilled or both unskilled. In the main
      analysis, refugees and locals are assumed to have the same propor-
      tion of skilled workers (15 percent). This assumption, although
      simplistic, helps the analysis by shutting down some eﬀects, and
      helps identify major mechanisms that drive the results that would be
      diﬃcult to isolate otherwise. While interpreting the results in Chap-
      ter 4, implications of alternative skill compositions will be discussed.

      Workers are free to change regions and sectors, but they face
      some frictions in the form of mobility costs. These costs are
      stochastically determined with identically and independently
      distributed moving cost (utility) shocks for each region and sector.
      Workers solve a dynamic optimization problem with perfect
      foresight, and equilibrium wages clear markets. However, thanks to
      the mobility costs, wage diﬀerentials and gross ﬂow versus net
      ﬂow diﬀerences can be sustained in equilibrium. Workers ﬁrst
      learn about the regional shock, and decide the region. After that,
      they learn about sectoral shock in that region and decide the
      sector. This structure bears no consequences for results, it is
      chosen for computational convenience.

      There is a tradable good that is freely traded among regions and
      countries, thus, it has a ﬁxed price. Domestic producers are price
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                         29




 takers in this sector. Each region also has a non-tradable sector,
 therefore, there are 41 non-tradable sectors, whose prices are
 determined endogenously within the region. The model allows for
 segregated markets in diﬀerent locations.

 Simulations abstract from potential skill intensity in either tradable
 or non-tradable sectors. As above, this is to isolate other channels
 in identifying the impact of refugees on host community welfare.

 Overall, this framework enables studying dynamic characteristics
 of the problem by contrasting short-run and long-run analysis in
 the case of population shocks. A brief formal deﬁnition of the simu-
 lation model is provided in the appendix.


Towns that did not experience an influx of refugees (counter-
factual towns) are used for detecting Kakuma-specific effects.
By comparing how an indicator changes with distance to Kakuma
and how it changes with distance to other towns, the analysis is
able to capture some Kakuma specific effects, albeit in an imperfect
manner. If these towns are taken as similar prior to the establish-
ment of Kakuma refugee camp, then current outcomes for house-
holds in these locations reflect differences resulting from shocks
that are unique to each of these places. Yet there are two ways in
which the use of these towns as counterfactuals could be invalidat-
ed. First, if they experience other types of shocks that cause them to
diverge significantly from what would have been an average time
trend for the region, and second, if the presence of the refugee
camp spills over to them. Because of its presence on an unstable
border, Lokichogio is clearly different from the other towns in the
sample, and can only be taken as a very loose “future scenario.” In
the case of the Lokichar and Lorugum subsamples, their use as a
counterfactual is more likely to be invalidated by spillovers – i.e.,
migration of households or price effects that ripple down from
Kakuma. These potential problems will be examined in the data,
but no strong evidence for them will be found, allowing these two
towns to remain among the counterfactuals in our analysis.

As the last step of the analysis, a number of policy simulations
are used to shed light on alternative integration options going
forward. Whereas the assessment of the impact of refugees on
host community welfare takes the status quo as given, policy
experiments follow a scenario approach to characterize the future
outcomes of alternative policies. Therefore, these are performed
by simulations only. Overall, these thought experiments are used
to facilitate a discussion on the future of Kakuma Refugee Camp
and the communities that have generously been hosting it.
Young Mother © Harun Onder, Lodwar 2016
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                         31




        3. The economics of encampment




I
   n this section, the results of the analysis will be discussed.
   First, simulation results are presented to develop a set of a priori
   effects. These will begin by discussing the impacts on aggregate
economic activity, and then switch to specific effects on prices,
wages, and incomes. Second, the empirical analysis will assess the
effects market by market, e.g. focusing on agriculture, housing, and
livestock markets. When possible, separate price, income, and labor
allocation effects will be discussed in each individual market.

3.1. Simulation results: prognosis

Encampment restricts the impact of refugees into demand
channels only; they are only consumers. Refugees, although not
allowed to work, can still increase the demand for both tradable
and non-tradable goods. They receive income in the form of aid and
remittances, which gives them the purchasing power to buy from
the market. For “perfectly tradable goods,” this additional demand
does not have an effect on market prices because tradability with
no supply bottlenecks implies an immediate adjustment of supply
to changes in demand, e.g. there is an infinite supply at the fixed
market price. This is not the case for the prices of non-tradable
goods and those tradable goods where there are supply bottlenecks,
whose prices increase in the wake of increased demand. These
changes, in turn, have aggregate and distributional consequences.

Aggregate eﬀects

The arrival of refugees boosts economic activity in Turkana.
Table 3-1 summarizes the simulations of refugee arrival and its
aggregate effects on macroeconomic outcomes. The Gross Regional
Product (GRP) of the Turkana region permanently increases by 3.4
percent as a result of the refugee arrival. Gross Regional Income
(GRI), which is defined as the regional output minus the refugee
32                                                                               The economics of encampment




     Table 3-1: Simulation Results: Macroeconomic Eﬀects Of Refugee
     Arrival (Encampment)




                                         AR AL




                                                                        S


                                                                                   S


                                                                                              S


                                                                                                         S


                                                                                                                    S
                                         VA E




                                                               S

                                                                       AR


                                                                                 AR


                                                                                            AR


                                                                                                       AR


                                                                                                                  AR
                                       RI OR




                                                              AR
                                      AR L
                                      YE R I V




                                                                   YE


                                                                             YE


                                                                                        YE


                                                                                                   YE


                                                                                                              YE
                                     AR EF




                                                          YE
                                       B




                                                                   0


                                                                            5


                                                                                       0


                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                              0
                                                         +5


                                                                 +1


                                                                            +1


                                                                                       +2


                                                                                                  +3


                                                                                                             +5
                                                    (Percentage change from initial equilibrium

      TURKANA
      Gross Regional Product (GRP)       0.0      2.6      3.4        3.4        3.4        3.4        3.4        3.4

      Tradable                           0.0      -5.7    -7.1     -7.1      -7.2       -7.2           -7.2   -7.2

      Non-tradable                       0.0      5.7      7.3        7.4        7.4        7.4        7.4        7.4

      Employment (locals only)           0.0      1.2      2.8        2.9        2.9        2.9        2.9        2.9

      Tradable                           0.0      -2.7    -6.0     -6.3      -6.3       -6.3           -6.3   -6.4

      Non-tradable                       0.0      2.7      6.2        6.5        6.5        6.5        6.5        6.5

      Gross Regional Income (GRI)        0.0      2.6      3.4        3.4        3.4        3.4        3.4        3.4

      GRI per local person               0.0      1.4      0.6        0.5        0.5        0.5        0.5        0.5

      Non-tradable prices                0.0     12.0      7.3        7.0        6.9        6.9        6.9        6.9

      REST OF KENYA
      Gross Regional Product (GRP)       0.0      0.0      0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0

      Tradable                           0.0      0.0      0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0        -0.1   -0.1

      Non-tradable                       0.0      0.0      0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0

      Employment (locals only)           0.0      0.0     -0.1     -0.1      -0.1       -0.1           -0.1   -0.1

      Tradable                           0.0      0.0      0.0        0.0    -0.1       -0.1           -0.1   -0.1

      Non-tradable                       0.0      -0.1    -0.1     -0.1      -0.1       -0.1           -0.1   -0.1

      Gross Regional Income (GRI)        0.0      0.0      0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0

      GRI per local person               0.0      0.0      0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0

      Non-tradable prices                0.0      0.0      0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0

     Notes: Gross Regional Income (GRI) is deﬁned as Gross Regional Product minus the wage bill of refugees.
     In the case of encampment, since refugees are not allowed to work, both concepts are equivalent.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                         33




wage bill, is the same with GRP in this case as no refugees are
allowed to work.

Incomes of locals increase on a per capita basis after refugee
arrival, especially in the short-term. The GRI per local person
(GRIplp) in Turkana increases by 0.5 percent in the long-term. In
the short-term, however, the effects are larger at 1.4 percent
growth. Over time, the initial effects are smoothed over time labor
moves across regions and sectors.

Growth also brings about a sectoral transformation. Whereas
the non-tradable sector grows by 7.4 percent in the long-term, the
tradable sector shrinks by 7.2 percent as resources are allocated to
produce more non-tradable goods and services. As the former
sector is substantially larger than the latter, the net effect is posi-
tive overall growth. This is an expected result: as higher demand
pushes up the relative price in non-tradable sector, more resources
are allocated from the tradable to the non-tradable sector. Where-
as employment in the non-tradable sector increases by 6.5 percent
in the long-term, it decreases by 6.3 percent in tradable sector
(Table 3-1). Overall, total employment increases by 2.9 percent.

Refugee arrival has negligible effects on the rest of Kenya.
Refugee arrival pulls labor from other regions to Turkana. Although
these flows have important implications for Turkana economy, they
do not have such effects for the rest of Kenya. The bottom panel in
Table 3-1 shows that most effects on the rest of Kenyan economy are
small enough to be rounded up to zero. Only in employment num-
bers, is there an observable decrease by 0.1 percent.

Non-tradable sector prices increase permanently with an
over-shooting in the short-term. In the short-term, the prices of
non-tradable goods surge when refugee arrivals create a demand
shock. Over time, however, supply in these sectors adjusts as labor
moves in, and prices stabilize around their long-term equilibrium
level. In quantitative terms, the non-tradable goods prices
increase by about 12 percent in the year of the refugee arrivals in
Turkana. Over time, propagation mechanisms bring prices down
to their long-term levels that are 7 percent greater than the initial
equilibrium.

Distributional eﬀects

Not everyone benefits the same way from the arrival of refu-
gees. Although locals enjoy higher incomes, both in aggregate and
per capita terms, from the refugee arrival, not everybody gains
from it. Therefore, it is important to identify the potential losers,
34                                                The economics of encampment




     which may help establish mitigating mechanisms, e.g. transfers
     from winners to losers.

     Demand-shocks boost real wages in non-tradable sectors. With
     higher prices in non-tradable sectors, marginal products of work-
     ers increase, thus they get paid more. In comparison, as prices in
     the tradable sector is determined globally, there is no change
     there. As real wages are defined with respect to changes in
     consumer prices, e.g. average prices in the region, stagnant wages
     in tradable sectors indeed denote sharp decreases in real wages in
     that sector. In comparison, the increase in wages in the non-trad-
     able sector more than offsets the increase in consumer prices. In
     the long-term, the real wages of skilled workers increase (0.9
     percent) more than those of unskilled workers (0.4 percent) in the
     non-tradable sectors (Figure 3-1). Similarly, skilled workers suffer
     a bit less (- 0.4 percent) in the tradable sector than unskilled work-
     ers (- 0.9 percent).

     Short-term effects are more prominent than long-term effects;
     mobility of labor smooths them over time. Unlike the long-term
     increases, which are more subdued, wages of both skilled and
     unskilled workers in the non-tradable sector increases by 5.6
     percent immediately after the arrival of the refugees. Similarly,
     the drop in tradable sector wages is more pronounced in the
     short-term. The movement of labor from low real wage sectors to
     high real wage sectors, and also from low real wage regions to high
     real wage regions, take place over years. As a result, some of the
     wage hikes in the short-term are undone gradually over time.

     When total incomes are taken into consideration, gains are
     magnified and losses are depressed. In addition to workers in
     non-tradable sectors, those who own fixed factors of production
     (like land) also enjoy higher economic rents when demand
     expands. Simulations allocate these rents equally across the local
     population. In the long-term, the incomes of those who work in the
     non-tradable sector increase by 0.7 percent. In comparison, the
     incomes of those who work in the tradable sector decrease by 0.25
     percent. As the non-tradable sector employs more labor than trad-
     able sector in Turkana, the gains dominate the losses. Consequent-
     ly, the arrival of the refugees has a net positive effect on average
     income in Turkana.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                                                           35




Figure 3-1: Real Wages And Incomes Of Locals After Refugee Arrival


                         REAL WAGES                                                         REAL INCOME
                    Wages of Skilled Workers                                        Total Income of Skilled Workers
        1.50                                                            1.90

        1.45
                                                                        1.85
        1.40
                                                                        1.80




                                                                Price
Price




        1.35
                                                                        1.75
        1.30

        1.25                                                            1.70
               0     5       10           15    20         25                  0        5        10           15      20   25
                                  Years                                                               Years

                   Wages of Unskilled Workers                                      Total Income of Unskilled Workers
        0.58                                                            1.00
        0.56                                                            0.98
        0.54
                                                                        0.96
        0.52
Price




                                                                Price




                                                                        0.94
        0.50
        0.48                                                            0.92

        0.46                                                            0.90
               0     5       10           15    20         25                  0        5       10            15      20   25
                                  Years                                                               Years


                                                Tradable                               Non-Tradable




With encampment, everything depends on the transfers
received by refugees. With no additional sources of income or
possibility to affect the outcomes through labor markets, refugees
could only affect the host community welfare to the extent that
foreign aid and remittances grant them purchasing power. Four
financial organizations within the Somali trader network, through
which remittance transfers are conducted, have been identified at
the camp: Dahabshil, Amel, Dalson, and Iftin. Therefore, not only
the well-being of the refugees, but also that of the locals depend on
the size of those transfers. The higher the aid, the larger the effects
in both short-term and long-term.

With market frictions short-term rents are captured by fewer
people and for a longer period. Refugee camps are typically set
up in relatively underdeveloped regions everywhere in the world.
This possibly reflects the low opportunity cost of land in such envi-
ronments and that conflicts may be more common in the
36                                                The economics of encampment




     neighboring areas. Kakuma, located in the poorest region in Kenya
     and surrounded by neighbors that are prone to conflict, is not an
     exception in this regard. However, underdevelopment also means
     that these regions are likely to suffer from limited connectivity and
     less developed markets. Both factors increase mobility costs and
     slow down the transition dynamics upon refugee arrival. As a
     result, they help transitory rents to be captured by a few privileged
     groups like producers with market power. In comparison, without
     these extra frictions, markets adjust relatively more rapidly, and
     gains are distributed in a more widespread manner.

     3.2. Empirical results: evidence

     To what extent does data support our simulations? In this
     section, we investigate the empirical evidence for the effects
     described by simulations. Given limitations in data, however,
     tracing the effects over a certain time horizon has proven to be
     difficult. Therefore, in many cases, a distinction between
     short-term and long-term effects could not be made. In what
     follows, the analysis will first look for evidence for the impact of
     refugee arrivals on prices and production in grain, livestock,
     agriculture, and housing markets. Next, it will focus on labor mar-
     kets. Finally, in order to capture wages and income effects, which
     are not possible to observe properly in data, consumption patterns
     will be analyzed. In all components, the analysis will not shy away
     from presenting any meaningful information that was collected as
     part of this study for documenting the characteristics of the Turka-
     na economy, which may be useful for future studies.

     Grain markets

     The camp constitutes a major source of demand for food –
     perhaps larger than the local residents themselves. Refugee
     households spend at least 60% of their income on food purchases.
     The top two expenditures in this category are meat (13%) and
     sugar (13%), followed by cereals (9%) and milk (9%). Purchase of
     vegetables constitutes only 6% of expenditures (WFP FSOM 2014).
     In terms of local preferences, interviews with wholesale traders
     suggest that cow, goat, and camel meat, and cow and goat milk are
     coming from local markets. Maize and beans are the most widely
     purchased cereals and pulses, while tomatoes and potatoes consti-
     tute the largest percentage of vegetable and fruit sales (Fernandez
     et al 2014). The total sum of purchases by refugees depends on the
     number of refugees in the camp and their purchasing power. The
     higher the number of refugees or the more they can purchase by
     means of selling the aid packages, receiving remittances, and earn-
     ing wage labor, the more demand is created. Figure 3-2 shows
   THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                                           37




   Figure 3-2: Refugees And Food Aid To Kakuma

                          3000                                                       200




                          2500
Food aid in metric tons




                                                                                     150




                                                                                           1000s of refugees
                          2000


                                                                                     100
                          1500




                          1000                                                       50
                             2000           2005               2010             2015
                                                        Year
                                    Food aid in metric tons           1000s of refugees

   Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations using data from WFP and UNHCR



   the available information on refugee numbers in the camp and
   food aid deliveries. The recent outbreak of violence in South
   Sudan (from 2013) has clearly caused a recent spike in refugee
   numbers. The incomes of refugees will be discussed below.

   Imperfect market conditions are important determinants of
   prices. An assessment of market structure in arid regions of Kenya
   conducted by WFP in 2014 (Fernandez, Kisingu, Wanambwa and
   Njoroge, 2014) highlights the weak market integration both across
   local markets and with main supply markets. The refugee camps,
   however, due to their size and location on transport corridors,
   tend to have somewhat better functioning markets. However, the
   lack of local production outside of livestock, milk and a small
   amount of cereals means that traders must bring other products
   from some distance. The report suggests that markets are relative-
   ly competitive between wholesalers, although the authors do note
   that wholesalers in Kakuma appear to have a very important role
   in determining prices – more so than in Dadaab. Interviews with
   camp residents that were performed by this study suggest that
   there are 4 to 5 main wholesalers who determine market prices in
   Kakuma camp.
38                                                                 The economics of encampment




         Figure 3-3: Retail Price Of Corn In Four Markets

                               5                                                           200



                               4
     Ln (retail maize price)




                                                                                                1000s of refugees
                                                                                           150


                               3

                                                                                           100
                               2



                               1                                                           50
                               2000         2005              2010                 2015
                                                   Year
                                      Garissa             Lodwar                   Kitui
                                      Nairobi             1000s of refugees

        Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations using FEWSNET price data



        Refugee camp markets are heavily patronized by host commu-
        nity residents, who take advantage of lower prices of a variety
        of goods. 62 percent of participants in the Kakuma subsample of
        the survey for this report stated that they use the market in the
        camp. This can be attributed to the fact that the prices and prod-
        ucts offered there are found to be attractive by locals. In addition,
        the sheer size of the refugee camp leads to better connectivity to
        other markets and, thus, availability of a greater variety of goods.

        With limited data, no definite conclusions regarding the
        impact of the camp on local grain prices can be inferred. The
        grain price data that includes Turkana district is extremely limit-
        ed: only the retail price of corn is available. Inspection of the
        dynamics of the retail price of corn (Figure 3-3) show no observ-
        able correlation between refugee inflows (the grey line) and corn
        prices in any market, and no deviations in the Lodwar (Turkana)
        market from other markets. Running a fixed effects regression
        with market and year effects using this data reveals a positive
        correlation between refugee inflows and price, and a negative
        correlation between aid inflows and price. However, the results
        are far from statistically significant, and the low number of obser-
        vations calls into question the validity of the estimates. There is
        somewhat more price data on livestock prices and sales, which
        will be discussed in the next section.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                       39




Livestock markets

Livestock, the main source of livelihood of the Turkana region,
has been affected significantly by the presence of refugees. The
present Turkana chief of Kakuma indicates that one of the biggest
impacts of the camp was to displace Turkana livestock. In an inter-
view with the World Bank team, he stated that when the refugees
arrived in 1991, the site where the camp was based was a bushy
forest ecosystem that supported a wealth of indigenous trees. The
local people who inhabited that place or moved with their cattle
did not want to leave the area and it was only after they were
instructed to exit and remain outside of a certain radius from the
camp that most eventually left. For some, this process took
between 6 months to one year due to their protests. The chief
pointed out that even today you can find some old Turkana who
spend a lot of time inside the camp because they still believe that
this is their land. Over time, the numbers of people in Kakuma
grew and many of the local inhabitants remained along the Tarach
River so as to have access to water supplies. Many of the pastoral-
ists, particularly during the dry season, move farther and farther
away. Earlier on, they moved north towards the South Sudan
border, but because clashes with the Toposa have resulted in
numerous deaths for the local population, many have recently
chosen instead to cross the border to the west to graze their cattle
with the Karamojong in Uganda.

Data provides some support for the livestock displacement
effect of the camp. HSNP census data shows that livestock hold-
ings in 2011 were quite low in the Kakuma area relative to the rest
of the region (Figure 3-4). It bears mentioning that the bulk of the
population is not located around the camp (see the accompanying
histogram of population distribution on the graph), but that those
who do live nearby tend not to have cattle. Cattle holdings increase
substantially at about 7 kilometers from the camp. It is also worth
noting that the 2011 HSNP data affords us only a snapshot in time,
from which it is difficult to draw firm conclusions regarding such
a mobile population. This spatial distribution is verified by regres-
sions that control for precipitation (Appendix B).

Some effects of the refugee camp on livestock are localized.
When averages across Kakuma households and non-Kakuma
households Lorugum and Lokichar (which together represent the
counterfactual case) are compared, there are no significant differ-
ences in number or value of poultry and livestock cared for, sold,
owned, or stolen in the past year. Similarly, no changes in the
movement or watering of animals during the past 5 years are
reported. There are interesting results, however, when the
40                                                                The economics of encampment




      Figure 3-4: Livestock Holdings By Distance From Camp

               1.5
                                                                                         4




                                                                                             Inverse hyperbolic sine (# livestock)
                                                                                         3
               1.0
     Density




                                                                                         2

               0.5
                                                                                         1



                0                                                                        0
                     -2        0                 2                   4               6
                                      Ln (km to Kakuma camp)
                           Density                  Livestock             95% Cl


      Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations using HNSP 2011 data



      patterns across stratification levels -- < 2 km to the city center, 2-8
      km, and 8-10 km, are compared between the Kakuma subsample
      and the subsample for Lorugum and Lokichar. The first panel of
      Table 3-2 shows that the probability of livestock being stolen is 8
      percentage points higher in the Kakuma sub-region, and the value
      of livestock sold is 7 percent higher, while the value of that cared
      for is orders of magnitude larger, though possibly driven by very
      large outliers. Panel b, which considers different distance bands,
      also show that both the number (column 2) and value (column 6)
      of animals are higher at distances closer to Kakuma. In addition,
      the Kakuma sub-region also has a significantly higher probability
      of cattle stealing close to town. Both the higher probability of cattle
      stealing and the exchange of cattle care with refugees are elements
      that were mentioned in interviews with refugees and Turkana.

      Despite the herd displacement effect, local producers may
      benefit from the presence of the refugee camp through higher
      sale prices for their meat and milk products. Analysis of month-
      ly livestock prices from 2007 to 2013 suggests that increases in
      refugees and aid are correlated with price increases near the refu-
      gee camp (Table 3-3). In particular, a one percent increase in the
      refugee population results in a 3.5 to 3.8 percent increase in goat
      prices in Lodwar. There is some evidence that increases in food
      aid per refugee also induce price increases, probably through their
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                                                                   41




Table 3-2: The Patterns Of Livestock Economy: Kakuma vs. Other Towns




                                                             CK
                                                     R) CK




                                                    ) CK




                                                           CK
                                                   N TO




                                                           )
                                                           )
                                                    CA E



                                                   W E




                                                  SO E
                                                       ED
                                                        RE
                                                 FO O




                                                 ED O




                                                        O




                                                         )
                                                IN U




                                                O U




                                               S LU
                                                      LD
                                               LE ES




                                               LD S T
                                              D EST




                                              N ST




                                             S AL




                                             S AL
                                                      N
                                            IM AS




                                           AL VA
                                            O IV
                                                    S




                                           W E




                                           SO IVE
                                                    )




                                         AL ( V




                                         AL ( V
                                                 AL
                                       AN 1 ) H




                                          RE IV



                                        O (LIV




                                        ST (L




                                                  (
                                     IM ) Ln




                                     IM ) Ln




                                       IM Ln
                                      CA (L




                                              (L
                                             B
                                            (




                                         RO
                                           n




                                           n




                                           n




                                   AN )
                                  AN (6




                                  AN (7




                                          8
                                        )L




                                        )L




                                        )L




                                        (
                                      )P
                                     (2




                                     (3




                                     (5
                                   (4
 a. Diﬀerence across subsamples

 In Kakuma subsample               0.0527       0.6547      0.1122     0.0833*     0.0734*     2.0260*      0.4101       1.283

                                   (0.0876)    (0.4732)    (0.4272)    (0.0459)    (0.0405)    (0.9430)     (0.7088)    (1.2050)

 N                                   330         154         154         154         154         154          154         154

 r2                                 0.001       0.007         0           0           0         0.011        0.002       0.005

 b. Averages by distance band and subsamples

 Less than 2 km to town           0.2674***    1.5027***   2.5987***   0.3888***   0.5964***   5.4744***   9.6417***    1.2645***

                                   (0.0441)    (0.2398)    (0.3860)    (0.0319)    (0.0374)    (0.1845)     (0.7018)    (0.0356)

 Between 2 and 8 km from town     0.4443***    2.9126***   3.7280***   0.3599***   0.5540***   8.4901***   11.5531***   5.5049***

                                   (0.0678)    (0.0102)    (0.1033)    (0.0338)    (0.0644)    (0.2735)     (0.1038)    (1.6294)

 Between 8 and 10 km from town    0.8053***    2.8437***   3.7662***   0.4993***   0.7709***   8.7966***   11.5422***   5.1682***

                                   (0.0216)    (0.2377)    (0.1816)    (0.0512)    (0.1129)    (0.7505)     (0.4663)    (0.6603)

 Less than 2 km to Kakuma          0.1018      1.0797***    0.5379     0.1529**    0.1361*     3.0915***    1.1637      2.9795***

                                   (0.0708)    (0.3316)    (0.4438)    (0.0588)    (0.0660)    (0.4011)     (0.7540)    (0.3895)

 Between 2 and 8 km to Kakuma      0.0172      0.2715*     -0.2589**    0.0568     -0.0064     1.2345**     -0.2513     -0.4878

                                   (0.1178)    (0.1330)    (0.1057)    (0.0895)    (0.1430)    (0.4712)     (0.1422)    (1.6336)

 Between 8 and 10 km to Kakuma     -0.1053      0.1301     -0.5360**   -0.1421     -0.2281      0.2228      -1.1473     -0.8624

                                   (0.0841)    (0.2950)    (0.2114)    (0.1321)    (0.2316)    (1.3572)     (1.0050)    (0.7539)

 N                                   330         154         154         154         154         154          154         154

 r2                                 0.419       0.661       0.814        0.49       0.435       0.757        0.948        0.48


Panel a shows the weighted t-test of key outcomes in the livestock module of the household survey. Panel b
shows regressions without a constant with the full set of dummy variables indicating the distance strata for
Kakuma and the counterfactual towns. This speciﬁcation means that each coeﬃcient represents the mean of the
outcome variable for a given distance and location, tested against the hypothesis of zero. The coeﬃcients
indicating distance to Kakuma give the additional eﬀect of being at a particular distance from town in the
Kakuma subsample.
42                                                                The economics of encampment




     Table 3-3: Correlation Between Livestock Prices And Aid

                                              (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)
      Ln (refugees) x Lodwar                              0.358*        0.353*       0.377*

                                                          (0.152)       (0.153)      (0.162)
      Aid per 1000 refugees x Lodwar         0.009                      0.007        0.008**

                                            (0.004)                     (0.004)      (0.003)
      Ln (volume sold)                                                                0.109

                                                                                     (0.089)
      Observations                            205          205           205          205
      Adjusted R 2                           0.724        0.736         0.735         0.748


     Dependent variable: ln(price in shillings). Regressions include ﬁxed eﬀects at market and
     year/month level. Data is average monthly price. Standard errors clustered at market level.
     For female goats, markets are Isiolo, Lodwar, Mulot, Nairobi, and Rumuruti. *p$<$.10,
     **p$<$.05, *** p$<$ .01. Prices are for female goats of grade 2. Note that prices are not
     available for Kakuma, but only for Lodwar. We expect that price increases in Kakuma
     would be larger than those estimated here.



     effect on refugee income. The increase in price may be favorable
     to producers who sell on this market.

     Overall, the empirical analysis in this section finds evidence
     for the simulated increases in livestock prices, but it finds
     more. The livestock data suggest both benefits and costs to the
     refugee presence resulting from changes in cattle markets. On the
     down side, there is a greater propensity for cattle stealing near the
     camp than near other towns. This is an effect the simulation
     model, which focuses on market transactions only, could not antic-
     ipate by construction. On the other hand, prices for goats are
     found to increase with increases in food aid. This may benefit local
     residents if they engage in the market, which seems to be the case
     closer to Kakuma. However, it also raises the cost of consumption
     for net buyers of livestock-related goods, as discussed before.

     Agriculture

     In theory, another potential source of impact of the refugee
     camp is to provide either incentive for more agricultural
     production or competition with local production. The house-
     hold data suggests that agriculture provides at least a partial liveli-
     hood for a small number of households around the camp although
     Turkana region is generally unsuitable for agriculture without
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                                43




Table 3-4: Summary Statistics Agriculture, Household Survey

                                         MEAN         MEAN      P-VALUE      OBS        OBS
                                        KAKUMA     NON-KAKUMA     DIFF     KAKUMA   NON-KAKUMA

    Household farms                      0.333        0.005     0.000***    111        219
    Farmed with no harvest due
    to drougth                           0.108        0.000        .         37         1

    Area farmland owned (ha)             31.689      500.000       .         37         1

    Value of farm sales                 3018.297    36000.000      .         37         1

    Farm sales - inputs (not labour)    1215.595    33900.000      .         37         1

    Non-labor input costs               1802.703    2100.000       .         37         1

    Labor days on the farm               51.111      15.000        .         36         1
    Proportion farm production
    to animals                           0.062        0.002        .         32         1
    Proportion farm production
    consumed                             0.400        0.200        .         30         1

    Proportion farm production sold      0.181        0.140        .         30         1

    Proportion farm production gifted    0.085        0.001        .         31         1
    Proportion farm production
    saved                                0.165        0.006        .         32         1

    Had land dispute                     0.432        0.000        .         37         1

    Borehole dispute                     0.297        0.000        .         37         1


*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01



significant infrastructure investment. In Kakuma, 33 percent of
households farmed last year, though 10 percent of these did not
harvest due to the fact that drought devastated their crops (Table
3-4). The main crops farmed are millet, maize, sorghum, and
legumes. The largest part of production is consumed by the
households themselves (40%), with 18% sold, and a similar
amount saved. Smaller proportions (6 and 8 percent) are fed to
animals or gifted.

Farming households typically have other sources of income.
The value of farm sales were around 3000 shillings for the prior
growing season; but, if non-labor inputs are taken into consider-
ation, the revenues decreases to 1215 shillings. Given a minimum
wage for an unskilled worker in Kenya is 228 shillings per day9,


9
    http://www.wageindicator.org/main/salary/minimum-wage/kenya
44                                                The economics of encampment




     this revenue is easily exceeded by value of labor used on the farm.
     Thus, about half of farmers also husband animals and 20 percent
     also own a small business.

     Despite the harsh conditions, the camp has a small but positive
     effect on farming. Although agricultural production is not a large
     part of the Turkana regional economy, it seems that the refugee
     camp has provided some demand for products grown locally
     (Table 3-4). This suggests that the dynamic where food aid drives
     down local food prices, thus discouraging production, is not at play
     in this setting.

     Housing market- or lack thereof

     Refugees and aid workers do not rely on housing services
     outside the camp directly, but influence the housing market
     via indirect channels. All international workers who come to
     Kakuma camp are housed in a compound, and the refugees them-
     selves are limited to the camp. Nonetheless, the refugee situation
     could affect the housing market when households move to the
     area seeking jobs – which may increase housing demand – particu-
     larly if this activates a previously nascent rental and sales market.

     There is qualitative evidence for changing housing dynamics
     after the establishment of the refugee camp. According to the
     clerk to the Kakuma Turkana Chief, prior to the refugees’ arrival,
     land was free and available for the Turkana. After the arrival of
     refugees, some commercialization began. In more rural areas,
     land is still considered to be communal, while in more urban areas
     local authorities facilitate the allotment of land. Although the
     process is still only developing, the tendency is confirmed in the
     county government’s reporting of land titling; the Turkana County
     Integrated Development Plan for 2013-2018 indicates that in the
     entire county, three official land titles have been issued (Republic
     of Kenya, 2015).

     With commercialization of land, speculation and illegal prac-
     tices gained momentum. It is reported to be quite common for
     local fraudsters to sell the land that belongs to someone who has
     left to abroad or to other parts of Kenya and then to run away
     with the money. When the owners return, they find that someone
     else is occupying that land, and it falls on the chief to resolve the
     dispute. In addition, the discovery of natural resources – water
     and oil – have magnified speculations that drive up land prices
     for locals.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                      45




Table 3-5: Summary Statistics From Household Survey, Housing

                                MEAN         MEAN      P-VALUE     OBS        OBS
                               KAKUMA     NON-KAKUMA     DIFF    KAKUMA   NON-KAKUMA

 Non-traditional roof           0.171        0.256      0.084     111        219

 More than one room in house    0.198        0.315     0.025*     111        219

 Brick or metal walls           0.036        0.110     0.023*     111        219

 Receive water from pipe        0.135        0.265     0.007**    111        219

 Owns home                      0.991        0.932     0.017*     111        219

 Monthly rent for home         1500.000    2233.333     N/A        1         15

 Year house built              2004.624    2005.410     0.465     109        212
 Date household head began
 living in current location     1995         1990      0.027*      71        203


*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01


Because land and housing markets are thin, it is difficult to
detect impacts in our household dataset. Table 3-5 shows basic
comparisons between the Kakuma subsample and the counterfac-
tual towns. The housing in Kakuma seems to be of lower quality –
homes are smaller, less likely to have piped water or more modern
walls or roofs. Households are more likely to state that they own
their home. The rental market does not seem to be active in
Kakuma – only one household stated that they rent their home.
Household heads who could remember the year that they arrived
in their current house (the Turkana use a different calendar) seem
to have, on average, arrived slightly later to Kakuma.

The lower quality of the housing in the Kakuma subsample
seems to indicate a higher level of poverty, while the higher
level of ownership of homes suggests the opposite. Taken
together with the qualitative information, however, the overall
picture is one of housing and land markets just beginning to be
developed in an area where baseline poverty is very high and
historical concepts of land ownership do not coincide with ours.
The situation seems to be ripe for opportunism, and bears watch-
ing in the future.

Labor market

There is no clear evidence to suggest that camp has pushed
populations away or pulled them in. Although changing admin-
istrative boundaries over time make it difficult to map out popula-
46                                                                                                                       The economics of encampment




Figure 3-5: Change In Population Density In Turkana From 1989 To 1999, 2009

(a): 1999/1989 Population Density                                                       (b): 2009/1989 Population Density


                                       Kaiemothia                                                                              Kaiemothia

                                                     Kokuro                                                                                  Kokuro

                                                Todenyang Namuruputh                                                                    Todenyang Namuruputh


                Lokichokio                                                                              Lokichokio
                                                     Lokitaung                                                                               Lokitaung



                              Kakuma                Murangering                                                       Kakuma                Murangering

                                                      Lokwa Kalokol                                                                           Lokwa Kalokol


                                                          Eliye Springs                                                                           Eliye Springs

                                                Lodwar                                                                                  Lodwar

 LEGEND                                      Lorukumu                                    LEGEND                                      Lorukumu

       Roads                                            Loichangamata                          Roads                                            Loichangamata
       Market towns           Loiya
                                                    Lokichar                                   Market towns           Loiya
                                                                                                                                            Lokichar
                                      Lokitanyala              Loperat                                                        Lokitanyala              Loperat
 Turkana Population Density                                                              Turkana Population Density
 Density 1999/Density 1989                          Kaputirr                      Tum    Density 2009/Density 1989                          Kaputirr                      Tum
                                                                    Lokori                                                                                  Lokori
                                               Nasolot                                                                                 Nasolot
       0.14 - 1.43                                  Lotongot                                   0.23 - 0.89                                  Lotongot
                                                           Amaler                                                                                  Amaler
       1.44 - 2.02                                                                             0.90 - 1.39
                                                                         Lomelo                                                                                  Lomelo
       2.03 - 2.71                                                                             1.40 - 2.12
                                                                    Kapedo                                                                                  Kapedo
       2.72 - 8.12                                                                             2.13 - 5.49



Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations using Kenyan Census data, 1989, 1999, 2009


                                 tion changes in Turkana, the analysis here was able to harmonize
                                 the 1989 (pre-camp) and 1999, 2009 sub-location boundaries.
                                 Census data then allows for the comparison of spatial population
                                 growth rates over the two periods. Figure 3-5 illustrates changes in
                                 population density between 1989 and 1999 and between 1989 and
                                 2009. As these are data from the Kenyan census, they do not
                                 include refugees.

                                 Our household survey data, however, suggest that there is
                                 significantly more in-migration into Kakuma than into the
                                 counterfactual villages. Of all the individuals registered in the
                                 rosters of the households we interviewed, 8.6% of those living in
                                 Kakuma had moved there from other villages, while 5.9% of those
                                 living in control towns were in-migrants. It is also interesting to
                                 note the timing of those moves (see figure 3-6). Although these
                                 numbers denote simple correlations, it appears that the control
                                 villages had more in-migrants until around 1992, after which their
                                 frequency was higher in the Kakuma sublocation. This frequency
                                 remained higher until about 2009, when there was an increase in
                                 arrivals from other villages in the control areas. Furthermore,
                                 in-migrants into the control cities from Kakuma are rare: out of the
                                 449 individuals who migrated into control cities, only 10 of them
                                 were from Kakuma.
 THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                     47




 Figure 3-6: In-Migrants Into Kakuma And Other Villages Over Time

                                Kernel density estimate
          .06




          .04
Density




          .02




           0
                1980     1990                2000             2010              2020
                        Year individual arrived from another village
                                Other villages                         Kakuma

 kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 2.4307




 The lakeshore subdistricts were among those that shrank or
 grew very slowly, and the fastest growing subdistricts were
 mostly located in the center of the country. Along the border
 with neighboring countries, population tended to stagnate, a situa-
 tion that may potentially be driven by security concerns. There
 was large growth in the northwest area and around Kakuma, as
 well in the southwest. There is no clear evidence that large popula-
 tions have moved away from the Kakuma area, as they might have
 if it were the case that the camp worsened local opportunities, nor
 is there any indication that households have flocked to the
 Kakuma subregion in order to take advantage of potential jobs
 provided within the refugee camp infrastructure. Population
 growth in general appears to occur more significantly along the
 main roads, outlined in red in figure 3-6.

 A smaller share of Kakuma household heads own small busi-
 nesses than that of counterfactual towns. Table 3-6 shows infor-
 mation from the registration survey conducted for the Hunger
 Safety Net Program (HSNP) in 2011. The table shows averages of
 household characteristics in the Kakuma location as compared to
 other locations within the Turkana region. The largest difference
 between Kakuma and other Turkana regions is the significantly
 smaller proportion of the population whose head of household
 declares themselves to be a small business owner as their main
 occupation. This does not mean, however, that small businesses
48                                                               The economics of encampment




     Table 3-6: Occupation Of Household Head, 2011

                                                (1)            (2)            (3)
                                              OTHER          KAKUMA      NORMALIZED
                                             TURKANA                     DIFFERENCE

         Household size                       4.672           4.091          -0.198
         Farmer/herder/charcoal gatherer      0.252           0.211          -0.068
         Small business owner                 0.133           0.043          -0.226
         Observations                        129476           9554          139030

     Source: HSNP 2011 data. The last column measures the diﬀerences across covariates in terms
     of standard deviations (normalized diﬀerences).


     Figure 3-7: Distribution Of Household Head Occupations, HSNP


     .5


     .4


     .3


     .2


     .1


     0
                          Other Turkana                                Kakuma

                                Ag/herder        Low skill            Medium skill

                                High skill       Undeﬁned


     Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations from HSNP data




     owner as their main occupation. This does not mean, however,
     that small businesses cannot provide secondary income to house-
     holds, as will be shown below.

     A larger share of Kakuma household heads work in low skill
     occupations than that of counterfactual towns. Figure 3-7
     shows a slightly different categorization of the HSNP occupational
     data: agricultural/herder, low skill (including charcoal production),
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                        49




medium skill jobs (including business ownership), and high skill
jobs (professional). There is also an extremely large category of
undefined jobs. The bar graph over Kakuma and non-Kakuma
locations of Turkana District show significantly fewer household
heads who declare agriculture or herding as their main occupa-
tion. There are also many more who state that they are employed
in a low skill sector, with somewhat fewer in medium skill occu-
pations. It is difficult to interpret these statistics, however, since
the majority of individuals in Kakuma do not declare an occupa-
tion at all.

A larger share of Kakuma households run a bodaboda (moto
taxi) and do manual labor than that of counterfactual towns.
Summary statistics of the household surveys show that households
in the Kakuma subsample are less likely to have claimed to own a
small enterprise. The households located closest to Kakuma, how-
ever, are significantly more likely to run a bodaboda service and
do manual labor, including firewood collection and loading, than
households at similar distances from the control towns (Table 3-7).

Interviews suggest a perception of being better off in Kakuma
due to work opportunities. There is a small amount of evidence
that this is the case when the enterprise data is examined. At the
individual level, the household surveys also collected information
on access to wage work. Summary statistics (Table 3-8) of the
survey data reveal little wage work in general – 15% of adults
between 15 and 60 in Kakuma, and around 9 percent in the coun-
terfactual towns. This difference is, however, marginally statisti-
cally significant. In Kakuma, around 30 percent of the wage jobs
are located in the camp, while obviously residents in other loca-
tions do not have this option. Wages appear to be slightly lower in
the Kakuma subsample, although the data is highly skewed, and
the sample is small. It also bears mentioning that while Kakuma
households are much less likely to have a member with secondary
education, they are more likely to have a household head with a bit
of primary or primary complete education.

Education improves the odds of finding a wage job in Kakuma
more than it does in other towns. Because education levels differ
between Turkana and other towns, the analysis should consider
the effects of having secondary education on wages. To do this, it
controls for a binary variable indicating that a household member
has secondary education while estimating the probability of a
family having a wage earner and the level of the wage. An interac-
tion term between education and Kakuma is also included to
examine if education levels have differential effects in the
Kakuma subsample. The estimation results show this to be the
50                                                                                      The economics of encampment




Table 3-7: The Eﬀect Of Camp Proximity On Enterprises




                                                                                         R/




                                                                                        E
                                                                              O BO




                                                                                   AD
                                                                                   CT
                                                A




                                                                                      )
                                                                                   TS
                                               D




                                                                            O A




                                                                                RU




                                                                                TR
                                             SE



                                            BO




                                                                                FI
                                                                         W LL
                                                                                 D
                                        RP AS




                                                                               ES




                                                                             RO
                                           RI




                                                                             ST
                                                              AL



                                                                      RE A
                                     TE ) H




                                                                            ED
                                          A




                                                                   FI NU




                                                                          (P
                                                                          N
                                         D




                                                            )S
                                  EN (1




                                                                         LL
                                       O




                                                                        O




                                                                        n
                                                           (3



                                                                       A




                                                                      KI
                                                                     )C
                                    )B




                                                                     )L
                                                                   )M




                                                                   )S




                                                                  (7
                                                                  (5
                                 (2




                                                                   (4




                                                                (6
a. Diﬀerence across subsamples

In Kakuma subsample              -0.1480***    0.0266      -0.1382       0.0934     -0.0246     -0.0529     -0.0973

                                  (0.0309)     (0.0316)    (0.1337)     (0.1355)    (0.0221)    (0.0806)    (0.3318)

N                                   330          210         210          210         210         210         131

r2                                  0.008       0.001       0.004        0.002       0.002       0.002         0

b. Averages by distance band and subsamples

Less than 2 km to town            0.4470***   0.0191***    0.4789***    0.2949***   0.0441***   0.1970***   9.2299***

                                  (0.0050)     (0.0061)    (0.0671)     (0.0877)    (0.0055)    (0.0546)    (0.2018)

Between 2 and 8 km from town      0.3543***   0.0391***    0.0391**     0.7113***   0.0391**    0.0391**    9.5531***

                                  (0.0096)     (0.0176)    (0.0176)     (0.0276)    (0.0176)    (0.0176)    (0.1815)

Between 8 and 10 km from town     0.4991***   0.0613***    0.1437**     0.6933***    0.0403      0.0202     8.4957***

                                  (0.0613)     (0.0086)    (0.0604)     (0.0432)    (0.0345)    (0.0173)    (0.3382)

Less than 2 km to Kakuma         -0.1393***   0.0620***    -0.2357**    0.1646*      -0.017     -0.0618      0.1881

                                  (0.0267)     (0.0243)    (0.0973)     (0.0923)    (0.0356)    (0.0994)    (0.2846)

Between 2 and 8 km to Kakuma     -0.1235***   -0.0391**     0.1147      -0.0959     -0.0391**   -0.0391**    -0.943

                                  (0.0130)     (0.0176)    (0.0725)     (0.0595)    (0.0176)    (0.0176)    (1.0153)

Between 8 and 10 km to Kakuma     -0.1491*    -0.0613***   -0.1437**    0.3067*     -0.0403     0.0909**    -1.6857

                                  (0.0697)     (0.0086)    (0.0604)     (0.1706)    (0.0345)    (0.0405)    (2.5996)

N                                   330          210         210          210         210         210         131

r2                                  0.305       0.079       0.132          0.4       0.027       0.107       0.957


*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p< .01. Outcome variables are binary indicators for whether or not a household has income
from a particular source. Columns (2)-(7) only include those with enterprise income. Column (7) is a continuous
variable that is the inverse hyperbolic sine of proﬁts (proﬁts can be negative).
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                            51




Table 3-8: Wage Earners And Wages

                                        WAGE EARNER IN FAMILY     Ln (WAGE LAST 12 MONTHS)

 In Kakuma subsample                     0.0460       0.0532*        -0.6441     -1.7004**
                                         (0.0389)     (0.0290)      (0.5226)      (0.6057)
 Member with secondary education                     0.1975***                   -0.9357*
                                                      (0.0551)                    (0.5081)
 Secondary school x Kakuma                           0.2471***                    1.3293*

                                                      (0.0702)                    (0.7512)
 N                                         330          330            37            37
 r2                                       0.001        0.213          0.005        0.013

Ordinary least squares regressions with standard errors clustered at the village level.
Observations weighted by probability of being sampled. *p<.10, **p<.05, *** p< .01.


case – in Kakuma, having a family member with secondary educa-
tion more than doubles the probability of having a wage earner in
the family, and the returns to secondary schooling are higher in
Kakuma than in the counterfactual towns. On average, however,
wages are significantly lower in Kakuma for households without
secondary education: a household in Kakuma without secondary
education has wages 72 percent lower than a household with
secondary education.10 Furthermore, the marginal effect of living
in Kakuma on wages, for households without secondary educa-
tion, is 81 percent. Clearly, the sample is small here and may be
substantially driven by outliers, so we suspect that the direction is
more accurate than the magnitude.

Overall, the empirical analysis suggests that refugees do not
compete with the Turkana for low skill jobs – and there is
proportionately more employment in low skill jobs near the
camp. There is some evidence that the camp provides some
employment opportunities, and that these opportunities show
good returns for individuals with above average levels of educa-
tion. However, it bears mentioning that these opportunities do not
appear to have had a large effect on secondary schooling among
current adults, and that the proliferation of street children seeking
work opportunities in the camp is thought to be one of the largest
problems facing the Turkana community at the moment.



10
   The marginal effect calculated here is for changing the dummy variable on house-
hold education times Kakuma from 1 to zero. The second marginal effect is for
changing the Kakuma variable from 0 to 1.
52                                                         The economics of encampment




     Figure 3-8: Per Capita Predicted Consumption And Distance To Camp

     7.6



     7.4



     7.2



     7.0



     6.8



     6.6
           -2                0                  2                  4                  6
                                     Ln (km to Kakuma camp)

                           95% Cl                   Inv hyp sine (Consumption)

     Notes: Figure shows a kernel regression of the HSNP predicted consumption measure on
     the log-transformed distance to Kakuma camp.


     Income and transfers

     In the absence of better ways to measure welfare, consump-
     tion and self-reported income provide reasonable approxima-
     tions. Previous sections highlighted both positive and negative
     effects of refugees on prices, economic activity, and jobs. The anal-
     ysis showed that while Turkana households near the camp are not
     more likely to have a wage earner, if they do have a wage earner
     with some education, they are likely to earn significantly more
     than similarly educated individuals in the counterfactual
     town—i.e. a town that did not experience an influx of refugees. On
     the other hand, those closer to the camp are likely to experience
     elevated meat prices, and an increasingly complex housing
     market. Given the complexity of these dynamics, the question
     remains of what the net effect of camp presence is on income of
     Turkana households. As income is not observable from indepen-
     dent data, the analysis in this section focuses on consumption
     habits and self-reported income to infer the effects of refugees on
     local communities, if any.

     From a spatial perspective, the HSNP consumption data
     suggests that refugees have a positive impact on host commu-
     nity consumption. Figure 3-8 shows the distribution of the HSNP
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                          53




predicted consumption measure across distance to Kakuma camp.
This measure was created with the HSNP registration data that
correlated household characteristics with census data on
consumption to generate predicted consumption. HSNP calls this a
PMT, or proxy means test, which represents the Kenya shillings
value of adult household consumption per capita based on
2005-2006 prices. The peak of the per capita consumption variable
occurs at about 5 km from the camp, and decreases from that point
outward with some variation.

Regression analysis confirms the positive effect of refugees on
host community consumption. Using a set of regressions, which
parallel those that were applied to livestock herd size from the
HSNP data, the analysis confirms the relationship in the figure 3-8.
These results are shown in Table 3-9. As with the livestock, estima-
tions first disregard precipitation, and then introduce it as a
control in subsequent columns. Consumption is found everywhere
in Turkana district to be lower than it is in the circle of households
within 5 kilometers of the camp. The point estimates suggest that
the consumption measures within 5 km of the camp are up to 35
percent higher than in other parts of the county.

Household surveys also show that those who live close to the
refugee camp tend to have higher income and assets. In order
to generate a proxy for cash income, the analysis sums up the
income categories contained in the household survey: wage
income, agricultural income, enterprise income, transfers, income
from animal sales, and other sources. Because only the value of
the most recent transfer is available, that number is multiplied by
the recorded frequency of transfers. Households were also asked
to indicate whether they owned particular durable assets, both in
2005 and in 2015. Income per capita and asset ownership by subsa-
mple are listed in Table 3-10. Cash income is higher in the Kakuma
subsample, and the difference is marginally significant. However,
given the variance in the data, this result should be treated with
caution. The medians in the data are slightly different – 980 in
Kakuma and 816 in the counterfactual towns – but the magnitude
is not large. The Turkana in general have very few of the durable
assets that are included in the survey – 40 percent of the sample
have none of the assets at all. The sum of the potential assets in the
Kakuma subregion is slightly higher than that of the counterfactu-
al towns, but this difference is not statistically significant. Similar-
ly, the increase in the number of these assets between 2005 and
2015 is slightly larger in Kakuma than in other sublocations, but
this difference is not statistically significant.

The analysis also reveals heterogeneity of the effects on
income. In light of simulation results, which showed differential
54                                                             The economics of encampment




     Table 3-9: Ordinary Least Squares Regressions Of Consumption
     Per Capita

                                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
      Ln (km to Kakuma camp)        -0.0352*       -0.0380**

                                    (0.0186)       (0.0171)
      Inverse km to Kakuma                                        0.1473***

                                                                   (0.0489)

      5-10 km                                                                    -0.3035***

                                                                                  (0.0554)

      11-25 km                                                                   -0.2981***

                                                                                  (0.0513)
      26-50 km                                                                   -0.2743***

                                                                                  (0.0566)
      51-100 km                                                                   -0.1404

                                                                                  (0.0866)
      101-150 km                                                                 -0.1658**

                                                                                  (0.0724)
      151-200 km                                                                 -0.3467***

                                                                                  (0.0626)
      > 201 km                                                                   -0.2825***

                                                                                  (0.0750)
      Ln (precipitation)                            -0.1264        -0.1218         -0.081
                                    138982         (0.1621)        (0.1622)       (0.1369)
      N                               0.006         137964         137964         136898
      r2                                             0.01           0.011          0.031


     *p<.10, **p<.05, *** p< .01. Ordinary least squares regression with standard errors
     clustered at district level. Dependent variable is log-transformed predicted consumption.


     effects of refugees on incomes in different sectors and skill groups,
     the analysis here also considers heterogeneity in income and
     consumption according to income sources available to the house-
     hold. To this effect, Table 3-11 introduces simple interaction terms
     into the estimates that test for differences in assets and purchases
     between the Kakuma subsample and the counterfactual towns.
     The table tests for differences in assets, cash income, and
     consumption indicators across households with different incomes
     sources: small enterprise, wage, agricultural and animal sales.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                                                                              55




Table 3-10: Cash Income And Assets, Household Survey

                                      MEAN               MEAN               P-VALUE                OBS             OBS
                                     KAKUMA           NON-KAKUMA              DIFF               KAKUMA        NON-KAKUMA

 Cash income per capita            12771.446           6450.240             0.056*                 111                 219

 Owned house 2005                       0.541            0.530               0.852                 111                 219

 Owned car 2005                         0.000            0.000                  .                  111                 219

 Owned motorcycle 2005                  0.027            0.014               0.393                 111                 219

 Owned bicycle 2005                     0.117            0.027              0.001***               111                 219

 Owned refrigerator 2005                0.000            0.000                  .                  111                 219

 Owned television 2005                  0.009            0.005               0.624                 111                 219

 Owned radio 2005                       0.117            0.082               0.306                 111                 219

 Owned cell phone 2005                  0.198            0.192               0.890                 111                 219

 Owned generator 2005                   0.000            0.000                  .                  111                 219

 Owned computer 2005                    0.000            0.005               0.477                 111                 219

 Owned camera 2005                      0.000            0.005               0.477                 111                 219

 Sum of assets 2005                     1.009            0.858               0.186                 111                 219

 Change assets 2005-2015                0.117            0.082               0.674                 111                 219


*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p< .01.




Table 3-11: Heterogeneity In Consumption And Assets
                                      AN ES RY


                                    CH SE AR
                                     AN SES D




                                             ES T
                                   CH ASE EA


                                          AS EA
                                          TA ER




                                 CH HA OO



                                  CH AS XU
                                  PU AN RIL
                                          AP SE



                                            AP E




                                          A G
                                           TS E




                                               L
                                        ES AS




                                        H ET
                                        PI E P




                                         H SU




                                        H M
                                         05 S




                                              S



                                  PU AN S
                                LU PU RI
                                        SE G




                                        H U
                                      D HA




                                             F
                                      20 SET




                                    AS AN




                                      RI CH




                                     RC E L




                                     RC GE
                                     RC GE




                                     RC NG
                                     CA M




                                     RC GE
                                    O C
                                        AS



                                       CO




                                  PU G
                                         R


                                   XU R
                                       CH




                                        S




                                  PU A
                                 FO PU
                                    IN




                                   CH




                                  PU




Small business
In Kakuma subsample              0.2440    0.8867     -0.1829    0.1663     0.0949     -0.5385**   0.0233 -0.1757** -0.1776** -0.1090*

                                (0.2114)   (0.8112)   (0.1140)   (0.3773)   (0.1431)   (0.2492)    (0.1198)   (0.0706)   (0.0788)   (0.0599)

Household owns small business   0.4492*** 4.2828*** -0.4237*     0.3387     0.2837*     0.1866     0.0515     0.0513     0.0080     0.0306

                                (0.0628)   (0.9063)   (0.2234)   (0.2082)   (0.1410)   (0.1291)    (0.0818)   (0.0526)   (0.0319)   (0.0313)

Has enterprise x Kakuma         -0.1832    -0.1007    0.3744     -0.0852    -0.0533    0.4822**    0.0242     0.2489*    0.1140* 0.0919**

                                (0.2196)   (1.1071)   (0.2546)   (0.3951)   (0.3111)   (0.2147)    (0.2147)   (0.1351)   (0.0569)   (0.0410)

N                                 330        330        330        330        330        330         330        330        330        330

r2                               0.016      0.204      0.008      0.006      0.016      0.064       0.002      0.093      0.023      0.024

Wage earner
In Kakuma subsample              0.0842    -0.0207    -0.0723    -0.0408    -0.0218    -0.3582     0.0283     -0.0841    -0.1467    -0.0439

                                (0.1829)   (0.5348)   (0.0659)   (0.2851)   (0.1238)   (0.2555)    (0.0879)   (0.0577)   (0.0858)   (0.0689)
                                                                                                     CH A S X
                                                                                         RI
                                                                                     ES A S




                                                                                                         H SU
                                                                                                             ES
                                                                                                        AN E S
                                                                                                         H U
                                                                                       AP
                                                                                   RI CH




                                                                                                       RC E L




                                                                                                          AS
                                                                                                       RC GE
                                                                                                     PU NG
                                                                                 XU R
                                                                               LU PU




                                                                                                       A



                                                                                                     PU
                                                                                                 CH
56                                                                                                          The economics of encampment
     Small business
     In Kakuma subsample              0.2440     0.8867     -0.1829    0.1663     0.0949     -0.5385**   0.0233 -0.1757** -0.1776** -0.1090*

                                      (0.2114)   (0.8112)   (0.1140)   (0.3773)   (0.1431)   (0.2492)    (0.1198)   (0.0706)   (0.0788)   (0.0599)

     Household owns small business   0.4492*** 4.2828*** -0.4237*      0.3387     0.2837*     0.1866     0.0515      0.0513    0.0080     0.0306
 Table 3-11: Heterogeneity In Consumption And Assets (continued)
                                      (0.0628)   (0.9063)   (0.2234)   (0.2082)   (0.1410)   (0.1291)    (0.0818)   (0.0526)   (0.0319)   (0.0313)

     Has enterprise x Kakuma          -0.1832    -0.1007    0.3744     -0.0852    -0.0533    0.4822**    0.0242     0.2489*    0.1140* 0.0919**




                                           AN ES RY


                                         CH SE AR
                                          AN SES D




                                                  ES T
                                        CH ASE EA


                                               AS EA
                                               TA ER




                                      CH HA OO



                                       CH AS XU
                                       PU AN RIL
                                               AP SE



                                                 AP E




                                               A G
                                      (0.2196)   (1.1071)   (0.2546)   (0.3951)   (0.3111)   (0.2147)    (0.2147)   (0.1351)   (0.0569)   (0.0410)




                                                TS E




                                                     L
                                             ES AS




                                             H T
                                             PI E P




                                             H SU




                                             H M
                                              05 S




                                                    S



                                       PU N S
                                     LU PU RI
                                             SE G




                                             H U
                                           D HA




                                                  F
                                           20 SET




                                                  E
                                         AS AN




                                           RI CH




                                          RC E L




                                          RC GE
                                          RC E




                                          RC G
                                          CA M




                                          RC GE
                                         O C




                                               G




                                              N
                                             AS



                                            CO




                                       PU G
                                              R


                                        XU R
                                            CH
                                        330        330        330        330        330        330         330        330        330        330




                                             S
     N




                                       PU A
                                      FO PU




                                           A
                                         IN




                                        CH




                                       PU
     r2                                0.016      0.204      0.008      0.006      0.016      0.064       0.002      0.093      0.023      0.024

     Wage earner
     In Kakuma subsample              0.0842     -0.0207    -0.0723    -0.0408    -0.0218    -0.3582     0.0283     -0.0841    -0.1467    -0.0439

                                      (0.1829)   (0.5348)   (0.0659)   (0.2851)   (0.1238)   (0.2555)    (0.0879)   (0.0577)   (0.0858)   (0.0689)

     Household had wages in past year 0.9294*** 5.2161*** -0.3492*** 0.8580*** 0.2720 0.5012*** 0.1394               0.0371    0.0308 0.1951***

                                      (0.2231)   (0.5982)   (0.0689)   (0.1519)   (0.1774)   (0.1202)    (0.1459)   (0.0603)   (0.0596)   (0.0423)

     Wage earner x Kakuma             -0.0008    0.0730     0.4756** 0.6117*      0.3070 -0.6096*** -0.0782 -0.1973*** -0.0082 -0.3395***

                                      (0.2655)   (0.6474)   (0.1873)   (0.3229)   (0.2514)   (0.1983)    (0.1487)   (0.0617)   (0.0912)   (0.0871)

     N                                  330        330        330        330        330        330         330        330        330        330

     r2                                0.099      0.201      0.006      0.103      0.057      0.011       0.001      0.021      0.009      0.024

     Sold animals
     In Kakuma subsample              0.0322     -0.1085    0.0375     0.0625     0.0529     -0.3466     -0.0202    -0.0793    -0.1058    -0.0968

                                      (0.2497)   (0.3849)   (0.0599)   (0.3840)   (0.1168)   (0.3272)    (0.0928)   (0.0743)   (0.1243)   (0.0655)

     Sold animals on market           -0.2851 2.8137*** 0.0809 -0.9190*** -0.0727            0.4548*     0.2216* 0.2414*** 0.2253*        0.0061

                                      (0.1655)   (0.1291)   (0.0627)   (0.2288)   (0.1126)   (0.2473)    (0.1051)   (0.0761)   (0.1224)   (0.0710)

     Sold animals x Kakuma            0.5504     0.2901 -0.2720*** 0.5358         -0.0368    -0.5780     0.0980     -0.2586*   -0.2840    0.0395

                                      (0.5445)   (0.5860)   (0.0801)   (0.4892)   (0.2005)   (0.3994)    (0.1158)   (0.1336)   (0.2511)   (0.0749)

     N                                  330        330        330        330        330        330         330        330        330        330

     r2                                0.012      0.089      0.012      0.012      0.003      0.012       0.034      0.008      0.013      0.006

     Sold farm products
     In Kakuma subsample              0.0956     -0.0831    -0.0232    0.0415     0.0080     -0.4058     0.0327     -0.1176** -0.1438*    -0.0825

                                      (0.1437)   (0.4670)   (0.0567)   (0.3488)   (0.1140)   (0.2643)    (0.1083)   (0.0458)   (0.0773)   (0.0729)

     Sold farm products in market    -0.9012*** 4.1709*** -0.1193*** -1.8514*** -0.6005*** 0.0355 -0.3061*** 0.6898*** -0.3180*** -0.1467***

                                      (0.0643)   (0.3043)   (0.0290)   (0.1191)   (0.0513)   (0.1025)    (0.0342)   (0.0304)   (0.0303)   (0.0153)

     Sold farm products x Kakuma     1.1047** -1.8936** 0.1808** 2.1883*** 0.8059*** -0.2086             0.2278 -0.6460*** 0.2930*** 0.1076

                                      (0.4056)   (0.6439)   (0.0810)   (0.3922)   (0.1655)   (0.1315)    (0.1738)   (0.1189)   (0.0443)   (0.0840)

     N                                  330        330        330        330        330        330         330        330        330        330

     r2                                0.005      0.032      0.001      0.005      0.007      0.011       0.001      0.007      0.009      0.005



 *p<.10, **p<.05, *** p< .01.
Sold animals
In Kakuma subsample                 0.0322    -0.1085    0.0375      0.0625     0.0529     -0.3466    -0.0202    -0.0793    -0.1058    -0.0968

                                   (0.2497)   (0.3849)   (0.0599)    (0.3840)   (0.1168)   (0.3272)   (0.0928)   (0.0743)   (0.1243)   (0.0655)

THE          on market OF HOSTING
      ECONOMICS
Sold animals                        REFUGEES
                              -0.2851 2.8137*** 0.0809              -0.9190*** -0.0727     0.4548*    0.2216* 0.2414*** 0.2253*        0.0061     57

                                   (0.1655)   (0.1291)   (0.0627)    (0.2288)   (0.1126)   (0.2473)   (0.1051)   (0.0761)   (0.1224)   (0.0710)

Sold animals x Kakuma               0.5504    0.2901 -0.2720*** 0.5358          -0.0368    -0.5780    0.0980     -0.2586*   -0.2840    0.0395

                                   (0.5445)   (0.5860)   (0.0801)    (0.4892)   (0.2005)   (0.3994)   (0.1158)   (0.1336)   (0.2511)   (0.0749)

Whereas
 N               wage earning        330 and    330 farming
                                                          330         households
                                                                     330        330      330of Kakuma
                                                                                                  330       330        330        330
have
 r2
          observed         a  growth       in   their    assets       in  the     last  decade,       those
                                    0.012      0.089     0.012      0.012      0.003    0.012    0.034     0.008      0.013      0.006
who sell animals have observed a decrease. In terms of assets
 Sold farm
both      wageproducts
                    earning and business-owning households had higher
asset
 In Kakumalevels
            subsamplein 2005 as        well
                                   0.0956       as higher
                                             -0.0831   -0.0232 income
                                                                   0.0415        per capita,
                                                                              0.0080               as com-
                                                                                       -0.4058 0.0327    -0.1176** -0.1438* -0.0825
pared to others. Households                         with     farm      income        also    had    signifi-
                                  (0.1437) (0.4670) (0.0567) (0.3488) (0.1140) (0.2643) (0.1083) (0.0458) (0.0773) (0.0729)
cantly higher assets, but they also had higher asset growth since
 Sold farm products in market    -0.9012*** 4.1709*** -0.1193*** -1.8514*** -0.6005*** 0.0355 -0.3061*** 0.6898*** -0.3180*** -0.1467***
then. While wage earning                      households also have had significantly
higher asset growth                   in Kakuma
                                  (0.0643)                   than
                                             (0.3043) (0.0290)                 other(0.1025)
                                                                        in (0.0513)
                                                                  (0.1191)                places,     those
                                                                                                (0.0342)  (0.0304) (0.0303) (0.0153)

engaged        in x
 Sold farm products animal
                      Kakuma    sales    in   Kakuma          have      had      significant      decreas-
                                  1.1047** -1.8936** 0.1808** 2.1883*** 0.8059*** -0.2086 0.2278 -0.6460*** 0.2930*** 0.1076
es. Given that the average                     baseline measure of assets outside of
                                  (0.4056) (0.6439) (0.0810) (0.3922) (0.1655) (0.1315) (0.1738) (0.1189) (0.0443) (0.0840)
Kakuma is 0.05, the magnitude of the measured impacts is quite
 N                                   330        330       330        330        330      330      330       330        330        330
large      (.47 for wage earners).                   However,            in practical         terms,     this
implies
 r2           a difference of         one asset.
                                    0.005      0.032     0.001      0.005      0.007    0.011    0.001     0.007      0.009      0.005



A temporary
*p<.10, **p<.05, ***cash shock that hit the camp in 2015 reveals
                           flow
                     p< .01.
the heterogeneity of exposure to the camp among the locals.
Following the Garissa University attacks in April 2015, all informal
money transfer systems were shut down for security reasons, but
were then allowed to resume operations in June. During this time,
45 percent of refugees reported that the frequency of their trans-
fers had decreased either slightly or significantly (see Box 3-1 for
more detail on refugee transfers). In the meantime, small enter-
prise households in Kakuma had increases in the number of food
purchases and in quantities purchased of measured food items –
indicating that they were buffered from the cash flow shock that
hit the camp. Wage earning households, on the other hand, were
not – they had decreases in food purchases and in quantities of all
food items in Kakuma. Animal-selling households had decreases in
the number of food items purchased and in the amount of sugar,
perhaps indicating that sales of animals are in response to distress
rather than market signals. Finally, Kakuma farm households
show mixed results on consumption – no significant effects on
number of goods purchased between April and June, but decreas-
es in sugar, and increases in tea purchases. In conclusion, business
owners and households engaged in farm sales seem to have been
buffered from the negative effects of being near Kakuma town
between April and June, while wage earning and livestock-selling
households seem to have suffered more from the effects of being
near Kakuma.
58                                                  The economics of encampment




     Box 3-1: Remittances To Refugees

     Remittances received by refugees are an important source of
     purchasing power for both refugees and locals. Given the legal
     restrictions on refugees working outside of the camp, the majority of
     the camp population relies heavily on sales of food aid and remittanc-
     es from relatives outside of the camp in order to survive. This large
     infusion of cash has the potential to strongly impact the local econo-
     my – one that has not historically been highly monetized. The majori-
     ty of the refugees in the household survey reported having received
     a transfer in the last 12 months (61%).

     A variety of formal and informal transfer systems have been operat-
     ing in the camp. These include formal systems, such as Moneygram,
     Western Union, and transfers from relatives through MPesa, as well
     as the transport of cash from Nairobi in suitcases. Only a minority
     (21%) of the transfers take place through formal services. There is
     also a small number of very active informal brokerages. All of these
     were owned by Somalis and, with the exception of Dahabshil, which
     started in 1989, most began in the mid-2000s. For most of the time
     since then, there were ﬁve main operators. There is an additional
     South Sudanese broker who has recently begun operation in the
     camp. This operator claimed to transfer around $75,000 USD per
     month in early 2015. Note that if these reports are accurate, informal
     transfers through these brokers total over 3 million USD per year.
     These dealers also operate other businesses including shops, whole-
     sale businesses, and others. They bring food items, non-food items,
     technology, communications and other services in the Kakuma area.
     They also occasionally oﬀer credit services, but only to Muslims.

     The importance of these remittances for both refugees and locals
     alike became clearer after the tragic Garissa University attacks. After
     April, 2015, when the attacks occurred, all informal transfer systems
     were shut down for security reasons, but were allowed to resume
     operations in June. During this time, 45 percent of refugees report-
     ed that the frequency of their transfers has decreased either slightly
     or signiﬁcantly.

     Appendix C provides an analysis of how this interruption aﬀected the
     consumption of refugees and locals. Anecdotally, refugees reported
     that the temporary shutdown of the informal transfer systems was
     detrimental to their ability to obtain cash. However, the impacts on
     short -term purchases seem not to have been particularly large, a fact
     that probably reﬂects some oﬀsetting mechanisms like alternative
     channels of transfers that are more costly, or relying on small assets
     for consumption smoothing.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                         59




 The Turkana, on the other hand, do not depend heavily on cash trans-
 fers, but potentially do depend on the cash economy generated by
 the refugee transfers. The data show larger decreases in the number
 and quantity of food items purchased by Turkana households near
 the camp between April and June of 2015, both illustrating the
 dependence of the local economy on refugee cash transfers, as well
 as the negative impact of the shutdown of refugee transfer networks
 during those months on both refugees and the Turkana.


Overall, there is some empirical evidence that those living in
the Kakuma subsample have higher income and consumption
than those living in the counterfactual areas. However, the
measured difference across income and asset variables is not
particularly large, nor is it statistically different from zero. House-
holds with access to small businesses and farm income appear to
be better-buffered from short-term shocks, while wage-earner and
animal-selling households suffer more from them. Farming house-
holds and wage-earners also have higher long-term asset growth
in Kakuma than in other towns.

3.3. Discussion

The results from simulations and estimations serve different
purposes, and by doing so, complement each other. It is import-
ant to note that simulations and empirical analysis that have been
presented in this chapter capture different dynamics. In particu-
lar, the simulations starkly separate short and long-term effects of
large shifts in the refugee population. However, in reality, refu-
gees have arrived (and left) continuously over the past 20 years,
thus their impacts at any given moment are the accumulation of
these short and long-term dynamics. The field data is comprised of
both cross-sectional household surveys and some longer panels of
prices. The price estimations use only monthly variation, and thus
capture short-term effects. The comparisons across different
subsets of villages are likely to capture long-term equilibria,
though they may be affected by recent, less substantial variation
in refugee populations. In addition, the simulations require that
markets clear. In reality, markets for non-tradables are very thin,
and often function according to traditional norms rather than
market signals.

Comparing the simulation results and empirical evidence is
rewarding. Simulations provide a very useful benchmark in
showing “what would happen under such circumstances.” By
doing so, it also enables us to identify “unexpected” empirical find-
ings, and investigate why they deviate from our predictions.
60                                                The economics of encampment




     Both simulations and empirical analysis suggest increased
     economic activity near the camp after refugee arrival. Simula-
     tions predicted an increase in economic activity in the region
     where the camp is located. This increase comes with increases in
     employment in the non-tradable sector relative to the tradable
     sector in the long-term. The empirical analyses generally support
     these predictions. We observe an increase in economic activity
     near the camp, and small but positive wealth effects driven by
     employment and production opportunities.

     Simulations predict a migration towards the camp from other
     regions; empirical analysis finds only limited support for this
     prediction. Simulations predicted that Kenyans from other
     regions migrate towards the refugee camp to take advantage of
     increased economic opportunities. Empirical analysis shows that
     there has been some small amount of migration towards Kakuma.
     However, we find that this migration did not come from other
     counties in Kenya, but rather from other villages within Turkana.
     This highlights a possible feature outside the scope of the model:
     Turkana County is considered a remote and inhospitable region
     by most Kenyans, and therefore migration to it comes with a
     substantial cost.

     Neither simulations, nor empirics could identify major effects
     on the rest of Kenya. Simulations showed that the impacts of
     refugees on the rest of Kenya would remain minimal. The data
     that we collected do not shed light on the impacts of the refugees
     on the rest of Kenya. Indeed, this is most certainly not empirically
     identifiable. However, the fact that many of the impacts of the
     camp are highly localized suggests that it is unlikely that camp
     impacts spread far enough from Kakuma to leave the boundaries
     of Turkana county.

     Simulations sharply separated short-term and long-term price
     effects; empirical analyses could not analyze prices in
     long-term. Simulations predicted short-term price increases in
     both tradable and non-tradable goods, with a permanent increase
     in the prices of non-tradables. Price analysis for non-tradable
     goods is not possible with the existing data, and therefore there is
     no empirical analysis to compare with the simulation data.
     Furthermore, the main non-tradable market for which data collec-
     tion was attempted – the housing market – is not yet developed
     enough to generable reliable signals. The empirical results do
     show responsiveness of livestock prices to refugee population
     shocks in the short-term, but the series is of insufficient length to
     examine longer-term impacts.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                      61




Simulations separated the impacts by skill group; limitations
in data forced us to leave this analysis for the future. Because
of the scarcity of skilled labor in the Turkana population, larger
sample sizes will be needed to detect heterogeneous impacts by
skill group. Overall, the labor market is a key area for interaction
of refugees with hosts, and there is scope for more specialized
inquiries in the future. An open question is what refugees would
choose to do were they allowed free mobility. This is not answer-
able with the data at hand, and under the constraints of Kenya’s
current refugee policy. The simulations in the remainder of this
report analyze this question. In the future, it would be informative
to pilot free movement permits for refugees in order to under-
stand how they might move through Kenya’s labor market, and
compare the findings with our simulation results.

Collection of better data is crucial to understanding the effects
of refugees on the host community. Food and livestock markets
are another key arena in which refugees interact with hosts. The
current data are not of sufficiently high quality to elucidate the
true impact of these interactions. For example, the closest market
to Kakuma on which livestock data is available is Lodwar. This
market is clearly affected by events in Kakuma, but the true
impacts on the local population can only be measured with high
frequency (monthly, at a minimum) price data from multiple mar-
kets in Turkana and surrounding counties, which does not
currently exist.
Turkana Girl © Harun Onder, Lodwar 2016
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                        63




                         4. Beyond encampment:
                            what are the options?



I
   s encampment the best option for settling refugees? The
   analysis has so far shown that the refugee arrivals have a net
   positive effect on the host community in aggregate, but this
effect is unevenly distributed. The discussion highlighted that both
the scale and the distribution of these effects are shaped by policy
choices and the institutional environment. The settlement choice
for refugees, e.g. encampment vs. integration, plays a particularly
important role in determining the pace, distribution, and magni-
tude of those effects. In addition, the rules that regulate the inter-
actions between the refugees and the host community, the degree
of market development in the host region, and the connectivity of
the host region could also influence the magnitude of economic
costs and benefits that arise from refugee arrival.

In this chapter, we will provide a forward-looking comparison
among alternative options. The analysis will first simulate the
implications of alternative refugee settlement policies. Starting
from the status quo, which is an encampment scenario, alternative
integration options will be compared in terms of their transitory
and permanent effects on host community welfare. Next, the focus
will be switched to a discussion on how different institutional
factors like market development, transportation costs, and mecha-
nisms of aid distribution could affect the impact of refugees on
host community welfare in such integration scenarios.

4.1. Settlement scenarios

This section discusses the outcomes of alternative policies
regarding refugee settlements. The analysis starts from the
status quo, where all refugees are settled in the camp, have no
legal permits for work outside the camp, receive some transfers in
the form of international aid and remittances, and consume both
tradable and non-tradable goods in Turkana. Next, in order to
64                                      Beyond encampment: what are the options?




     assess the extent to which overall effects of the refugee presence
     on host community welfare would change, simulations of alterna-
     tive settlement policies are employed. To this effect, three scenari-
     os will be used to demonstrate the implications of alternative
     policies for aggregate economic activity, employment, wages and
     incomes of host community members residing both in Turkana
     and in the rest of Kenya. These scenarios are the following:

     • Partial integration scenario (PIS): only skilled refugees are
       allowed to work outside the camp, they can move to any location
       in Kenya; unskilled refugees remain in the camp; both refugee
       types continue to receive the same levels of aid and remittances.

     • Complete integration scenario (CIS): all refugees are granted
       legal permits to live and work anywhere in Kenya; they continue
       to receive the same transfers.

     • Decampment scenario (DS): the camp is shut down, and all
       refugees are repatriated back home or on to another country.

     In all cases, the shift in refugee settlement policy should affect
     incomes and employment in both Turkana and the rest of
     Kenya. Refugees constitute approximately one fifth of Turkana’s
     population. Therefore, their integration into the work force could
     create major ripple effects, especially through labor markets in the
     case of CIS. The immediate effects should be significant for Turka-
     na, especially in the short-term. As people respond to changes in
     prices and income “with their feet”, e.g. they relocate to other
     regions or sectors, therefore, the effects should gradually be
     absorbed by the rest of Kenya and, thus, be diffused over time.

     Unlike Turkana, the effects of alternative settlement scenarios
     are likely to be small for the rest of Kenya. As the entire refugee
     population from the Kakuma Camp constitutes less than half a
     percent of the Kenyan population, the fully diffused effects are
     likely to be small. The most important effects are likely to be
     observed in Turkana during the transition phase. In other words,
     in these policy experiments, most of the impact should be concen-
     trated spatially (around the camp) and temporally (dynamics of
     transition). This likely outcome once again emphasizes the need
     for an approach that focuses both on equilibrium outcomes and
     the dynamics of transition.

     With partial integration (PIS), skilled locals of Turkana are
     crowded out in the short-term, but not much so in the
     long-term. Our simulations show that, with the addition of skilled
     refugees into the labor force, the employment of skilled locals
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                       65




decreases initially in both tradable and non-tradable sectors
(Figure 4-1). At their peak, these reductions are 6.4 percent and 5.5
percent, respectively. In the long-term, however, most of these
reductions are undone, and while there remains a 0.9 percent loss
in the employment of locals in the non-tradable sector, there is a
0.7 percent gain in the tradable sector. In comparison, PIS has a
small and heterogeneous effect on the employment of unskilled
locals. Following partial integration, the employment of unskilled
workers in the tradable sector shows a monotonic but small
increase; by the end of the projection horizon, there is a 0.9
percent gain. In comparison, the employment of unskilled locals in
non-tradable sector first increases by 1.3 percent, but then
decreases by 0.9 percent in the long-term.

Complete integration leads to crowding out of both skill-types.
With the inclusion of all refugees into the job market, 4 percent of
the skilled locals in the tradable sector and 8.5 percent of them in
the non-tradable sector relocate in the short-term. In comparison,
about 8.9 percent and 7.1 percent of the unskilled refugees in the
same sectors, respectively, do the same. In the long-term, however,
these shocks are partially mitigated in the non-tradable sector and
reversed in tradable sector. In the non-tradable sector, the net
decrease in the employment of unskilled locals fall back to 5.8
percent, and that of skilled locals drop to 6.6 percent. In tradable
sector, the employment of both skilled and unskilled workers
recovers and increases by 7 and 6 percent, respectively.

4.2. Results

Participation of refugees in the labor force affects locals’
welfare through both supply and demand channels. Integration
of refugees increases both the labor supply and refugees’ purchas-
ing power. Whereas the former are likely to push wages down, the
latter could increase them by pushing prices up. Overall, the mag-
nitude of these effects vary by sector and by integration scenarios,
thus, the net effects on prices, income and employment are also
case specific.

Demand side effects are particularly important in the decamp-
ment scenario (DS). In PIS and CIS, integration boosts refugees’
demand for goods and services. This puts pressure on non-trad-
able goods prices. However, the pressure is counteracted by
increasing labor supply, which reduces wages. The net effect is
ambiguous. In contrast, when refugees are sent back home or to
onto others countries, there is a negative demand shock and no
effect on the supply side. Therefore, the prices of non-tradable
goods should plummet in the short-term with no ambiguity.
66                                                                                      Beyond encampment: what are the options?




Figure 4-1: Employment Dynamics In Turkana Under Diﬀerent Settlement Scenarios


                        TRADABLE SECTOR                                                 NON-TRADABLE SECTOR
                         Tradable Sector - PIS                                            Non-Tradable Sector - PIS
                          (Partial Integration)                                             (Partial Integration)
             0.40                                                            0.75

             0.35                                                            0.70
Employment




                                                                Employment
             0.30                                                            0.65

             0.25                                                            0.60

             0.20                                                            0.55

             0.15                                                            0.50
                    0   5          10           15   20   25                        0      5        10           15    20        25
                                        Years                                                            Years

                          Tradable Sector - CIS                                           Non-Tradable Sector - CIS
                         (Complete Integration)                                            (Complete Integration)
             0.40                                                            0.85
                                                                             0.80
             0.35
                                                                             0.75
Employment




                                                                Employment




             0.30                                                            0.70

             0.25                                                            0.65
                                                                             0.60
             0.20
                                                                             0.55
             0.15                                                            0.50
                    0   5          10           15   20   25                        0      5        10           15    20        25
                                        Years                                                            Years

                            Tradable Sector - DS                                          Non-Tradable Sector - DS
                               (Decampment)                                                   (Decampment)
             0.40                                                            0.75

             0.35                                                            0.70
Employment




                                                                Employment




             0.30                                                            0.65

             0.25                                                            0.60

             0.20                                                            0.55

             0.15                                                            0.50
                    0   5          10           15   20   25                        0      5        10           15    20        25
                                        Years                                                            Years



                               Unskilled Local                 Skilled Local                                 Unskilled Refugee
                               Skilled Refugee                 Total Employment
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                         67




Aggregate eﬀects

Integrating refugees diffuses economic activity across Kenya,
especially under the CIS. In the short-term, the integration of
refugees creates a temporary boom in Turkana’s economy under
both scenarios (Tables 4-1 and 4-2). However, as both refugees and
locals move to other regions pursuing higher wages, Turkana’s
GRP decreases by 0.4 percent in PIS and 2.9 percent in CIS in the
long-term. In both cases, the fall in economic activity is driven by
a shrinking non-tradable sector. As labor moves out to other
regions, local demand for non-tradables decreases, forcing a
decrease in production. In the meantime, other regions in Kenya
enjoy increases in economic activity by an average of 0.1 percent
in PIS and 0.4 percent in CIS.

Non-tradable prices surge temporarily with integration, and
collapse with decampment; they settle in long-term lows in all
cases. Tables 4-1, 4-2, and 4-3 show the price dynamics under
different refugee settlement scenarios. With PIS, the price of
non-tradables in Turkana increases by 2.3 percent before stabiliz-
ing at 1 percent below the integration level. In comparison, the CIS
generates higher increases at 7.1 percent before settling at -6.3
percent. The initial surge in these prices come from the fact that
with more purchasing power, refugees consume more, which
creates a demand shock, which is absent in the case of decamp-
ment scenario. Overtime, however, with gradual reallocation of
labor, the pressure is eased, and prices fall back to levels lower
than before the integration. This follows from the fact that some
refugees, who were consuming both tradable and non-tradable
goods while in camp, move to other regions. Under the decamp-
ment, with complete loss of demand generated by the refugees,
relative prices fall by 10.3 percent initially, but are stabilized at a
6.5 percent decrease after long-term adjustments.

Despite a small reduction in the long-term, integration boosts
per capita income in Turkana during the transition. Although
integration diffuse economic activity, transition generates higher
GRI per local person (GRIplp) in Turkana. In the case of PIS, the
GRIplp rises by 1.6 percent following the integration, which gradu-
ally goes back to initial levels in the long-term. In comparison, CIS
leads to a greater increase in GRIplp, 9.4 percent. This also converg-
es back to zero in the medium term and to a small negative effect in
the long-term. Thus, in both cases, although permanent effects on
GRIplp are small in Turkana, there are substantial transitory gains
for about 25 years during the run up to a new equilibrium.
68                                                                   Beyond encampment: what are the options?




     Table 4-1: Simulation Results: Macroeconomic Eﬀects Under Partial Integration Scenario
     (PIS)




                                                      N
                                                     O
                                           TE ON




                                                    S


                                                    S


                                                    S


                                                    S


                                                    S
                                                TI E


                                              AR TI



                                                   S


                                                 AR


                                                 AR


                                                 AR


                                                 AR


                                                 AR
                                             RA R




                                                AR
                                           YE R A
                                           G O




                                              YE


                                              YE


                                              YE


                                              YE


                                              YE
                                        TE EF




                                             YE
                                              G
                                      IN B




                                            0


                                            5


                                            0


                                            0


                                            0
                                          +5


                                         +1


                                         +1


                                         +2


                                         +3


                                         +5
                                        IN
                                                       (Percentage change from initial equilibrium

      TURKANA
      Gross Regional Product (GRP)        0.0      4.7      0.1      -0.3      -0.4     -0.4         -0.4   -0.4

      Tradable                            0.0      6.9      1.2       1.1      1.1       1.2         1.2    1.2

      Non-tradable                        0.0      4.0      -0.3     -0.7      -0.8     -0.9         -0.9   -0.9

      Employment (locals only)            0.0      -0.8     -1.2     -0.8      -0.6     -0.5         -0.4   -0.4

      Tradable                            0.0      -1.6     -1.1      0.0      0.5       0.8         0.9    0.9

      Non-tradable                        0.0      -0.5     -1.2     -1.1      -1.0     -0.9         -0.9   -0.9

      Gross Regional Income (GRI)         0.0      0.8      -1.6     -1.1      -0.7     -0.6         -0.5   -0.5

      GRI per local person (GRIplp)       0.0      1.6      -0.5     -0.3      -0.2     -0.1         -0.1   -0.1

      Non-tradable prices                 0.0      2.3      -0.6     -0.8      -0.9     -0.9         -1.0   -1.0

      REST OF KENYA
      Gross Regional Product (GRP)        0.0      0.0      0.1       0.1      0.1       0.1         0.1    0.1

      Tradable                            0.0      0.0      0.1       0.1      0.1       0.1         0.1    0.1

      Non-tradable                        0.0      0.0      0.1       0.1      0.1       0.1         0.1    0.1

      Employment (locals only)            0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0         0.0    0.0

      Tradable                            0.0      0.0      0.0      -0.1      -0.1     -0.1         -0.1   -0.1

      Non-tradable                        0.0      0.0      0.0       0.1      0.0       0.0         0.0    0.0

      Gross Regional Income (GRI)         0.0      0.0      0.1       0.0      0.0       0.0         0.0    0.0

      GRI per local person                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0         0.0    0.0

      Non-tradable prices                 0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0         0.0    0.0

     Notes: Gross Regional Income (GRI) is deﬁned as Gross Regional Product minus the wage bill of refugees.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                                            69




Table 4-2: Simulation Results: Macroeconomic Eﬀects Under Complete Integration Scenario
(CIS)




                                                 N
                                                O
                                      TE ON




                                               S


                                               S


                                               S


                                               S


                                               S
                                           TI E


                                         AR TI



                                              S


                                            AR


                                            AR


                                            AR


                                            AR


                                            AR
                                        RA R




                                           AR
                                      YE R A
                                      G O




                                         YE


                                         YE


                                         YE


                                         YE


                                         YE
                                   TE EF




                                        YE
                                         G
                                 IN B




                                       0


                                       5


                                       0


                                       0


                                       0
                                     +5


                                    +1


                                    +1


                                    +2


                                    +3


                                    +5
                                   IN
                                                 (Percentage change from initial equilibrium

 TURKANA
 Gross Regional Product (GRP)        0.0     15.1      0.3      -2.1     -2.7      -2.8        -2.9   -2.9

 Tradable                            0.0     21.6      7.4      7.0       7.4      7.7         7.8    7.9

 Non-tradable                        0.0     12.9     -2.0      -5.1     -6.0      -6.3        -6.4   -6.5

 Employment (locals only)            0.0      -3.6    -7.0      -5.2     -3.9      -3.3        -2.9   -2.8

 Tradable                            0.0      -6.5    -6.3      0.2       3.6      5.1         6.0    6.2

 Non-tradable                        0.0      -2.6    -7.2      -7.0     -6.5      -6.2        -6.0   -6.0

 Gross Regional Income (GRI)         0.0      2.3     -5.3      -4.7     -3.9      -3.6        -3.3   -3.3

 GRI per local person (GRIplp)       0.0      6.1      1.9      0.5       0.0      -0.3        -0.4   -0.5

 Non-tradable prices                 0.0      7.1     -3.5      -5.3     -5.9      -6.1        -6.3   -6.3

 REST OF KENYA
 Gross Regional Product (GRP)        0.0      0.0      0.4      0.4       0.4      0.4         0.4    0.4

 Tradable                            0.0      0.0      0.3      0.3       0.2      0.2         0.2    0.2

 Non-tradable                        0.0      0.0      0.4      0.5       0.5      0.5         0.5    0.5

 Employment (locals only)            0.0      0.1      0.2      0.1       0.1      0.1         0.1    0.1

 Tradable                            0.0      0.1      0.0      -0.3     -0.4      -0.4        -0.5   -0.4

 Non-tradable                        0.0      0.1      0.3      0.3       0.3      0.3         0.3    0.3

 Gross Regional Income (GRI)         0.0      0.0      0.2      0.1       0.1      0.1         0.1    0.1

 GRI per local person                0.0      -0.1     0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0    0.0

 Non-tradable prices                 0.0      0.0      0.2      0.2       0.2      0.2         0.2    0.2

Notes: Gross Regional Income (GRI) is deﬁned as Gross Regional Product minus the wage bill of refugees.
70                                                                   Beyond encampment: what are the options?




 Table 4-3: Simulation Results: Macroeconomic Eﬀects Under Decampment Scenario (DS)




                                                     N
                                                    O
                                          TE ON




                                                   S


                                                   S


                                                   S


                                                   S


                                                   S
                                               TI E


                                             AR TI



                                                  S


                                                AR


                                                AR


                                                AR


                                                AR


                                                AR
                                            RA R




                                               AR
                                          YE R A
                                          G O




                                             YE


                                             YE


                                             YE


                                             YE


                                             YE
                                       TE EF




                                            YE
                                             G
                                     IN B




                                           0


                                           5


                                           0


                                           0


                                           0
                                         +5


                                        +1


                                        +1


                                        +2


                                        +3


                                        +5
                                       IN
                                                    (Percentage change from initial equilibrium

     TURKANA
     Gross Regional Product (GRP)      0.0      15.1      0.3      -2.1     -2.7      -2.8        -2.9   -2.9

     Tradable                          0.0      21.6      7.4      7.0       7.4      7.7         7.8    7.9

     Non-tradable                      0.0      12.9     -2.0      -5.1     -6.0      -6.3        -6.4   -6.5

     Employment (locals only)          0.0      -3.6     -7.0      -5.2     -3.9      -3.3        -2.9   -2.8

     Tradable                          0.0      -6.5     -6.3      0.2       3.6      5.1         6.0    6.2

     Non-tradable                      0.0      -2.6     -7.2      -7.0     -6.5      -6.2        -6.0   -6.0

     Gross Regional Income (GRI)       0.0       2.3     -5.3      -4.7     -3.9      -3.6        -3.3   -3.3

     GRI per local person (GRIplp)     0.0       6.1      1.9      0.5       0.0      -0.3        -0.4   -0.5

     Non-tradable prices               0.0       7.1     -3.5      -5.3     -5.9      -6.1        -6.3   -6.3

     REST OF KENYA
     Gross Regional Product (GRP)      0.0       0.0      0.4      0.4       0.4      0.4         0.4    0.4

     Tradable                          0.0       0.0      0.3      0.3       0.2      0.2         0.2    0.2

     Non-tradable                      0.0       0.0      0.4      0.5       0.5      0.5         0.5    0.5

     Employment (locals only)          0.0       0.1      0.2      0.1       0.1      0.1         0.1    0.1

     Tradable                          0.0       0.1      0.0      -0.3     -0.4      -0.4        -0.5   -0.4

     Non-tradable                      0.0       0.1      0.3      0.3       0.3      0.3         0.3    0.3

     Gross Regional Income (GRI)       0.0       0.0      0.2      0.1       0.1      0.1         0.1    0.1

     GRI per local person              0.0      -0.1      0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0    0.0

     Non-tradable prices               0.0       0.0      0.2      0.2       0.2      0.2         0.2    0.2

 Notes: Gross Regional Income (GRI) is deﬁned as Gross Regional Product minus the wage bill of refugees. In the
 case of decampment, since no refugees work before the decampment or after it, both concepts are equivalent.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                        71




CIS diffuses the effects of refugees on host communities more
aggressively than PIS. A comparison of tables 4-1 and 4-2 shows
that, although the signs of aggregate effects are similar in different
integration scenarios, the complete integration scenario brings out
more pronounced effects in magnitude. This is true in both transi-
tion dynamics and the long-term outcomes.

Decampment leads to permanent income loss in Turkana.
Shutting down the camp imposes a negative demand shock in
Turkana economy. As a result, the GRP decreases by 3.3 percent
permanently. With labor moving out to other regions, the GRIplp
initially decreases by 1.4 percent, and then stabilizes on a 0.5
percent loss in the long-term.

In Turkana, decampment and CIS have interestingly similar
effects on long-term incomes; yet, getting there is painful in
the former and gainful in the latter. Under both scenarios, the
GRP decrease significantly (-3.3 percent in DS, -2.9 percent in CIS)
and GRIplp registers a small decrease (both -0.5 percent) decades
after the shift in settlement policy. However, whereas decamp-
ment decreases GRP even in the short-term (by 2.6 percent), CIS
increases it substantially (up to 15.1 percent) with refugees joining
the labor force at local level first. A similar outcome is also
observed in per capita incomes of locals. Decampment decreases
the GRIplp even in the short-term (-1.4 percent) and CIS increases
it (up to 6.1 percent) before both scenarios converge. In the latter
case, the positive effect lasts for more than a decade, albeit at a
decreasing level.

The effects of the integration scenarios on the prices in the rest
of Kenya are positive but insignificant. As labor movement out
of Turkana is small compared to the rest of Kenya’s population, the
prices of non-tradable goods in the rest of Kenya are only
increased by less than half a percent.

Distributional eﬀects

Skill compositions of refugees and locals matters in integra-
tion scenarios. Participation of refugees in the labor force
increases the labor supply. How this affects local real wages
depends on the skill composition of refugees who join the labor
force. When only skilled refugees work, as in the case of the PIS,
they increase productivity and wages of unskilled workers. This
follows from the fact that these two types of workers are imperfect
substitutes in production. At the same time, they reduce the wages
of skilled workers, because they are perfect substitutes. When all
refugees join the labor force, both channels are operative for all
skill groups. Therefore, the net effects could vary by sector.
72                                                                             Beyond encampment: what are the options?




Figure 4-2: The Eﬀects Of Alternative Integration Policies On Real
Wages And Incomes In Turkana

                   TRADABLE SECTOR                                            NON-TRADABLE SECTOR
                    Skilled Wages (Tradable)                                    Skilled Wages (Non-tradable)
        1.50                                                       1.40
                                                                   1.38
        1.40
                                                                   1.36
Price




                                                           Price
        1.30                                                       1.34
                                                                   1.32
        1.20
                                                                   1.30
        1.10                                                       1.28
               0    5        10             15   20   25                  0        5       10           15       20   25
                                  Years                                                         Years


                   Unskilled Wages (Tradable)                                  Unskilled Wages (Non-tradable)
        0.54                                                       0.55
        0.52
                                                                   0.54
        0.50
        0.48                                                       0.53
Price




                                                           Price




        0.46                                                       0.52
        0.44
                                                                   0.51
        0.42
        0.40                                                       0.50
               0    5        10             15   20   25                  0        5       10           15       20   25
                                  Years                                                         Years


                    Skilled Income (Tradable)                                   Skilled Income (Non-tradable)
        1.90                                                       1.97
        1.85
                                                                   1.92
        1.80
        1.75                                                       1.87
Price




                                                           Price




        1.70                                                       1.82
        1.65
                                                                   1.77
        1.60
        1.55                                                       1.72
               0    5        10             15   20   25                  0        5       10           15       20   25
                                  Years                                                         Years


                   Unskilled Income (Tradable)                                 Unskilled Income (Non-tradable)
        1.00                                                       1.15
        0.99
                                                                   1.10
        0.98
        0.97                                                       1.05
Price




                                                           Price




        0.96                                                       1.00
        0.95
                                                                   0.95
        0.94
        0.93                                                       0.90
               0    5        10             15   20   25                  0        5       10           15       20   25
                                  Years                                                         Years


                                  Partial              Complete I.                               Decampment
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                       73




The direct effects settlement scenarios on real wages is gener-
ally negative in Turkana. The upper panel in Figure 4-2 shows
the dynamics of real wages in Turkana. Wages in Turkana’s
non-tradable sector decrease permanently in all cases with the
exception of unskilled wages under CIS. In the case of the latter, a
skill complementarity effect dominates the competition effects,
thus, productivity and wages increase.

In cases of partial and complete integration, the decrease in
wages follows from the increase in the labor supply that domi-
nates the increase in demand. This is an expected result as all
refugees were already consumers before the integration, but none
of them were working. Indeed, the largest of these short-term
drops, an approximately 18% decrease, occurs in the wages of both
skill groups in the tradable sector under a CIS as prices are fixed,
and demand side effects are not operative in the tradable sector.

Effects operate through different channels in the case of
decampment. Unlike the integration scenarios, the story is
primarily on the demand side with decampment. With a sudden
fall in demand upon the repatriation of refugees, prices drop in
non-tradable sectors, pulling down wages. In the tradable sector,
however, there is no direct demand side effect as prices are fixed.
Thus, nominal wages are initially not affected, but with a sharp
decrease in non-tradable prices, they increase in real terms. This is
corrected overtime with labor movements and rebalancing in
relative prices.

In the long-term, real wages converge back to their initial
levels in Turkana. In the long-term, the wages in both the trad-
able and non-tradable sectors converge back to their initial levels
under all scenarios, with small differences remaining of less than
a percentage point. The reason for such a regression back to the
origin is because Turkana represents a small part of Kenyan econ-
omy, with or without refugees. Thus, any large deviations from
Kenyan averages are corrected by labor movements in the
long-term.

The effects of settlement scenarios on real wages in the rest of
Kenya are small. With the exception of small increases in
unskilled wages under the skill-based permits scenario (PIS), real
wages in the rest of Kenya decrease as a response to the integra-
tion. However, these decreases are often less than a percent.

For most types of economic agents, an equal redistribution of
economic rents and profits would be sufficient to offset the
short-term losses in wages under PIS and CIS. Income dynamics
74                                               Beyond encampment: what are the options?




     exhibit significant differences from wage dynamics. This is mainly
     because the former takes into consideration the returns to fixed
     factors of production. For instance, the incomes of unskilled work-
     ers register short-term gains up to 5.3 percent in the non-tradable
     sector and up to 4.6 percent in the tradable sector in PIS. In the
     long-term, they go back to the initial levels. In comparison, gains
     are even larger in CIS: up to 12.4 percent in the non-tradable
     sector, and 5 percent in the tradable sector. In all the cases
     discussed so far, the incomes converge back to the initial levels in the
     long-term and remain in the vicinity with small positive margins.

     Turkana’s skilled locals are more likely to suffer short-term
     losses even after fixed factor incomes are redistributed.
     Incomes of skilled labor loses up to 1.9 percent of their value in the
     non-tradable sector and 11 percent in the tradable sector following
     PIS.11 In the long-term they go back to their initial level. In compar-
     ison, the impact on incomes of skilled workers is more favorable in
     the case of decampment scenario. Skilled workers gain up to 5.5
     percent additional income in the non-tradable sector, but they
     suffer a loss of 5.8 percent in the tradable sector.

     Even with an egalitarian redistribution of rents and profits,
     the wage losses in non-tradable sectors are not being offset
     when decampment is chosen. The bottom panel of Figure 4-2
     shows that real incomes of skilled and unskilled workers remain
     in the red even after the (equal) redistribution of rents and profits.
     In decampment, not only the non-tradable wages but also the
     returns to fixed factors of production decrease. As a result, the
     redistribution of rents and profits fall short of fully compensating
     the short-term losses in wages in non-tradable sector.

     4.3. Discussion

     The analysis in this report highlights important findings. Simu-
     lations and empirical analysis in this report shed light on import-
     ant aspects of refugee arrivals and associated policy choices
     regarding their settlement. These can be summarized as follows:

     1. Positive aggregate effects: In aggregate terms, the arrival of
        refugees generates a positive economic effect on the host com-
        munity; this is especially true when there is a fixed factor of
        production like land.



      Note that this is result is primarily driven by the assumption that the PIS enables
     11

     only skilled refugees to work. If it did the opposite, e.g. let unskilled refugees work
     only, then those who make income losses would be unskilled locals.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                        75




2. Uneven distribution of effects: Although the aggregate effect is
   positive, there are both losers and winners in the host commu-
   nities. In the absence of mitigating transfers, some groups may
   face net losses while others face net gains that are larger than
   those losses.

3. Concentration in space: Encampment concentrates both gains
   and losses in the vicinity of the camp. By doing so, it reduces the
   potential aggregate gains for the entire economy while increas-
   ing the gains for those beneficiaries in the vicinity of the camp.

4. Concentration in time: Both refugee arrivals and integration
   of refugees may have transitory effects in the vicinity of the
   camp that can be different from the permanent effects in the
   long-term.

5. Scaling and diffusion of effects by integration: Integrating
   the refugees into society increases their positive economic
   effects in aggregate terms. However, it also diffuses these
   effects across all regions in the host country. Partial integration
   does this partially.

Whereas the first three effects are suggested by both simulations
and empirical investigations, the last two are forward looking and
based on simulations only. In what follows, a number of observa-
tions regarding these results will be discussed.

The relevance of aid and how to distribute it

In the case of encampment, the aid and remittances received
by refugees are crucial for the positive impact of refugees on
the local economy. If refugees are not allowed to join the labor
force, their contributions to the local economy that occur via
market mechanisms are limited to their exchange of goods and
services with locals. Without foreign aid, either in the form of cash
or in kind transfers, or remittances, they do not have any purchas-
ing power or goods to sell. They also have no means to survive.
Therefore, the magnitude of aid and remittances are key drivers of
refugee impact on host communities in the case of encampment.

Refugees, when integrated, could contribute positively to host
economy even in the absence of aid and remittances. Although
the transfers received by refugees add to their positive impact,
additional simulations show that the positive impact remains
when aid is phased out after integration. Table 4-4 shows the
effects of complete integration on GRP and relative prices when
transfers to refugees stop 5 years after the integration. Comparing
76                                                                    Beyond encampment: what are the options?




     Table 4-4: Macroeconomic Eﬀects Of Complete Integration With No Transfers

                                                    Rest of Kenya: Gross Regional Product (GRP)

                                     INTEGRATION/      +5       +10        +15        +20        +30     +50
                                     DECAMPMENT      YEARS     YEARS      YEARS      YEARS      YEARS   YEARS
                                         YEAR

                                                       (Percentage change from initial equilibrium)

      TURKANA
      Gross Regional Product (GRP)      15.1          -0.8     -2.7        -2.9      -3.0       -3.0    -3.0

      Non-tradable Prices                7.1          -6.8     -6.5        -6.5      -6.5       -6.5    -6.5
      REST OF KENYA
      Gross Regional Product (GRP)       0.2          0.4       0.4        0.4        0.4        0.4    0.4

      Non-tradable Prices                0.1          0.1       0.0        0.0        0.0        0.0    0.0



                       these results with those in tables 4-2 reveals the similarity between
                       integration-with-aid and integration-without-aid cases. Overall,
                       differences are within a tenth of a percentage point margin in the
                       short-term and long-term, and less than a percentage point in the
                       few years after the aid ceases. For the rest of Kenya, the differenc-
                       es are rounded up to zero, and the gross output increases by 0.4
                       percent in the long term under both scenarios. In other words, aid
                       complements and magnifies the effects of refugees, however, the
                       bulk of the results are driven by labor market participation.

                       Who should receive the aid, refugees or the host government?
                       An often-discussed idea is that, once integration takes place, the
                       foreign aid that goes to the refugees could be centralized in the
                       hands of local authorities to provide support with possible costs
                       borne by hosting refugees. A background analysis to this report
                       (Behzadan et al, 2016) discourages such motives of centralization.

                       Whereas centralized aid mechanisms could trigger Dutch
                       Disease type of symptoms (declines in tradable sectors, as
                       resources are drawn to produce non-tradable goods and
                       services), direct aid to refugees is less likely to do so. Remit-
                       tances and aid paid directly to individuals are typically more
                       successful in actually finding their way into the hands of refugees
                       compared to official foreign aid that trickles down from the top.
                       This difference turns out to be important for economic outcomes.
                       This is because consumption patterns change with income. In
                       particular, the marginal propensity to consume non-tradable
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                        77




goods (e.g. services) increases with income. Examples of these
non-tradable services are housekeeping, childcare, lawn care,
nannies, butlers, or chauffeurs. Poor people often do not purchase
such services in the market (they have a lower income elasticity of
demand for these services than do wealthier people). Poor people
on the other hand tend to spend more of any increased income on
tradable goods. Increased production of tradable goods to meet
this demand generates more externalities (i.e. additional econom-
ic activity and employment in ancillary goods and services) than
do increased services. Hence, a foreign transfer that eventually
finds its way into the pockets of wealthier rather than poorer
people increases the relative demand for non-tradables and reduc-
es tradable sector production by an even greater amount (by
forgoing both the primary production and ancillary goods and
services that support it). This generates an increased reliance on
imported goods and a consequent reduction in economic growth.
An empirical cross-country investigation by Behzadan et al (2016)
lends credence to such differences between official aid and direct
transfers like remittances.

An important exception to this observation is the direct fiscal
costs incurred, or that should be incurred, by the host govern-
ment. Hosting refugees often impose direct fiscal costs on the host
government. These could arise from different forms of public good
provisions, e.g. security services. These costs should be measured
carefully and mitigating transfers should be provided as part of
international aid efforts. This is particularly important when the
host country is in the low-income category. The governments in
these countries typically lack the necessary resources to finance
such efforts. In addition, they suffer from significant inefficiencies
in tax collection in the form of low tax collection capacity and high
informality. Therefore, the offsetting transfers should be made
available directly to the government. The alternative, e.g. giving
all money directly to the refugees and leaving it to the government
to tax them for provision of public goods, could lead to significant
waste and under-provisioning of public goods.

Market power and transportation costs

Market imperfections could further concentrate the refu-
gee-related rents in the hands of small interest groups. Overall,
encampment creates economic rents. Lack of sufficient competi-
tion in certain markets like retail, land, housing, and livestock in
the vicinity of the camp could reallocate some of these rents
disproportionately towards those who control the businesses,
thereby reducing the total benefits that could be received by the
society at large.
78                                      Beyond encampment: what are the options?




     In Turkana, there are signs of such market power. A back-
     ground study for this report (Oka, 2016) suggests the presence of a
     small group of highly influential local traders in the Kakuma
     market. These 3 – 5 traders have operated in Kakuma town like a
     cartel continuously between the years 2005 and 2015. Similarly,
     there are only two bus companies that operate between Kakuma
     and Nairobi. The existence of concentrated market power typically
     leads to inefficiently low supply and high consumer prices as in
     the case of transportation costs. These practices both reduce the
     overall gain the host community could receive from hosting refu-
     gees and distort the allocation of gains.

     High transportation costs also strengthen the concentration of
     rents by leading to supply bottlenecks and reducing the mobil-
     ity of labor. High transportation costs help sustain an unequal
     allocation of refugee related rents via both goods and labor market
     channels. In the goods market, with high transportation costs and
     delays in shipments, the supply of otherwise tradable goods adjusts
     more slowly than usual. This, in turn, keeps prices inflated and
     supply suppressed for a longer period of time. Thus, the short-term
     gains and losses for the respective groups are magnified in this
     case. In the labor market, mobility costs operate in a similar way.
     When mobility costs are high, the minimum real wage differential
     that can induce people to move from one region to another are also
     high. Therefore, with high mobility costs, real wage differences
     among regions could remain high even in the long-term.

     Rents and skills acquisition

     The restrictions on refugee employment and mobility changes
     their incentives for acquiring skills. The absence of employment
     prospects diminishes refugees’ incentives to develop their skills as
     manufacturers, traders, and merchants. Instead, they are more
     likely to depend on aid, remittances, and limited basic economic
     activities that can be performed within the camp. These induced
     distortions rob the Turkana region of valuable human capital
     (some refugees have more marketable skills than the host popula-
     tion in this remote and impoverished part of Kenya), it generates
     an unhealthy local dependence on the refugee camp (not as a
     source of growth but of monopoly rents), and it induces severe
     pressure on the local natural environment (in particular, firewood
     and groundwater supplies).

     Locals may also suffer from distorted incentives. The possibili-
     ty of refugee related rents, which are made possible by the exces-
     sive market power of a small number of traders and certain other
     groups in the local population, creates an economic windfall that
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                         79




engenders dependence on the refugee camp and diminishes the
incentives to make longer term investments in human capital
development. The extra market power of the host region buyers
(that is afforded by the refugees’ larger search costs and their spill-
over effect on the host population) and their consequent improved
terms of trade with refugees further reduces the locals’ incentive
to develop their skills. Hence the barriers against the participation
of refugees in the labor force reduce skills development in the
Turkana region as well. As a result, the two-way dependence, that
is, refugees’ dependence on aid and locals’ dependence on refu-
gees, becomes a self-reinforcing state.

In the long-term, disincentives to acquire skills could rob both
the Turkana region and Kenya of additional welfare gains.
While both refugees and locals find it less attractive to acquire
skills, the former for the lack of opportunities and the latter for the
opportunity to extract rents, they become stuck in low productivi-
ty sectors. Therefore, in the long-term, average productivity in
Turkana, and in Kenya, decreases along with incomes and welfare.
A background study for this report (Chisik et al, 2016) show that,
when refugees are integrated, although the host may be worse off
in the short run, the reduced dependency could improve their
welfare in the longer-term horizon.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                         81




References
Artuç, Erhan & Chaudhuri, Shubham & McLaren, John, 2008.
    "Delay and dynamics in labor market adjustment: Simulation
    results," Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, vol.
    75(1), pages 1-13, May.

Artuç, Erhan & Shubham Chaudhuri & John McLaren, 2010. "Trade
    Shocks and Labor Adjustment: A Structural Empirical
    Approach," American Economic Review, American Economic
    Association, vol. 100(3), pages 1008-45, June.

Aukot, E., 2003. “It Is Better to Be a Refugee Than a Turkana in
   Kakuma”: Revisiting the Relationship between Hosts and
   Refugees in Kenya. Refuge: Canada's Journal on Refugees,
   21(3).

Behzadan, Nazenin & Richard Chisik & Harun Onder & Apurva
   Sanghi, 2016. "Aid, Remittances, and the Dutch Disease," Work-
   ing Papers 062, Ryerson University, Department of Economics.

Binswanger, H.P. and Quizon, J.B., 1988. Distributional conse-
    quences of alternative food policies in India.

De Matteis, Alessandro. Market Analysis to Assist Selection
   between Response Options in Conditions of Food Insecurity.
   Diss. School of International Development, University of East
   Anglia, 2010.

De Montclos, M.A.P. and Kagwanja, P.M., 2000. Refugee camps or
   cities? The socio-economic dynamics of the Dadaab and
   Kakuma camps in Northern Kenya. Journal of refugee studies,
   13(2), pp.205-222.

Grindheim, K.A., 2013. Exploring the impacts of refugee camps on
    host communities: a case study of Kakuma host community in
    Kenya.

Harmand, S., Lewis, J.E., Feibel, C.S., Lepre, C.J., Prat, S., Lenoble,
   A., Boës, X., Quinn, R.L., Brenet, M., Arroyo, A. and Taylor, N.,
   2015. 3.3-million-year-old stone tools from Lomekwi 3, West
   Turkana, Kenya. Nature, 521(7552), pp.310-315.

Knox, K. and Kushner, T., 2012. Refugees in an age of genocide:
   Global, national and local perspectives during the twentieth
   century. Routledge.
82                                                             References




     Ohta, I., 2005. Displacement risks in Africa. ISBS.

     Oka, R. 2011. “Unlikely Cities In The Desert: The Informal Economy
        As Causal Agent For Permanent ‘Urban’ Sustainability In
        Kakuma Refugee Camp, Kenya.” Urban Anthropology and
        Studies of Cultural

     Systems and World Economic Development, 223–62.

     Verdirame, G., 1999. Human Rights and Refugees: The Case of
         Kenya1. Journal of Refugee Studies, 12(1), pp.54-77.

     World Bank, 2016. Refugee Impacts on Turkana Hosts, A Social
        Impact Analysis for Kakuma Town and Refugee Camp, Turka-
        na County, Kenya
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                                   83




Appendices
A. Household survey

Sampling for the refugee survey was intended to be proportional to
the ethnic populations contained in the camp, with some oversam-
pling of small populations. Table A-1 shows the number of house-
holds sampled compared to the number of individuals present in
official camp statistics. All other refugee groups present in the
camp that we did not sample (Burundians, Rwandans, etc.) repre-
sented less than 4 percent of total camp population.

Table A-1: Sampling By Ethnicity Among Refugee Population

                                                       NUMBER IN              PERCENTAGE
                      NUMBER         PERCENTAGE          CAMP                   IN CAMP
 Ethnicity           SURVEYED         OF TOTAL      (OFFICIAL STATISTICS)   (OFFICIAL STATISTICS)

 Somali                 40              23.4             56,178                     31

 Dinka                  50              29.4
                                                         89,973                     50
 Nuba                   11               6.5

 Darfuri                20              11.8              9,785                      5

 Congolese              20              11.8              9,045                      5

 Ethiopian              29              17.1              7,821                      4

Note: The camp number for Dinka/Nuba is for camp residents classiﬁed as South
Sudanese, who are not separated by ethnicity for UNHCR statistics. The oﬃcial camp
number also does not break down Sudanese refugees by ethnicity – we apply the “Sudan”
number to the Darfur population.


For the Turkana household survey we sought to sample enough
households around Kakuma and in two counterfactual cities in
order to be able to detect a 0.2 standard deviation change in
income, a power calculation based on data collected by Pascaline
Dupas. This gave us a preferred sample size of 352. Defining coun-
terfactual cities was difficult, and we decided upon two cases.
First, towns that had a similar size to Kakuma in 1989, and were on
the Kitale-Juba highway. Kakuma at this time had a measured
population of 5887. Within Turkana province, there are 5 market
towns that had a similar size to Kakuma in 1989, or at least as near
as we can tell from the sublocation data available from the 1989
census. These are: Lokichar (pop 4887), Lokori (pop 5590), Kangatet
(pop 5590), and Lokwal Kalokol (pop 6842). These towns are shown
in Figure A-1.
84                                                                                                                  Appendices




                  Figure A-1: Final Sample Of Towns For Household Survey



                                                                                                    Ethiopia



                                      South Sudan


                                                                           Kaiemothia

                                                                                      Kokuro
                                                                                           Namuruputh
                                                                             Tondenyang

                                                                                       Lokitaung
                                                    Lokichokio



                                                                                 Murangering
                                                                 Kakuma
                                                                                             Lokwa Kalokol MARSABIT


                                                                 TURKANA                        Eliye Springs
                                                                                    Lodwar
                                   Uganda
                                                                           Lorukuma


                                                                                      Loichangamata
                                                                   Loiya
                                                                   Lokitanyala      Lokichar
                                                                                           Loperat

                                                                                  Kaputirr                            Tum
                                                                                                   Lokori
                                                                          Nasolot
                                                                  WEST POKOT   Lotongot
                                                                                   Amaler
                                                                                                                SAMBURU
                                                                                                     Lomelo

                    LEGEND                                                                         Kapedo
                                                          TRANS NZOIA MARAKWET
                        Roads                         MT ELGON
                        Market towns of                                                      BARINGO      Churo
                        Turkana district             BUNGOMALUGARI
                                                                                                        Tangulbei
                                                                                                                    ISIOLO
                                               TESO           UASIN GISHU
                                                                                                        LAIKIPIA
                        District   boundries          KAKAMEGA
                                                                        KEIYO
                                             BUSIA BUTERE MUMIAS NANDI                   KOIBATEK




     Because Lokwa is found off of the main highway, and Kangatet is
     very close to Lokori and somewhat to the east of the main highway,
     we eliminated these from the sample. Unfortunately, security
     challenges made it impossible to arrive at Lokori during the time
     of our fieldwork. Our Turkana and UNHCR colleagues suggested
     the town of Lorugum, located on the main highway west of
     Lodwar en route to Uganda, which is halfway between Lokichar
     and Kakuma.

     In addition, we decided to add Lokichogio as a potential compari-
     son city, but one that offers a slightly different comparison than do
     Lorugum and Lokichar. This is because Lokichogio was the origi-
     nal site of what is now the Kakuma refugee camp. In addition, it
     was, from 1989 until 2011, home of the substantial infrastructure
     supporting Operation Lifeline Sudan. It is, therefore, a study in
     what happens when “aid leaves,” which is one of several different
     future scenarios for Kakuma.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                     85




Sampling was stratified by distance from the center of each city.
Distance rings included less than 2 kilometers from center, 2-8
kilometers from center, and 8-10 kilometers from center. Two
villages were randomly sampled in each distance ring, and house-
holds randomly sampled from within these. In cases where villag-
es were too small to provide sufficient numbers of households,
additional villages were added. This commonly occurred in the
more distant villages, which tended to be composed of very few
households. At final count, the sample was collected in 19 villages
around Kakuma, Lokichar, Lorugum, and Lokichogio. The total
number of households in each subsample is shown in Table A-2:

Table A-2: Sampling By Ethnicity Among Refugee Population

                  NUMBER OF
 Subsample       HOUSEHOLDS

 Kakuma             111

 Lokichar           116

 Lorugum            103

 Lokichoggio        118

 Total              448



Below, we provide various summary statistics from the surveys.
86                                                                                 Appendices




     Table A-3: Summary Statistics Livestock From Household Survey

                                          MEAN       MEAN      P-VALUE     OBS        OBS
                                         KAKUMA   NON-KAKUMA     DIFF    KAKUMA   NON-KAKUMA

      Household cares for animals         0.450      0.475      0.675     111        219

      Dist. to watering hole increased    0.500      0.510      0.912      50        104

      Movement of animals increased       0.520      0.567      0.583      50        104

      Location of grazing changed         0.660      0.721      0.441      50        104

      Value of animals cared for         146222     129442      0.739      50        104

      Value of animals owned             129382     144768      0.737      50        104

      Value of animals sold               6624       4264       0.237      50        104

      Number of livestock owned          35.260     49.240      0.365      50        104

      Number of livestock cared for      37.600     44.731      0.668      50        104

      Number of livestock sold            2.260      1.288     0.095*      50        104

      Number of livestock consumed        1.560      1.548      0.977      50        104

      Number of livestock dowried         5.300      2.510      0.351      50        104

      Number of livestock died            5.480      5.337      0.947      50        104

      Number of livestock stolen          3.480      5.990      0.255      50        104

      Number of poultry owned             1.300      1.019      0.790      50        104

      Number of livestock stolen          0.460      0.442      0.838      50        104

      Number of poultry cared for         1.440      1.606      0.914      50        104

      Number of poultry sold              0.120      0.067      0.551      50        104

      Number of poultry consumed          0.080      0.135      0.630      50        104

      Number of poultry dowried           0.000      0.058      0.416      50        104

      Number of poultry died              0.080      0.096      0.892      50        104

      Number of poultry stolen            0.040      0.154      0.300      50        104


     *p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                           87




Table A-4: Summary Statistics Enterprise Household Survey

                                      MEAN       MEAN       P-VALUE     OBS        OBS
                                     KAKUMA   NON-KAKUMA      DIFF    KAKUMA   NON-KAKUMA

 Household owns small business        0.297      0.447      0.008**    111        219
 Household has boda boda
 business                             0.051      0.026       0.379      59        151
 Household has a store/sells
 product                              0.186      0.245       0.502      59        151
 Household sells ﬁrewood or other
 manual labor                         0.576      0.550       0.801      59        151

 Household works in construction      0.017      0.040       0.470      59        151
 Household has other semi-skilled
 business                             0.102      0.086       0.739      59        151
 Proﬁts from enterprise sources
 over last 6 months                   12813       9961       0.572      33        98


*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01


Table A-5: Summary Statistics Wage Earnings And Household Demographics

                                      MEAN       MEAN       P-VALUE     OBS        OBS
                                     KAKUMA   NON-KAKUMA      DIFF    KAKUMA   NON-KAKUMA
 Has member employed for wage
 in past 12 months                    0.153      0.091      0.093*     111        219
 Number of members employed
 by NGO or UN                         0.294      0.250       0.771      17        20
 Number members working in
 camp                                 0.294      0.000      0.008**     17        20
 Proportion of wage earners
 working in camp                      0.294      0.000      0.008**     17        20
 Proportion ages 16 to 60
 employed with wage                   0.424      0.398       0.610      17        20
 Total household wage in last
 12 months                          125128.235 254283.900   0.087*      17        20
 Number of current household
 members                              4.730      4.726       0.987     111        219
 Household head with no
 education                            0.667      0.763      0.064*     111        219
 Member with secondary
 education                            0.162      0.329      0.001**    111        219
 Proportion ages 6 to 15 enrolled
 in school                            0.270      0.196       0.220      71        137
 Number current members age                      0.612       0.227     111        219
 5 or less                            0.486
 Number of current members ages       1.351      1.352       0.999     111        219
 6 to 15
 Number of current members ages       2.640      2.521       0.457     111        219
 16 to 60
 Number of current members
 older than 60                        0.243      0.228       0.799     111        219

 Number ages 6-15 enrolled in         0.369      0.233       0.122     111        219
 school

*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01
88                                                                             Appendices




     Table A-6: Summary Statistics Animals, Lokichogio And Kakuma

                                         MEAN       MEAN      P-VALUE   OBS      OBS
                                         LOKI      KAKUMA       DIFF    LOKI   KAKUMA

      Household cares for animals        0.280      0.450     0.007**   118      111

      Dist to watering hole increased    0.636      0.500      0.226    33       50

      Movement of animals increased      0.606      0.520      0.446    33       50

      Location of grazing changed        0.636      0.660      0.828    33       50

      Value of animals cared for        193475     146222      0.528    33       50

      Value of animals owned            162884     129382      0.555    33       50

      Value of animals sold             7206.061   6624.060    0.850    33       50

      Number of livestock owned          40.545     35.260     0.726    33       50

      Number of livestock cared for      41.818     37.600     0.812    33       50

      Number of livestock sold           1.818      2.260      0.608    33       50

      Number of livestock consumed       1.394      1.560      0.767    33       50

      Number of livestock dowried        9.545      5.300      0.526    33       50

      Number of livestock died           7.727      5.480      0.544    33       50

      Number of livestock stolen         13.636     3.480     0.033*    33       50

      Number of poultry owned            0.909      1.300      0.700    33       50

      Number of poultry cared for        0.455      1.440      0.389    33       50

      Number of poultry sold             0.091      0.120      0.771    33       50

      Number of poultry consumed         0.000      0.080      0.305    33       50

      Number of poultry dowried          0.000      0.000        .      33       50

      Number of poultry died             0.364      0.080      0.348    33       50

      Number of poultry stolen           0.000      0.040      0.420    33       50


     *p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                     89




Table A-7: Summary Statistics Farming, Lokichogio And Kakuma

                                      MEAN       MEAN       P-VALUE   OBS      OBS
                                      LOKI      KAKUMA        DIFF    LOKI   KAKUMA

 Household farms                      0.203       0.333     0.026*    118     111

 Area farmland owned (ha)             50.498     31.689      0.455    24       37

 Value of farm sales                 3812.917   3018.297     0.776    24       37

 Farm sales - inputs (not labor)     2012.917   1215.595     0.767    24       37

 Non-labor input costs               1800.000   1802.703     0.997    24       37

 Labor days on the farm               41.083     51.111      0.363    24       36
 Proportion farm production to        0.036       0.062      0.368    17       32
 animals
 Proportion farm production
 consumed                             0.511       0.400      0.298    17       30

 Proportion farm production sold      0.107       0.181      0.363    15       30

 Proportion farm production gifted    0.034       0.085      0.270    17       31

 Proportion farm production saved     0.118       0.165      0.384    17       32


*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01


Table A-8: Summary Statistics Enterprises, Lokichogio And Kakuma

                                      MEAN       MEAN       P-VALUE   OBS      OBS
                                      LOKI      KAKUMA        DIFF    LOKI   KAKUMA

 Household owns small business        0.246       0.297      0.383    118     111
 Household has boda boda
 business                             0.029       0.051      0.518    70       59
 Household has a store/sells
 product                              0.129       0.186      0.493    70       59
 Household sells ﬁrewood or other
 manual labor                         0.429       0.576      0.174    70       59

 Household works in construction      0.000       0.017      0.278    70       59
 Household has other semi-skilled
 business                             0.014       0.102      0.056    70       59
 Household receives government
 transfers                            0.600       0.492      0.220    70       59
 Proﬁts from other sources
 over last 6 months                  9315.517   12813.636    0.379    29       33


*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01
90                                                                              Appendices




     Table A-9: Summary Statistics Wage Work And Household Demographics,
     Lokichogio And Kakuma

                                          MEAN       MEAN      P-VALUE   OBS      OBS
                                          LOKI      KAKUMA       DIFF    LOKI   KAKUMA
      Number of current household
      members                             4.576      4.730      0.592    118      111
      Household head with no
      education                           0.737      0.667      0.244    118      111
      Member with secondary
      education                           0.331      0.162     0.003**   118      111
      Number current members age
      5 or less                           0.686      0.486      0.110    118      111
      Number of current members ages
      6 to 15                             1.237      1.351      0.504    118      111
      Number of current members ages
      16 to 60                            2.458      2.640      0.297    118      111
      Number of current members
      older than 60                       0.186      0.243      0.372    118      111
      Number ages 6-15 enrolled in
      school                              0.254      0.369      0.282    118      111
      Has member employed for wage
      in past 12 months                   0.085      0.153      0.110    118      111
      Proportion ages 6 to 15 enrolled
      in school                           0.177      0.270      0.175    71       71
      Total household wage in last       234440     125128      0.202    10       17
      12 months

     *p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01


     Table A-10: Summary Statistics Transfers, Lokichogio And Kakuma

                                          MEAN       MEAN      P-VALUE   OBS      OBS
                                          LOKI      KAKUMA       DIFF    LOKI   KAKUMA

      Cash transfers received             0.144      0.144      0.999    118      111
      Uses hawala or dahabshil
      transfers                           0.000      0.062      0.310    17       16

      Transfers have decreased            0.235      0.250      0.925    17       16

      Amount of last transfer            5226.471   7700.000    0.503    17       16
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                  91




Table A-11: Summary Statistics Income And Assets, Lokichogio And Kakuma

                                 MEAN       MEAN       P-VALUE   OBS        OBS
                                 LOKI      KAKUMA        DIFF    LOKI     KAKUMA

 Income per capita              8281.181   12771.446    0.303    118       111

 Predicted consumption (HSNP)   489.737     437.547     0.351    118       111

 Owned house 2005                0.483       0.541      0.387    118       111

 Owned car 2005                  0.000       0.000        .      118       111

 Owned moto 2005                 0.000       0.027      0.073    118       111

 Owned bicycle 2005              0.068       0.117      0.198    118       111

 Owned refrigerator 2005         0.000       0.000        .      118       111

 Owned television 2005           0.008       0.009      0.966    118       111

 Owned radio 2005                0.085       0.117      0.418    118       111

 Owned cell phone 2005           0.102       0.198     0.040*    118       111

 Owned generator 2005            0.000       0.000        .      118       111

 Owned computer 2005             0.000       0.000        .      118       111

 Owned camera 2005               0.000       0.000        .      118       111

 Assets 2005                     0.746       1.009     0.037*    118       111

 Change assets 2005-2015         0.102       0.117      0.853    118       111


*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01
92                                                               Appendices




     B. Herd size regressions

     The analysis here tests the relationship between average herd size
     and distance to Kakuma, controlling for precipitation. The first
     two columns use a log distance specification, which is insignificant
     both including and excluding precipitation. The third column uses
     the inverse of distance to Kakuma, which puts significant weight
     on observations close to the camp, and hence picks up part of the
     non-linearity present in the data. The last column in these regres-
     sions contains a semi-parametric estimation of the effect of
     distance, controlling for precipitation, in each distance bin. Each
     bin contains about 11,000 households, and the closest bin to
     Kakuma is eliminated, so that the coefficients indicate the addi-
     tional effect of being at a particular distance from the camp. The
     regressions suggest that the variation in livestock observed in the
     graph is a jump that occurs at greater than 8.9 km from the camp,
     and is robustly different until at about 70 km of distance. From 70
     to 113 km (nearing Lodwar), livestock holdings are not statistically
     different far from the camp than they are right next to it, and there
     are slight bumps at very far distances.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                         93




Table B-1: Distribution Of Cattle Herd Sizes By Distance To Kakuma

                                  (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
 Ln (km to Kakuma camp)         0.0451          0.0685

                               (0.1952)        (0.1986)
 Inverse km to Kakuma                                        -0.9037***

                                                              (0.1692)

 8.9-45 km                                                                   1.9072***

                                                                              (0.4934)

 45-71 km                                                                    1.8475***

                                                                              (0.4676)

 71-89 km                                                                     1.2115

                                                                              (0.7286)

 89-101 km                                                                   1.2513**

                                                                              (0.6051)

 101-108 km                                                                   0.3217

                                                                              (0.5891)

 108-113 km                                                                   -0.0446

                                                                              (0.5817)

 113-126 km                                                                  1.0391**

                                                                              (0.4640)

 126-152 km                                                                  1.6395***

                                                                              (0.4550)

 152-173 km                                                                   1.0437

                                                                              (0.7258)

 173-201 km                                                                   0.3871

                                                                              (0.6520)

 >201 km                                                                      -0.0588

                                                                              (0.5764)

 Ln (precipitation)                             0.9896         1.0275         0.6486

                                               (0.7499)       (0.7498)        (0.5491)

 N                             138982          137964          137964         137964

 r2                             0.001           0.025           0.049          0.159

Dependent variable: Inverse hyperbolic sine of herd size. OLS regressions with standard
errors clustered at the location level. *p<.10, **p<.05, *** p< .01.
94                                                                         Appendices




                   C. The effect of remittances on consumption in Kakuma

                   Refugee Camp

                   Table C-1 reports indicator variables for if households purchased
                   particular food and “luxury” items in April, before the informal
                   transfer shutdown, and then the totals of items purchased in each
                   category for both April and June.          The mostly commonly
                   purchased items are phone cards, sugar, tea, meat, and rice.

     Table C-1: Consumption And Consumption Changes In Refugee Camp Households

                                             MEAN        SD         OBS
      Food items

      Purchased sugar April                 0.060.965   0.185       170

      Purchased tea April                    0.918      0.276       170

      Purchased milk April                   0.553      0.499       170

      Purchased meat April                   0.818      0.387       170

      Purchased ﬁsh April                    0.371      0.484       170

      Purchased rice April                   0.647      0.479       170

      Purchased fruit April                  0.347      0.477       170

      Purchased coﬀee April                  0.300      0.460       170

      “Luxury” items

      Purchased home brewed alcohol April    0.012      0.108       170

      Purchased beer (factory) April         0.047      0.212       170

      Purchased tobacco April                0.106      0.309       170

      Purchased mirat April                  0.024      0.152       170

      Purchased henna April                  0.124      0.330       170

      Purchased incense April                0.159      0.367       170

      Purchased phone cards April            0.929      0.257       170

      Purchased cloth April                  0.312      0.465       170

      Purchased soap April                   0.618      0.487       170

      Purchased diapers April                0.235      0.425       170

      Purchased makeup April                 0.224      0.418       170

      Changes in purchases

      Number of foods purchased April        4.918      1.792       170

      Number of foods purchased June         4.965      1.727       170

      Number of luxuries purchased April     2.788      1.419       170

      Number of luxuries purchased June      2.871      1.486       170
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                      95




We also consider changes in quantities purchased of the most com-
monly purchased foods (Table C-2). For phone cards, sugar, and
meat, the percentage of the population for whom purchases
decreased between April and June was slightly higher than
the percentage for whom they increased. For rice and tea, it
was the opposite.

Table C-2: Consumption Quantity Changes, Refugee Data

                        PROPORTION     PROPORTION      PROPORTION
 Product                 DECREASED   STAYED THE SAME    INCREASED

 Phone cards               26              60             14

 Sugar                     32              47             21

 Tea                        8              79             13

 Meat                      27              52             21

 Rice                      13              65             21



It is unclear from these summary statistics whether or not these
changes are due to the changes in the transfer environment. To
elucidate this, we calculate the mean values of the change vari-
ables for refugee households that receive transfers and those that
do not, and for those who said that there was a decrease in their
transfer frequency between April and June (Table C-3). Clearly,
those whose consumption decreased the most were those who do
not receive transfers. These individuals consumed less of a variety
of goods, on average, than those who receive transfers. This may
be a result of lower spending by those receiving transfers, and
therefore less opportunity to earn money for individuals without
this source of income. Among those who receive transfers but had
their transfer quantity decrease, their consumption of all goods
either did not change, on average, or decreased. This is in contrast
to those who had no change in transfer frequency, or who experi-
enced increases in quantity of all items measured, with the excep-
tion of phone cards.
96                                                                                                             Appendices




           Table C-3: Change In Refugee Consumption Quantities Conditional On Transfers




                                                               RS




                                                                                       F




                                                                                                              F
                                                                                 ER E
                                                                                    IF




                                                                                                           IF
                                                                E




                                                                                                     SF HG
                                                                               SF AS
                                                   S




                                                                                    S




                                                                                                          S
                                                             SF




                                                                          D




                                                                                                         D
                                                ER




                                                                                                       ER
                                              SF S




                                                                                  E



                                                                                                  AN C
                                                                           E




                                                                                                       E
                                            ANHA




                                                           AN




                                                                             AN R
                                                                         LU




                                                                                                    LU
                                                                                               TR NO
                                                                           TR EC
                                                       TR




                                                                      VA




                                                                                                 VA
                                                                             D
                                           TR




                                                       O




                                                                    P-




                                                                                               P-
                                                      N
            Change in quantity purchased (-1, 0, 1)                                      Of those with transfers:

            Sugar                           -0.025     -0.289         0.062*        -0.119       0.077       0.267

            Tea                             0.103      -0.065         0.043**       0.000        0.184      0.078*

            Meat                            0.018      -0.208          0.185        -0.194       0.292      0.021*

            Rice                            0.140      -0.031          0.188        0.000        0.250       0.144

            Phone cards                     -0.102     -0.140          0.714        -0.178       -0.038      0.323

           *p<.10, **p<.05, *** p< .01


                      Overall, it appears that there were small decreases in refugee
                      consumption as a result of decreases in transfers. It is possible
                      that these decreases in consumption affected non-transfer recipi-
                      ents through decreases in consumption of these goods and others,
                      and perhaps through decreased economy activity in general. Did
                      these changes spill over the camp boundaries? The next section
                      examines consumption changes within the household survey
                      population in Kakuma Town and other locations.

                      Kakuma

                      We collected similar information regarding transfer behavior
                      from non-refugee households (Table C-4). Very few of them stated
                      that they received transfers at all, and for those who did receive
                      transfers, the main mechanism was MPesa.

     Table C-4: Transfer Behavior, Turkana Households

                                       MEAN        MEAN                    P-VALUE              OBS             OBS
                                    KAKUMA TOWN NON-KAKUMA                   DIFF             KAKUMA        NON-KAKUMA

      Cash transfers received             0.144            0.082               0.081*            111                219

      Uses informal transfers             0.062            0.000               0.296              16                18

      Transfers have decreased            0.250            0.056               0.117              16                18

      Amount of last transfer            7700.000      1239.056                0.004**            16                18

     *p<.10, **p<.05, *** p< .01
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                       97




Similarly, we requested households tell us about consumption
behavior in April and June, using a list of products quite similar to
those in the refugee survey. In the April consumption variables,
two comparisons are notable. First, the Turkana purchase many
fewer consumption items than the refugees – the refugees on aver-
age purchased almost five different items of those listed in April,
while the Turkana purchase less than two. This suggests that they
are more cash-poor than the refugees. Second, purchases are mar-
ginally higher of some items in the Kakuma Town subsample.
These include purchase of water, fish, coffee, tobacco, and cloth-
ing. This does not translate into significantly larger differences in
food or “luxury” items, but is suggestive of slightly higher
consumption in Kakuma.

Interestingly, on average there are very small increases in the
number of food and luxury goods purchased between April and
June, but these increases are smaller (and marginally significantly
so) in Kakuma. When we consider changes in quantity purchased
for the goods that are relatively frequently purchased by the
Turkana (sugar, tea, meat, and phone cards), there have been
decreases in quantities purchased of these goods, and decreases
that are larger in the Kakuma subsample.
98                                                                                                     Appendices




Table C-5: Consumption Behavior, Household Survey

                                      MEAN        MEAN             P-VALUE      OBS      OBS            REFUGEE
                                   KAKUMA TOWN NON-KAKUMA            DIFF     KAKUMA NON-KAKUMA          VALUE

 Purchased sugar April                  0.631          0.680        0.184        219         219          0.965

 Purchased water April                  0.108          0.018      1.000***       219         104           NA

 Purchased tea April                    0.568          0.607        0.244        219         104          0.918

 Purchased milk April                   0.297          0.297        0.504        219         104          0.553

 Purchased meat April                   0.207          0.242        0.240        219         104          0.818

 Purchased ﬁsh April                    0.054          0.009       0.994*        219         104          0.371

 Purchased coﬀee April                  0.009          0.005        0.688        219         104          0.300
 Purchased home brewed                  0.045          0.032        0.725        219         104          0.012
 alcohol April
 Purchased factory produced
 alcohol April                          0.009          0.009        0.496        219         104          0.047

 Purchased tobacco April                0.243          0.187        0.882        219         104          0.106

 Purchased khat April                   0.000          0.014        0.108        219         104          0.024

 Purchased incense April                0.018          0.027        0.301        219         104          0.159

 Purchased phone cards April            0.180          0.201        0.327        219         104          0.929

 Purchased clothing April               0.180          0.128        0.898        219         104          0.312
 Number of food items
 purchased April                        1.874          1.858        0.534        219         104          4.918
 Number of luxury items                 0.676          0.598        0.783        219         104          2.788
 purchased April

 Change in food purchases               0.568          0.863       0.032**       219         104

 Change in luxury purchases             0.342          0.333        0.541        219         104

 Change in sugar purchased             -0.310          -0.264       0.332        140         104
 April-June
 Change in tea purchased               -0.179          -0.075       0.192        120         104
 April-June
 Change in meat purchased              -0.353          -0.043      0.049**       46          104
 April-June
 Change in phone card purchases        -0.143          0.125        0.170        24          104
 April-June

*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p< .01. P-values in this table indicate the probability that the value in the Kakuma subsample
is less than the value in the non-Kakuma subsample.
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES                                                                              99




In a regression framework, this last finding remains robust to
weighting the observations and clustering standard errors (Table
C-6). This is particularly true for food items, where the number of
different items purchased dropped significantly in the Kakuma
subsample, as well as the quantity, though not significantly so.

Table C-6: Consumption Change Regressions, Household Survey

                                                                                NUMBER OF     NUMBER OF
                                       SUGAR           TEA           MEAT       FOOD ITEMS   LUXURY ITEMS

 a. Purchase good (0/1)

 In Kakuma town subsample             -0.1129*      -0.1466**      -0.0876*      -0.4299**      0.0225

                                       (0.0587)      (0.0587)      (0.0496)       (0.1754)      (0.0892)

 N                                       330           330            330           330           330

 r2                                     0.005         0.008          0.004         0.009           0

 b. Increase, no change, or decrease in quantity

 In Kakuma town subsample              0.0483        -0.0796        -0.325

                                       (0.1138)      (0.1070)      (0.2125)

                                         198           159            63

                                          0           0.002          0.02

*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p< .01. Dependent variables in panel a. are indicators for whether a household changed
their purchasing of a good (the diﬀerence between the binary indicator for June and April). In panel b., the
dependent variable measures whether or not the quantity of a good purchased decreased (-1), remained
the same (0), or increased (1). Observations are weighted by sampling probability and the standard errors
are clustered at the village level.
100                                                   Appendices




      D. Formal description of the simulation model
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES   101
102   Appendices
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES   103
104   Appendices
THE ECONOMICS OF HOSTING REFUGEES   105
106   Appendices
