GOOD PRACTICE HANDBOOK

Use of Security Forces: Assessing
and Managing Risks and Impacts
Guidance for the Private Sector in Emerging Markets
COPYRIGHT

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content
for educational purposes. Content from this publication may be used freely without prior
permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes.


DISCLAIMER

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the International Finance
Corporation (IFC) or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The purpose of the Good Practice Series is to share information about private sector approaches
for addressing a range of environmental and social issues that IFC believes demonstrate one
or more elements of good practice in these areas. Information about these approaches may be
taken from publicly available or other third party sources. IFC and/or its affiliates may have
financial interests in or other commercial relationships with certain of the companies.

While IFC believes that the information provided is accurate, the information is provided on a
strictly “as-is” basis, without assurance or representation of any kind. IFC may not require all
or any of the described practices in its own investments, and in its sole discretion may not agree
to finance or assist companies or projects that adhere to those practices. Any such practices
or proposed practices would be evaluated by IFC on a case-by-case basis with due regard for
the particular circumstances of the project.

For more information on IFC’s commitment to sustainability, including links to the Sustainability
Framework, visit www.ifc.org/sustainabilityframework.


Date published: February 2017.

Photo Credits: Felicity Kolp; Ben Li; J.J. Messner; Jason Paiement; Gaye Thompson; Shaza
Zeinelabdin; Control Risk East Africa Limited; and World Bank Group Photo Collections.
GOOD PRACTICE HANDBOOK

Use of Security Forces: Assessing
and Managing Risks and Impacts
Guidance for the Private Sector in Emerging Markets
Table of Contents

Acronyms List	                                                          vii

Acknowledgments	ix

Executive Summary	                                                      xi

I.	   Introduction: Security Issues in the Context of the Performance
      Standards	1

      IFC’s Sustainability Framework and Security Issues	                3
      Key Principles	                                                    8
          Interconnectedness between Security (PS 4) and Other Performance
          Standards	9
          Community Engagement and Grievance Mechanism
          for Security-Related Issues	                                   9
          Gender Considerations	                                        10
          The Principle of Proportionality in Security Responses	       11
          Security and Human Rights	                                    11
      Implementing Performance Standard 4	                              14
      Other International Standards on Security	                        14


                                                                              Table of Contents | v
                       II.	 Assessing Security Risks	                                             17

                            Security Risk Screening: 10 Questions All Companies Should Answer	    21
                            Preparing a Security Risk Assessment: For Companies Operating
                            in High-Risk Contexts	                                                33
                            Distinct Security Considerations in Different Phases of a Project	    37

                       III.	 Managing Private Security	                                           41

                            10 Key Considerations When Hiring Private Security	                   44
                            Community Engagement and Grievance Mechanism
                            for Security-Related Issues	                                          53

                       IV.	 Managing the Relationship with Public Security	                       57

                            Assessing Public Security Risks: 5 Key Questions for Companies	       62
                            Communication and Engagement with Public Security	                    65
                                 Who should engage?	                                              66
                                 When to engage?	                                                 66
                                 How to engage?	                                                  66
                                 What to discuss?	                                                68
                            Document Engagement Efforts	                                          75
                            Consider a Memorandum of Understanding	                               75

                       V.	 Preparing a Security Management Plan	                                  77

                            Key Components of Security Management Plan	                           81

                       VI.	 Assessing Allegations or Incidents Related to Security
                            Personnel	89

                            Policies and Procedures	                                              92
                            Key Steps in the Process	                                             93


                       Annexes: Tools and Templates

                       Annex A: Template Invitation to Bid and Request for Proposals
                       for Security Risk Assessment and Security Management Plan	                101

                       Annex B: Guidance for Drafting a Security Management Plan	                105

                       Annex C: Template Contract with a Private Security Provider	              115

                       Annex D: Sample Incident Report Summary Template	                         119

                       Annex E: Template Memorandum of Understanding	                            121

                       Annex F: Resources for Further Guidance on Use of Security Forces	        125




vi | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Acronyms List


CCTV	           Closed-Circuit Television (video surveillance)
CDC Group	      U.K.’s Development Finance Institution
CES	            IFC’s Environment, Social and Governance Department
DCAF	          Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces
DEG Investment	 German Investment and Development Corporation
DFID	           U.K.’s Department for International Development
EBRD	           European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EDC	            Export Development Canada
EPC	            Engineering, Procurement, and Construction
ESIA	           Environment and Social Impact Assessment
ESMS	           Environment and Social Management System
HSE	            Health, Safety, and Environment
ICMM	           International Council on Mining and Metals
ICRC	           International Committee of the Red Cross
IFC	            International Finance Corporation
MIGA	           Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MOU	            Memorandum of Understanding
NGO	            Nongovernmental Organization
PSs	            IFC’s Performance Standards
SMP	            Security Management Plan
SRA	            Security Risk Assessment
UN	             United Nations
UNICEF	         United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
VPs	            Voluntary Principles




                                                                           ﻿ | vii
Acknowledgments


This Good Practice Handbook on the Use of Security Forces: Assessing and
Managing Risks and Impacts is part of a series of good practice guidance from the
Environment, Social and Governance Department (CES) of the International Finance
Corporation (IFC). The Handbook was prepared by a core team comprised of
Felicity Kolp and Debra Sequeira (IFC), Krista Hendry (Monkey Forest Consulting),
and J.J. Messner and Hannah Blyth (The Fund for Peace), with contributions by
Don McFetridge and Tom Green (Monkey Forest Consulting).

The document also significantly benefited from extensive comments provided
through an internal and external peer review process. The authors wish to thank
IFC colleagues Felipe Albertani, Diana Baird, Lalit Bhandari, Emmanuel Brace,
Richard Caines, Pablo Cardinale, Lori Conzo, Leyla Day, John Graham, Rob Horner,
Konrad Huber, Alex Indorf, Sofie Fleischer Michaelsen, Louis Philippe Mousseau,
Rosa Orellana, Justin Pooley, and Shaza Zeinelabdin for their contributions.

Thanks are also due to external reviewers, including: Brian Gonsalves (AngloGold
Ashanti); Jonathan Drimmer (Barrick Gold); Helen Simpson (British Petroleum);
Mark Eckstein, Nomsa Fulbrook-Kagwe, Ritu Kumar, Nikolas Stone (CDC Group);
Sebastian Spitzer (DEG Invest); Diana Klein (DFID UK); Giorgia Depaoli, Evelin
Lehis, Rachelle Marburg, Sukran Caglayan Mumcu, Elizabeth Smith (EBRD);
Robert Cameron (EDC); Amy Lehr (Foley Hoag); Margaret Wachenfeld (Institute
for Human Rights and Business); Roper Cleland, Yadaira Orsini (International
Alert); Hannah Clayton (ICMM); Claude Voillat (ICRC); Reg Manhas (Kosmos
Energy); Kate Wallace, Debra Zanewich (MIGA); Nick Cotts, Otto Sloan (Newmont
Mining); Uwe Fitschen, Johanna Imiela, Pablo von Waldenfels (Euler Hermes);
Glenn Bestall (Seven Energy); Ida Hyllested (UNICEF); and Jorge Villegas (World
Bank). The drafting team is very appreciative of the many valuable and insightful
comments and hopes the reviewers find their input reflected in this final version.

Finally, the team would like to thank CES’ Knowledge Management team, including
Fiorella Facello, Susan Holleran, and Dickson Tang, who supported the publication
of this Good Practice Handbook.




                                                                                     Acknowledgments | ix
                                                                                     ﻿
Executive Summary


Companies around the world commonly hire or contract security personnel to
protect their employees, facilities, assets, and operations, ranging from a single night
watchman to a large contingent of private security guards, or even deployment
of public security forces. While many companies already assess the types and
likelihood of security threats posed by their operating environment, they are
increasingly being called upon to consider the impacts their security arrangements
might have on local communities.

Good practice regarding the use of security forces is based on the concept that
providing security and respecting human rights can and should be consistent.
This translates into implementation of policies and practices that ensure security
provision is carried out responsibly, with any response being proportional to the
threat. Proactive communication, community engagement, and grievance redress
are central to this approach, often through collaboration between security and
community relations departments. Gender considerations are also important, as
women often have different experiences and interactions with security personnel.
Companies have a responsibility to ensure proper hiring, training, rules of conduct,
and supervision of private security personnel. They should also encourage public
security personnel to use proper restraint when responding to situations related
to the project.

These expectations are reflected in IFC’s Performance Standard 4: Community
Health, Safety, and Security, which requires companies to 1) assess the security
risk their operations may have or could create for communities; 2) develop ways to
manage and mitigate these risks; 3) manage private security responsibly; 4) engage
with public security; and 5) consider and investigate allegations of unlawful acts
by security personnel. Performance Standard 4 applies to companies of any size
and in any country or sector.


                                                                                           Executive Summary | xi
                       This Handbook provides practical, project-level guidance for IFC clients and other
                       private sector companies operating in emerging markets to better understand and
                       implement the security-related provisions outlined in Performance Standard 4.
                       Specific guidance is provided throughout the document to differentiate expectations
                       for companies with lower risks from those with more complex and challenging
                       security-related risks and impacts. The Handbook is divided into the following
                       five sections:

                       Assessing and evaluating potential security risks is the first step in determining
                       the level and types of security arrangements a company might need. The level of
                       effort required should be commensurate with the threat environment in which the
                       project is operating, ranging from a relatively straightforward screening of risks
                       to undertaking a more formal and comprehensive Security Risk Assessment that
 Risk
 Assessment            may need to consider more in-depth political, socioeconomic, military, or other
                       aspects. As a starting point, a company should consider likely threats that would
                       require a response by security personnel, and the potential impact that such a
                       response might have on community members. It is also important to consider if
                       and how the very presence of the company may affect the security of the local
                       community.

                       Engaging some type of private security—whether in-house employees or contracted
                       security providers—is common practice for many companies operating in emerging
                       markets. While private security may vary in form and tasks, the objective of its
                       presence should be about protection of people and property and the reduction
 Managing              of risk. Decisions regarding the type, number, responsibilities, and arming of
 Private               private security forces should flow from an assessment of the security risks and
 Security              appropriate responses. Performance Standard 4 describes the requirements for
                       assessing risks and for hiring, conduct, training, equipping, and monitoring. Even
                       when such functions are undertaken by a security contractor, the company retains
                       oversight responsibility to ensure that these expectations have been met.

              Interaction with public security forces can be challenging for companies as they
              do not control the decisions or behavior of public security personnel and may
              have limited influence in this regard. Nevertheless, they may be associated with
              the actions of public security forces in the eyes of local communities and other
              stakeholders. Consequently, in situations where public forces are responding
 Managing the
              to incidents related to the project, companies have an interest in encouraging
 Relationship
              public security personnel to behave consistently with the principles set out for
 with Public
              private security personnel in Performance Standard 4. At minimum, companies are
 Security
              encouraged to assess the risks posed by public security forces and seek opportunities
              to engage with them to try and reduce such risks.



xii | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
           A Security Management Plan is an important industry standard tool that describes
           how security will be managed and delivered and what resources will be required.
           The Security Management Plan is the company’s overarching guidance document
           for all other procedures and protocols related to security. It also should consider
           risks and impacts to communities posed by a company’s security arrangements
Preparing
a Security and include provisions and mitigation measures to address these. The Security
Management Management Plan should link to the Security Risk Assessment and respond to
Plan       identified risks, providing direction, organization, integration, and continuity
           to the company’s security and asset-protection program. The level of effort in
           assessing and managing security risks should be commensurate with the level of
           security risk associated with the project and its operating context.

                 It is good practice and part of sound risk management for companies to have clear
                 policies and procedures for handling security-related allegations or incidents. Every
                 allegation or incident related to security should be documented and then assessed
                 with the objective of determining whether company policies and procedures were
Assessing        complied with and if any corrective or preventive actions are required. The level
Allegations      of depth and detail of inquiry should reflect the severity and credibility of the
or Incidents
                 allegation or incident. Unlawful or abusive acts should be reported to appropriate
Related to
                 authorities, and companies are advised to actively monitor the status of any
Security
                 ongoing criminal investigations led by government authorities. Companies are
Personnel
                 also encouraged to communicate outcomes to complainants and other relevant
                 parties, keeping in mind confidentiality provisions and the need to protect victims.
                 Where appropriate, it can also be constructive to share relevant lessons learned
                 and any efforts to incorporate these into company policy and/or practice.




                                                                                Executive Summary | xiii
C H A P T E R                 I
      INTRODUCTION:
      Security Issues in
      the Context of the
      Performance Standards
Introduction: Security Issues in the
Context of the Performance Standards


Companies around the world commonly hire or contract security personnel to
protect their employees, facilities, assets, and operations. In low-risk environments,
security arrangements may simply consist of fencing, sign posting, and perhaps
a night watchman. In higher-risk environments, companies may need a greater
level of security, requiring them to engage private security contractors or even
work directly with public security forces in the area.

In determining security needs, companies typically assess the types and likelihood
of security threats posed by their operating environment. They are increasingly
being called upon to consider the impacts their security arrangements might
have on local communities. In more complex security environments, particularly
those with a history of violent conflict or tensions between communities and the
government, the presence of the project itself might pose certain security risks
for a range of stakeholders.


IFC’S SUSTAINABILITY FRAMEWORK AND SECURITY ISSUES

The 2012 Sustainability Framework articulates IFC’s strategic commitment to
sustainable development and is an integral part of the institution’s approach to risk
management.1 At its core are eight Performance Standards (PSs), which address
a range of environmental and social issues arising in private sector projects.
The Performance Standards are designed to help companies avoid, mitigate, and
manage risk as a means of doing business in a sustainable way.



1
    	 IFC’s Sustainability Framework and the Performance Standards can be found at
     www.ifc.org/sustainabilityframework.



                                                   Introduction: Security Issues in the Context of the Performance Standards | 3
                       Security issues, while intersecting with environmental and social aspects in other
                       Performance Standards, are primarily covered in Performance Standard 4: Community
                       Health, Safety, and Security. The objectives of Performance Standard  4 are:
                       1) to anticipate and avoid adverse impacts on the health and safety of affected
                       communities during the project life from both routine and nonroutine circumstances
                       and 2) to ensure that the safeguarding of personnel and property is carried out
                       in accordance with relevant human rights principles and in a manner that avoids
                       or minimizes risks to the affected communities.2

                       Briefly, Performance Standard 4 requires companies to do the following:

                             •	 Assess the security risk their operations may have or could create for
                                communities;

                             •	 Develop ways to manage and mitigate these risks;

                             •	 Manage private security responsibly;

                             •	 Engage with public security; and

                             •	 Consider and investigate allegations of unlawful acts by security
                                personnel.
                       2
                           	 IFC Performance Standard 4, Objectives.

4 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Box 1 provides the full text of the security aspects of Performance Standard 4,
and Figure 2 (on pages 12 and 13) illustrates implementation of the process.




    Box 1: IFC Performance Standard 4—Security


    Security Personnel

    12. When the client retains direct or contracted workers to provide security to
    safeguard its personnel and property, it will assess risks posed by its security
    arrangements to those within and outside the project site. In making such
    arrangements, the client will be guided by the principles of proportionality and
    good international practicea in relation to hiring, rules of conduct, training,
    equipping, and monitoring of such workers, and by applicable law. The client
    will make reasonable inquiries to ensure that those providing security are
    not implicated in past abuses; will train them adequately in the use of force
    (and where applicable, firearms), and appropriate conduct toward workers
    and Affected Communities; and require them to act within the applicable
    law. The client will not sanction any use of force except when used for
    preventive and defensive purposes in proportion to the nature and extent
    of the threat. The client will provide a grievance mechanism for Affected
    Communities to express concerns about the security arrangements and
    acts of security personnel.

    13. The client will assess and document risks arising from the project’s use of
    government security personnel deployed to provide security services. The client
    will seek to ensure that security personnel will act in a manner consistent
    with paragraph 12 above, and encourage the relevant public authorities to
    disclose the security arrangements for the client’s facilities to the public,
    subject to overriding security concerns.

    14. The client will consider and, where appropriate, investigate all allegations of
    unlawful or abusive acts of security personnel, take action (or urge appropriate
    parties to take action) to prevent recurrence, and report unlawful and abusive
    acts to public authorities.



    a. Including practice consistent with the United Nation’s (UN) Code of Conduct for Law
      Enforcement Officials, and UN Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law
      Enforcement Officials.




                                              Introduction: Security Issues in the Context of the Performance Standards | 5
                       IFC Performance Standard 4 (paragraphs 12–14) outlines IFC’s requirements
                       regarding the assessment and management of security risks related to both private
                       and public security forces.3 The expectations placed on companies for actively
                       managing private security versus engaging with public security are based on
                       companies’ expected level of control over each. (See Table 1.)




  Performance Standard 4 expects
  companies to consider security risks
  TO communities as well as security
  risks FROM communities.




                       3
                           	 See also IFC’s Guidance Note 4 on Performance Standard 4, which provides helpful guidance and good
                            practice on Performance Standard 4 requirements.



6 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Table 1: Company Control and Responsibilities

 Private Security                            Public Security

Company Degree of Control and Corresponding Leverage under PS 4

 Company has significant direct              Public security forces are typically
 control over private security               outside of a company’s direct control
                                             and degree of leverage/influence can
                                             vary significantly

 Expectations to meet standards              Expectations focus on company
 related to hiring, conduct, training,       engagement with public authorities
 equipping, and monitoring                   and efforts to influence outcomes
                                             where feasible

 Contract terms are the key                  Best efforts to agree on rules
                                             of engagement and conduct—
                                             documented, if possible, in a
                                             Memorandum of Understanding or
                                             similar agreement

Company Responsibilities under PS 4

Assessment of risk and                      Assessment of risk from public forces
implementation of good practice in          deployed to provide security services
hiring, training, and employment of
private security forces

Appropriate conduct and use of force        Communication of principles of
by security personnel                       conduct and encouragement of public
                                            security forces to implement good
                                            practices and to disclose security
                                            arrangements

Grievance mechanism for security
concerns

Communication and discussion with
workers and communities regarding
security arrangements

Consideration of allegations of
unlawful acts by security personnel




                                     Introduction: Security Issues in the Context of the Performance Standards | 7
                       KEY PRINCIPLES

                       Good practice regarding the use of security forces is based on the concept that
                       providing security and respecting human rights can and should be consistent.
                       This translates into implementation of policies and practices that ensure security
                       provision is carried out responsibly, with any response being proportional to the
                       threat. Proactive communication, community engagement, and grievance redress
                       are central to this approach, often through collaboration between security and
                       community relations departments. Gender considerations are also important, as
                       women often have different experiences and interactions with security personnel.
                       These ideas are elaborated in five good practice principles presented in Figure 1
                       and discussed below.


                       Figure 1: Five Good Practice Principles




                                                         Interconnections
                                                             Make the link
                                                          between security and
                                                          community relations




                                                                                       Community
                              Human Rights                                             Engagement
                             Providing security is                                     Coordinate with
                           consistent with respect                                   community relations
                              for human rights               Five Good               and ensure grievance
                                                                                         mechanisms
                                                              Practice
                                                             Principles



                                           Proportional                          Gender
                                            Responses
                                                                           Consider women’s
                                        Use of force should be             unique experiences
                                            defensive and                   and perspectives
                                           preventive only




8 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Interconnectedness between Security (PS 4) and Other Performance Standards

Experience has shown that company-community tension over any issue can
quickly and easily become a security issue. Even small conflicts over any type
of environmental or social concern—whether water, lack of perceived benefits,
pollution, or working conditions—can suddenly turn into a spontaneous protest
at the project gates or a blockade of an access road, resulting in a security
situation that a company may not be prepared for. Similarly, the proper actions of
security personnel in the context of
labor-union gatherings or strikes
(PS 2), involuntary resettlement of
                                           Companies should consider the
households (PS 5), or activism by
indigenous communities (PS 7) is           identification and management
essential to ensuring the rights and       of security risks to be part of the
safety of local communities and to
the reputation of companies and            overall Environmental and Social
governments worldwide. Against             Management System described in
this backdrop, Performance
Standard 4 should be read in               Performance Standard 1.
conjunction with all of the other
Performance Standards.

Community Engagement and Grievance Mechanism for Security-Related Issues4

Making the link between security and community relations is key. Community
engagement is a central aspect of a good security program, and good relations
with employees and local communities can substantially contribute to overall
security in the project area. Companies can avoid internal operational silos by
ensuring that their Security staff coordinate regularly with other departments,
such as Community Relations and Human Resources. Through its Community
Relations function, a company can share information with communities about
security arrangements, the company’s security policies, and the expected conduct
of security personnel. Dialogue with communities about security issues can also
help a company identify potential risks and local concerns, and can serve as an
early warning system.

Community members should know where to go with complaints about the conduct
of security personnel. Can they lodge such complaints through the company’s
general community grievance mechanism or is there one specifically for security


4
    	 See also IFC’s guidance on “Addressing Grievances from Project-Affected Communities”: www.ifc.org/
     GPN-Grievance.




                                                  Introduction: Security Issues in the Context of the Performance Standards | 9
                       concerns—or even an alternative complaint mechanism (for example, as part of
                       the local justice system)? Companies should have a clear process and communicate
                       it. Equally important is community members’ awareness of their ability to make
                       such complaints without fear of intimidation or reprisal. Because guards often
                       are the first point of contact with community members at the project gates, they
                       should also be informed about their role in community relations and about the
                       grievance mechanism and any key issues requiring messaging to local communities.

                       Gender Considerations

                       Gender considerations are also important, as women often have different experiences
                       and interactions with security personnel. For example, the potential for sexual
                       harassment or sexual violence against women can increase from an expanded
                       presence of private or public security forces in a project area. Consulting women
                       separately may offer important perspectives and may help companies identify a
                       fuller range of potential risks and community concerns. At the same time, security
                       personnel’s awareness of and respect for culturally specific gender issues may help
                       the local population accept their presence. Some companies have had success in
                       improving cultural acceptance and reducing tensions by hiring female security
                       guards, particularly in situations where there are frequent interactions between
                       guards and women from the community. (See Box 2.)




                            Box 2: Related Roles of Security and Community Relations

                            Many companies have improved their security situation and their
                            relationships with local communities through greater collaboration
                            and coordination between their Community Relations and Security
                            staff. The demeanor and conduct of security staff in relation to the local
                            population usually reflect directly on the company and have the potential to
                            affect company-community relationships, positively or negatively. Community
                            Relations officers can pass along community grievances or security concerns,
                            alert security staff to sources of contention between local communities and
                            the company that could pose security risks, and help communicate important
                            security information to the local population. Community members, in turn,
                            are often in a position to identify potential risks and local concerns (that
                            the Security department may not have considered) and can help improve
                            security by providing local information and early warnings.




10 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
The Principle of Proportionality in Security Responses

The principle of proportionality means that the intensity of any security response
should correspond to the nature and gravity of the threat or offense. As per
Performance Standard 4, companies should “not sanction any use of force except
when used for preventive and defensive purposes in proportion to the nature and
extent of the threat.”5 Security personnel should be instructed to exercise restraint
and caution, and to prioritize peaceful resolution of disputes and the prevention
of injuries and fatalities.6

Security and Human Rights

Providing security and respecting human rights can and should be consistent.7 The
connection between human rights and security is aligned with the commitment
in Performance Standard 1 that “Business should respect human rights, which
means to avoid infringing on the human rights of others and address adverse
human rights impacts business may cause or contribute to.”8

Interactions with security forces have the potential to affect the rights and safety
of individuals and communities. At the most extreme, the use of lethal force could
result in loss of life. The use of excessive force, as well as unlawful detention,
also may threaten the right to liberty and security of the person. Other possible
impacts include limitations to freedom of movement or assembly or expression,
or even restrictions on employees’ freedom of association. Companies have a
responsibility to ensure proper hiring, training, conduct, and supervision of private
security personnel. They should also encourage public security personnel to use
proper restraint when responding to situations related to the project. Community
members should also be able to engage with a company and register complaints
without fear of reprisal.


5
    	 IFC Performance Standard 4, paragraph 12.
6
    	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 29.
7
    	Ibid.
8
    	 IFC Performance Standard 1, paragraph 3.




                                                  Introduction: Security Issues in the Context of the Performance Standards | 11
Figure 2: Key Steps in Assessing and Managing Security Risks and Impacts

                      Blue Italics—Key questions for companies to ask       Green—Possible means of documentation



1                                                         (Chapter II)       2                                                    (Chapters III, IV, V)


Assess Risks                                                                 Prevent and Mitigate Impacts
Assessing security risks can be simple and straightforward in                As with other Performance Standards issues, companies
low-risk contexts. The person responsible for security—ideally               should seek to avoid, minimize, and compensate for or o set
with input from other departments—should consider:                           negative impacts. Where potential risks or impacts are
                                                                             identiﬁed, companies should consider two key questions:
▶ Security Risks (p. 23)
  What might reasonably happen that would require some type of               ▶ How can potential risks or impacts be prevented before they
  action by security (security guards, police, army)?                          happen?
▶ Security Response (pp. 24–25)                                              ▶ How can negative impacts be mitigated after they happen?
  How are those security personnel likely to react and respond to
  those identiﬁed risks?                                                     Companies can prevent or mitigate negative impacts through
                                                                             corporate policies and engagement with private security (Chapter III)
▶ Potential Impacts (pp. 26–29)                                              or public security (Chapter IV). These e orts should also be reﬂected
  What are the potential impacts from that response, focusing                in a Security Management Plan (Chapter V, pp. 81–87). In low-risk
  especially on impacts on communities?                                      contexts, this plan may be relatively brief and may be incorporated
Document the outcomes of this process through a Risk-Response                into other policies and procedures as part of a company’s broader
Chart (p. 30) or any other basic format (e.g., Excel sheet) that             Environmental and Social Management System.
captures the potential risks, responses, and impacts.




3                                                                                                                                        (Chapter III)


Manage Private Security
Private security guards may be company employees or be contracted through a third-party security provider. Regardless,
companies retain responsibility for ensuring that minimum standards are met—either through their own contracts and
enforcement or through oversight of private security providers. This includes attention to:

 ▶ Vetting (pp. 46–47)                                                                    ▶ Equipping (pp. 49, 51)
   Who is providing security? Does anything in the guards’ background give cause            Do guards have what they need to do their jobs properly
   for concern? Companies need to make reasonable inquiries to ensure that                  and safely? This usually means a uniform and
   no guard has a history of past abuse or dishonesty. This may involve                     identiﬁcation and some type of communication
   background checks or cross-checking with other companies, domestic or                    device (typically a radio). In some cases it includes
   foreign government o cials, UN missions, etc., as appropriate to the                     non-lethal weapons, such as pepper spray. The
   country context.                                                                         decision to arm guards with lethal force, such as a
                                                                                            gun (pp. 51–52), is a serious one that should derive
 ▶ Ensuring appropriate use of force (pp. 46, 48)
                                                                                            from the assessment of risk and be accompanied
   Do guards know what is expected of them? Are they prepared to react with
                                                                                            with a dedicated training program.
   appropriate and proportional force in any situation? Companies should use
   their policies and procedures, reinforced by training, to provide clear                ▶ Monitoring (p. 53)
   instructions to directly employed guards. This can be as simple as                       Are guards performing professionally and appropriately?
   including a clause in the employment contract setting out expectations,                  Companies should check to conﬁrm that policies
   and following up with training.                                                          and procedures remain relevant, and that guards
                                                                                            are aware of and following them.
 ▶ Training (p. 49)
   What will a guard do if a community member approaches in a nonthreatening              Companies contracting security services still retain
   way? In a threatening way? Training should focus on appropriate behavior               oversight responsibility of third-party security providers
   and use of force. In low-risk contexts this can involve just a brief review of         to ensure appropriate vetting, use of force, training,
   policies and procedures, recorded in a log, to ensure that guards                      equipping, and monitoring of guards.
   understand how to respond to common interactions and scenarios.

  12 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
                       Blue Italics—Key questions for companies to ask      Green—Possible means of documentation



4                                                                                                                                    (Chapter IV)


Manage the Relationship
with Public Security
Particularly in low-risk contexts, companies may have limited interactions with public security forces—this is especially true
regarding national forces, such as the army or navy. Still, most companies are likely to need support from at least the local police in
the case of an incident, and it’s important to understand who will be responding, and how. The focus is on assessment and
engagement, building on key questions, such as:
▶ Public Security Response (pp. 62–65)
  When are public security forces likely to be involved? (E.g., only when called on, or potentially in other cases as well?) What type of
  individual or unit is likely to respond? How are they likely to respond? (E.g., what kind of capacity, mandate, reputation, etc., do they
  have, and how might this apply to likely scenarios involving the company?)
▶ Engagement (pp. 65–74)
  Are there opportunities to establish a relationship with police or other relevant public security forces? Companies are encouraged to reach
  out to authorities—preferably in advance of any issue—to understand potential deployments and, to the extent possible, to
  promote appropriate and proportional use of force. In low-risk contexts, this may involve simply making introductions to the
  local police commander and initiating a discussion about when and how authorities are likely to respond to incidents at the
  company or involving company personnel.
▶ Documentation (p. 75)
  Companies should document their engagement e orts, whether or not they are successful (e.g., in a basic meeting log with
  dates, attendees, and key topics).




5                                                                                                             (Chapter III, pp. 52–53, Chapter VI)


Address Grievances
When security problems arise or communities have complaints, companies should ensure that they have a method to respond.
This generally involves:
▶ Receiving Complaints (p. 94)
  How can communities share information about allegations or incidents? (What is the company’s grievance mechanism?) How are
  complaints recorded and information collected?
▶ Assessing (p. 95)
  How are complaints considered? What type of inquiry is undertaken for more serious issues? (What is the company’s inquiry
  procedure?) Companies should record their information, analysis, and any conclusions or recommendations in a basic memo or
  incident report.
▶ Reporting (p. 95)
  Alleged illegal acts should be reported to the proper authorities.
▶ Acting and Monitoring (pp. 95–96)
  What can be done to prevent recurrence? Are remedial actions needed for a ected parties? Companies are encouraged to
  identify lessons learned and to integrate these into future practices and, where appropriate, to communicate them to external
  stakeholders.




                                                         Introduction: Security Issues in the Context of the Performance Standards | 13
                       IMPLEMENTING PERFORMANCE STANDARD 4

                    This Handbook provides practical, project-level guidance for IFC clients and other
                    private sector companies operating in emerging markets to better understand and
                    implement the security-related provisions outlined in Performance Standard 4. Like
                    Performance Standard 4, this Handbook is applicable to companies of varying
                    size and risk level, and operating in any country or sector. Specific guidance is
                                                                      provided throughout the document
                                                                      to differentiate expectations for
                                                                      companies with lower risks from
  Level of     effort should be based
                                                                      those with more complex and
  on risk.                                                                                challenging security-related risks
                                                                                          and impacts. (See Figure 3.)

Figure 3: Spectrum of Security Personnel Corresponding to Level of Risk


               LOW                                       MEDIUM                                          HIGH




            Guard or night                              Guards protecting                          Public security on site
            watchman, unarmed,                          facility with access                       or nearby, in high-risk
            at low-risk, low-proﬁle                     controls, weapons                          environment with
            facility in stable                          either possessed or                        history of conﬂict,
            environment                                 available, situated in                     tensions, and violence
                                                        area with some history
                                                        of crime, etc.


                       OTHER INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS ON SECURITY

                       It is important for companies to be aware of other international standards related
                       to security management. However, adherence to the following (or other) standards
                       does not replace a company’s responsibility to undertake due diligence in accordance
                       with Performance Standard 4:

                             •	 UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials 9 (1979)
                                 Principles and prerequisites for law enforcement officials to perform their duties
                                 while respecting and protecting human dignity and human rights




                       9
                           	 www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/LawEnforcementOfficials.aspx.



14 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
      •	 UN Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement
          Officials 10 (1990)
          Principles on use of force and firearms by law enforcement officials

      •	 Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights 11 (2000)
          Internationally recognized set of principles designed to guide companies in
          maintaining the safety and security of their operations within an operating
          framework that encourages respect for human rights (See Box 3.)

      •	 International Code of Conduct for Private Security Service Providers 12 (2010)
          Principles and standards applicable to private security companies (companies
          providing guard forces)

      •	 UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights 13 (2011)
          Global standard for preventing and addressing the risk of adverse human rights
          impacts linked to business activity




         Box 3: Performance Standard 4 and the Voluntary Principles

         The Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights are considered good
         international practice and provide helpful guidance to companies. While
         implementation of the Voluntary Principles is not a requirement of
         Performance Standard 4, the two significantly overlap, and proper
         implementation of one generally suggests broad conformance with
         the other. The Voluntary Principles were originally focused on extractive
         industries, but a growing number of companies in a range of sectors are
         also choosing to implement them.




10
     	 www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/UseOfForceAndFirearms.aspx.
11
     	 www.voluntaryprinciples.org.
12
     	 www.icoca.ch/.
13
     	 www.business-humanrights.org/en/un-guiding-principles.



                                                 Introduction: Security Issues in the Context of the Performance Standards | 15
C H A P T E R               I I
       Assessing Security
       Risks
Assessing Security Risks


Assessing and evaluating potential security risks is the first step in determining the
level and types of security arrangements a company might need. Decisions as to
whether guards should carry firearms or whether fences should be electrified, for
example, should be based on an informed analysis of whether the level of risk calls
for such measures, as well as on consideration of the impact these arrangements
might have on employees, local communities, and security personnel themselves.




Figure 4: Objectives of Assessing Security Risks


                                           Identify, evaluate, and
                                           prioritize risks and likely
                                           security responses


                                           Understand and respond to
                                           community concerns and
                                           perceptions



          Assess security                  Determine appropriate
                                           security arrangements
             risks to

                                           Inform mitigation plans and
                                           project resource implications




                                                                                 Assessing Security Risks | 19
                       Performance Standard 4 outlines requirements for assessing a company’s security
                       arrangements, including both private security14 and public security.15 The level of
                       effort required in assessing security risks should be commensurate with the threat
                       environment in which the project is operating. For clients with lower-impact
                       operations in stable settings, a review of threats and related risks can be relatively
                       straightforward. For operations in higher-risk environments, the level of analysis
                       merited will be a more formal and comprehensive Security Risk Assessment (SRA)
                       that may need to consider political, socioeconomic, or military aspects, patterns
                       and causes of violence, and potential for future conflicts.16




                       14 	
                             “When the client retains direct or contracted workers to provide security to safeguard its personnel and
                             property, it will assess risks posed by its security arrangements to those within and outside the project site.”
                             IFC Performance Standard 4, paragraph 12.
                       15
                             “The client will assess and document risks arising from the project’s use of government security personnel
                            	
                             deployed to provide security services.” IFC Performance Standard 4, paragraph 13.
                       16
                             IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 25.
                            	



20 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
    Key Takeaway for Lower-Risk Contexts

    In straightforward contexts where risks are limited and impacts are not
    expected to be significant, an assessment of security risks can be a relatively
    simple process. Companies should consider likely threats that would require
    a response by security personnel (such as guards, police, army) and the
    potential impact that such a response might have on community members.
    It is also important to consider if and how the very presence of the company
    may affect the security of the local community.



SECURITY RISK SCREENING: 10 QUESTIONS ALL COMPANIES
SHOULD ANSWER

A company’s initial screening of security risks can be undertaken by external
consultants or by those in charge of security within the company, ideally including
input from different functions within the company, such as Community Relations,
Human Resources, and Government Relations. Some companies also find it useful
to consult with external stakeholders, such as community representatives, local
authorities, and public security. Where a company’s Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) is comprehensive and includes a wide range of information
about potential risks and impacts, the assessment of security risks can incorporate
and build on information in the ESIA. While many companies already assess a
project’s security risks from a company perspective, often these do not consider
potential impacts on communities.

It is important for companies to
document the outcomes of their
risk-screening exercise. (See
                                             Risk assessment should be done as
Box 4.) Many companies use a                 early as possible, but is a valuable
simple “Risk Register”—a security-
specific type of risk-response
                                             tool at any stage of operations. It
chart—to list potential risks and            should be undertaken even if no
likely security responses. This
                                             assessment was done at project
can be constructed by following
the steps outlined below, which              initiation.
answer the 10 questions shown
in Figure 5. Answers to the first
eight questions (Steps 1–8) contribute a new column of information to complete
the chart. (For a sample completed chart, with example responses filled in for
illustrative purposes, see Figure 6 on page 30.)

                                                                                      Assessing Security Risks | 21
                            Box 4: Key Company Documents

                            Companies of any size, operating in any context, should have some level
                            of documentation that reflects internal risk-management policies related
                            to security. In addition to the project-level Security Risk Assessment and
                            Security Management Plan, many companies also have a Corporate Security
                            Policy, an Ethics and/or Human Rights Policy, and a Use of Force Policy.

                            While it is not necessary to have these exact, stand-alone policies, it is good
                            practice to cover this information in some form, with the scope based on the
                            project’s particular situation. For example, companies operating in complex,
                            high-risk environments typically have a comprehensive Use of Force Policy as
                            a standard document, while companies operating in low-risk environments
                            may simply enumerate protocols relating to use of force in a security guard’s
                            employment contract. Companies also often have emergency response plans,
                            which should also take into account security’s appropriate role in case of
                            an emergency and how it will be managed.




                       Figure 5: Ten Questions All Companies Should Answer

                        1                          2                      3                          4
                        What are the               How likely is it       What would be the          If a security incident/
                        potential risks to the     that these risks       likely security            response happens,
                        project that may           will occur?            response?                  what would be the
                        require a security                                                           impacts on the
                        response?                                                                    company?




                                                     7                     6                           5
                                                    How severe would       If a security incident/     How severe would
                                                    these impacts be on    response happens,           these impacts be on
                                                    the community?         what would be the           the company?
                                                                           impact on the
                                                                           community?




                                                 8                        9                            10
                                                 What are possible        Which risks are              Is a full Security
                                                 mitigation measures      highest priority for         Risk Assessment
                                                 that prevent or          mitigation, based on         needed?
                                                 reduce negative          likelihood and severity
                                                 impacts?                 of impact?




22 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Step 1. What are the potential risks to the project that may require a security
response?

List all realistically possible threats that may call for action by private and/or
public security forces, including risks arising from the following activities of the
company:

•	 Operating environment	
   Contextual circumstances (poverty, corruption, crime, legacy issues such as
   unsettled political claims or unresolved land disputes), direct threats (organized
   crime, anti-industry movements, terrorism, violent/armed conflict), national
  security requirements (especially where public security presence is nonnegotiable)

•	 Relationship with local communities	
   Related directly to company operations (labor and workplace, community health
   and well-being, access to land or natural resources, resettlement, compensation,
   associated population influx), agitation from actions the company does not
   take (unmet community expectations, or where benefit sharing is perceived
   to be lacking or unfair)

•	 Security response to an incident	
   Escalation from past interactions that increased tensions with communities

Table 2 lists some potential risks. (Other risks may also apply.)


Table 2: Examples of Potential Risks

            Potential Risks to a Project That May Require a Security Response
  More Common Risks                More Serious Risks                     Rare, Severe Risks

  Most projects have          Projects in more complex           Few projects face such intense
  at least some risk of       security environments              security risks, which typically are
  these occurring             may face these risks               found only in more conflicted
                                                                 areas
  Trespassing                 Robbery                            Invasion/occupation of company
                                                                 land or property
  Vandalism                   Assault                            Riot
  Petty theft                 Armed protest                      Hostage taking
  Roadblock                   Sabotage of company                Kidnapping
                              property or operations
  Community protests          Shooting or other use of           Personal or communal attacks
                              offensive weapons                  causing fatalities (e.g., bombing,
                                                                 murder, etc.)


                                                                                Assessing Security Risks | 23
                       Step 2. How likely is it that these risks will occur?

                       For each potential risk, assess the likelihood of its occurrence, taking into consideration
                       both the current conditions and historical context. This is often quantified using
                       a Likert scale (0–5 or 0–10) but can also be categorized with high-medium-low
                       or red-yellow-green (“stoplight” model). The example in this Handbook uses a
                       scale ranging from 1 (low probability) to 5 (nearly certain).

                       Step 3. What would be the likely security response?

                       Identify the security response most likely to occur for each of the risks: how
                       would the company’s private security or local public security react to each type
                       of security incident? Consider both who (private or public security or both) is
                       likely to respond as well as how they are likely to respond. Table 3 lists some
                       hypothetical responses. (Other responses are also possible.) Responses in purple
                       italics are never appropriate, but nevertheless are possible.




                       Table 3: Potential Responses by Security Personnel

                        Passive Deterrents

                         Access Control                       Physical measures to prevent access to or
                                                              passage through restricted areas, such as
                                                              gates, signage, guards, fences, surveillance
                                                              systems, etc.

                         Visual presence of security          Guards (and guard dogs) stationed at access
                                                              points to process ingress and egress, but
                                                              who also serve as a visible deterrent.

                         Observe and report                   Guards observe, report, and record activity.

                        Active Deterrents (Actions that are never acceptable are in purple italics)

                        Verbal instructions, warning,        Guards issue verbal warnings to people who
                        refusal of passage/entry             attempt or threaten to attempt to circumvent
                                                             physical security measures. The warnings may
                                                             include notice that additional security is being
                                                             called.

                        Show of force                        Guards increase their numbers or demonstrate
                                                             their weapons as visual indications of potential
                                                             escalation of security response.

                                                                                                       (continued)

24 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Reasonable detention                Guards detain people discovered to have
                                    trespassed or committed theft, etc., on the
                                    company site for only as long as it takes for
                                    police to arrive and assume responsibility.

Intimidation or harassment          Guards use their position (or, in particular, their
                                    weapons or guard dogs) as a tool for intimidating or
                                    harassing community members, especially where no
                                    immediate risk or threat is present.

Escalation (Actions that are never acceptable are in purple italics)

Use of nonlethal force              Guards use nonlethal force defensively (e.g.,
                                    batons, nonlethal ammunition) to repel an
                                    external physical threat, subject to existing
                                    use-of-force protocols.

Arrest by public authorities        Guards request the intervention of police to
                                    apprehend and/or arrest people alleged to
                                    have committed criminal acts such as theft,
                                    trespass, assault.

Lethal force (to protect life)      Guards use lethal force defensively to protect
                                    against an immediate threat to human life,
                                    subject to existing use-of-force protocols.

Inappropriate detention             Guards detain people either for no legitimate
                                    reason, or for longer or in conditions other than
                                    what is acceptable.

Inappropriate use of force          Guards use nonlethal force offensively, or outside
                                    of acceptable use-of-force protocols, or for
                                    illegitimate reasons (such as for purposes of
                                    criminal activity, etc.).

Assault or torture                  Guards detain people and physically or
                                    psychologically harm a detainee.

Inappropriate use of lethal force   Guards use lethal force offensively, or outside
                                    of acceptable use-of-force protocols, or for
                                    illegitimate reasons.




                                                                                          Assessing Security Risks | 25
                       Step 4. If a security incident/response happens, what would be the impact
                       on the company?

                       Assess the likely effects of a security incident on a company’s “people, property,
                       or production,” should the incident occur. Impacts may arise either from the
                       incident itself (such as loss of property from theft) or from the security response
                       to the incident (for example, aggressive opposition to a protest could provoke a
                       violent confrontation and risk causing injury to company employees or damage
                       to company property).

                       Step 5. How severe would these impacts be on the company?

                       Gauge the seriousness of the potential impacts identified in Step 4 on the company.
                       This may be presented through quantitative or qualitative rankings. The example
                       in this Handbook uses a scale ranging from 1 (very little noticeable impact) to 5
                       (shutdown or suspension of operations and/or injuries to employees).




26 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Step 6. If a security incident/response happens, what would be the impact
on the community?

Consider how local community members17 may be affected by security personnel
or arrangements. This includes impacts from a security response to an incident as
well as impacts from the presence of the project itself (including the introduction
of potentially new security arrangements such as fences, checkpoints, guard dogs,
or armed security guards):

•	 Impacts from a security response	
   A security response can come from private or public security and can have an
       impact on a single community member or the wider community. For example,
       a private security guard or the local police might engage in unlawful behavior
       when interacting with someone suspected of theft, or they might use excessive
       force in dispersing a community protest. (See Box 5 for examples of how
       security responses can cause risks to escalate.)

•	 Impacts from the presence of the project (and its security)	
   When a project comes into a largely undeveloped area, its very presence may
   create security-related issues or impacts. Security fences or other physical
   barriers may impede access to water or other important communal areas or
   routes. Population influx as a result of the project and associated rises in crime
   rates or community tensions can have indirect and direct impacts on security.18
   The introduction of security personnel into the area may also generate tensions
   where guards interact with community members. Because one aspect of security
   is to control key access points, security guards often are the first point of contact
   when community members come to the area to request (or demand) access
   to land, thoroughfare, or employment. These interactions can be a risk to the
   guard and/or the community member if not handled appropriately.

Both physical security measures and security guards can have particularly significant
impacts on women, who are likely to be traversing distances for domestic tasks.
They may be disproportionately affected by the presence of (typically male and
potentially armed) security guards, whom they may encounter daily in following
their routine. In some cases, women may be subjected to gender-related harassment
or intimidation or may be the victims of sexual violence. Consultation with
community representatives, including women, can be an important part of a
company’s risk identification and assessment.


17
     	Note that “community members” may include people who contribute to a security risk (such as protesters,
      alleged thieves, and so on) as well as those not involved with the project in any way.
18
     	See also IFC guidance on in-migration, “Projects and People: A Handbook for Addressing Project-Induced
      In-Migration”: www.ifc.org/HB-Inmigration.



                                                                                                            Assessing Security Risks | 27
                            Box 5: Dynamic Nature of Security Risks and Responses

                            In considering security risks, it is important to understand that a security
                            response to an incident can in turn create new risks. For example, if a previous
                            transit route is restricted by a new security fence, and a community member
                            circumvents the fence, security guards may consider that person to be
                            trespassing. If the guards intercept and handle him or her roughly, the person
                            is likely to feel disrespected. That person and other community members
                            who also object to the restricted access may protest, creating a roadblock
                            to draw attention to their grievance. Police are usually called to deal with
                            such a protest, which can increase the potential for violence—for example,
                            a confrontation that might result in a discharge of firearms. If this type of
                            escalation is observed by local civil society or the media, it is likely to lead to
                            reports that police shot at local community members on the company site.

                            While it is impossible to consider every extrapolation from every incident,
                            it is important to recognize how security reactions may in turn engender
                            other reactions—and potentially escalation. It is critical that security forces
                            attempt to de-escalate security situations as much as possible.




                                               Restricting Access Routes


                                                   Trespassing by Locals

                                             Rough Handling by Security

                                                Protest at Company Site

                                                   Use of Force by Police




28 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Step 7. How severe would these impacts be on the community?

Estimate the severity on the community of the potential impacts identified in
Step 6, based on how grave, widespread, and irremediable the impacts are expected
to be. The example in this Handbook uses a scale ranging from 1 (no noticeable
impact) to 5 (significant injuries to community members).

Step 8. What are possible mitigation measures that prevent or reduce negative
impacts?

Identify potential risk mitigation measures, taking into account potential security
risks, impacts on the company, and impacts on communities. Mitigation options
can decrease the risk itself (and thereby the need for a security response) or
decrease the potential for negative impact where a security response is necessary.
(Figure 6 provides an example of a completed risk-response chart.)

To decrease the need for a security response:

•	 Make illegal or threatening behavior more difficult and less appealing. Use
   lower-level security measures to prevent the need for a higher-level response
   (for example, higher fencing, greater visual presence of security).

•	 Understand and mitigate the underlying causes for security risks. Address
   security risks with a social solution (for example, reduce community members’
   trespassing to gain access to a water source by providing a direct route to the
   water source or by providing a new water source). Ensure that community
   members have access to a grievance mechanism.19

To improve the outcome of a security
response:

•	 Reduce the risk of an inappropriate use
   of force. Create the conditions for a
   professional guard force capable of an
   appropriate and proportional response
   (such as through vetting, training, strict
   control of weapons and ammunition,
   oversight).




19
     	Performance Standard 4 states that companies “will provide a grievance mechanism for Affected
      Communities to express concerns about the security arrangements and acts of security personnel.” IFC
      Performance Standard 4, paragraph 12.




                                                                                                             Assessing Security Risks | 29
                                                                        Figure 6: Example of a Risk-Response Chart

                                                                        STEPS                        1           2                     3                                  4              5                        6               7                       8


                                                                                        Security                             Security                        Impact on                              Impact on




                                                                                                                Likelihood
                                                                                                                                                                                         Severity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Severity
                                                                                        Risk                                 Response                        Company                                Community                                Mitigation
                                                                                                                 4           Access controls to              Loss of company             2          Alleged thieves risk          3          Ensure that guards have
                                                                                                                             prevent theft; private          property; potential                    injury or mistreat-                      clear guidelines for
                                                                                                                             security guards may             danger to employees if                 ment during apprehen-                    apprehension and
                                                                                               Theft                         apprehend suspected             thieves take property                  sion and/or detention                    short-term detention;
                                                                                                                             thieves and turn them           by force                                                                        encourage police to treat




                                                                            [Risk 1]
                                                                                                                             over to authorities                                                                                             suspects appropriately




                                                                                                                 3           Prevent or control              Disruption to               4          Injuries sustained            5          Ensure that guards and police
                                                                                                                             access to site; public          operations, par-                       from any use of force                    have clear protocols on
                                                                                                                             security may respond            ticularly sta access to                (justiﬁed or otherwise)                  dealing with protesters,
                                                                                             Protest                         physically if protest           site and transportation;               against a protest;                       particularly regarding use of
                                                                                                                             becomes violent                 possible injury to                     community resentment                     force; community relations




                                                                            [Risk 2]
                                                                                                                                                             employees                              toward company                           sta may be able to address




30 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             issues with community to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             prevent the need for protest

                                                                                                                 2           Access controls to              Potential safety            2          Frustration among              1         Community relations sta
                                                                                                                             prevent access,                  hazard and dis-                       community that                           consult with community on
                                                                                                                             including clear signage;        ruption to operations                  pre-existing access/transit              issues of access; guards have
                                                                                           Trespass                          guards may confront                                                    routes are no longer                     clear protocols on how to
                                                                                                                             people attempting to                                                   available; injuries sustained            appropriately confront




                                                                            [Risk 3]
                                                                                                                             walk through site                                                      by community members                     trespassers and lead them
                                                                                                                                                                                                    entering hazardous areas                 away from secured areas
                                                                                                                                                                                                    of the site

                                                                                                                 3           Presence of security            Limited immediate            1         Verbal harassment             4          Clarify expectations for
                                                                                                                             forces generates                impact; potential                      and/or physical                          appropriate behavior in
                                                                                         Harassment of                       potential threat                secondary impact to                    violation of community                   policies and procedures;
                                                                                           women by                                                          operations and/or                      members, particularly                    reinforce through regular
                                                                                                                                                             reputation from                        women                                    scenario-based training;
                                                                                         security guards




                                                                            [Risk 4]
                                                                                                                                                             community reaction                                                              ensure functioning grievance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mechanism


                                                                                       In this sample chart, hypothetical examples are listed for illustrative purposes. Actual results should be based on speciﬁc company contexts.
•	 Reduce the risk of a more severe outcome from the use of force. Consider
   authorization of access to and use of lethal force by private security personnel
   to be an exception that must be justified by the level of risk. Weapons may
   increase, rather than decrease, the range of risks to both security personnel and
   communities. When authorized, weapons and ammunition should be subject
   to strict protocols and access controls. Note that national laws may preclude
   possession of lethal weapons by private security personnel.

Step 9. Which risks are highest priority for mitigation, based on likelihood
and severity of impact?

Focus on addressing the most significant risks—those that are most likely to occur
and that would have the greatest potential negative impact (on the company, the
community, or both) if they did occur. For each identified risk, plot the Likelihood
“scores” on the X-axis and the higher of the two impact “scores” (Company Impact
or Community Impact) on the Y-axis. This Y-axis value captures the greatest
risk, whether to the company or the community. The resulting simple grid (see
the example in Figure 7) can be an early-indication heat map to help guide and
prioritize addressing the most imminent and severe security risks.


Figure 7: Example of a Heat Map to Prioritize Security Risks
for Mitigation

        High Impact
                                                     Protest
                               5
          Severity of impact




                               4


                                                               Theft
                               3
                                                             Harassment
                                              Trespass
                               2




                               1

         Low Impact
                                        1        2       3       4           5
                                   Unlikely                            Near Certain
                                              Likelihood of impact



                                                                                      Assessing Security Risks | 31
                       For example, using the four initial risks identified previously, it is possible to map
                       their likelihood and severity. Theft (risk 1) is ranked as 4 on a likelihood scale
                       ranging from 1–5, so the X-axis value is 4. Consideration of the severity of both
                       the incident and the likely security response resulted in a score of 2 for severity
                       of impact on the company and 3 for severity of impact on the community. Taking
                       the higher score results in a Y-axis value of 3. Doing the same for protest (risk 2),
                       trespass (risk 3), and harassment (risk 4) produces a simple grid to help the
                       company visualize risks and prioritize them for development and implementation
                       of mitigation measures. Note again that this is a hypothetical example, and the
                       full list of (typically more than four) risks should reflect the actual circumstances
                       of the project. (See Box 6 for guidance on updating the screening process.)




                            Box 6: Updating the Security Risk Screening

                            Companies should ensure that the security-risk information is up to
                            date for the project’s operating environment and reflects current
                            risks.a It is good practice to review security risks annually, or whenever
                            major events or changes occur at the project level (such as transition from
                            construction to operations) or in the operating context (such as a change
                            in government, escalating social unrest, health epidemic, economic crisis,
                            or other significant impact). This involves revisiting assumptions to ensure
                            that the analyses and conclusions remain valid, and updating as needed.

                            When the operating environment changes, companies should reassess
                            risks and opportunities and modify their security-management system
                            accordingly. At a national level, changes in the government—whether by
                            democratic transition or otherwise—may have an impact on the company’s
                            engagement strategy with government officials as well as with public security
                            forces, thus requiring a change in approach. At a more local level, when a
                            police chief changes, the company’s relationship with public security forces
                            may have to adjust accordingly.



                            a. IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 25.




32 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Step 10. Is a full Security Risk Assessment needed?

For many companies in low-risk to medium-risk security environments, the process
outlined above is likely sufficient for understanding and managing potential
security risks. A full Security Risk Assessment is recommended under either or
both of the following circumstances:

•	 Security risks to the company are high and/or the potential impacts on communities
   from a security response may be severe.

•	 The context is particularly complicated, or public security forces are likely to
   have a significant role.

PREPARING A SECURITY RISK ASSESSMENT: FOR COMPANIES
OPERATING IN HIGH-RISK CONTEXTS

In complex, high-risk circumstances where a full SRA is warranted, the assessment
of security risks should be more comprehensive and should include a more detailed
analysis of the operating environment and of the actual (or proposed) security
arrangements. Key components of an SRA are summarized in Figure 8 and described
in greater detail below. They include background research, an onsite assessment,
consideration of scenarios, and development or refinement of mitigation measures.
Importantly, the assessment process in high-risk contexts typically considers a
wider range of possible responses to security risks (such as through brainstorming
scenarios), as it can be more challenging to predict likely outcomes in complex
circumstances. Companies in this situation should ensure that they have sufficient
(internal or external) experienced experts to manage both this process and the
company’s security arrangements.




                                                                                 Assessing Security Risks | 33
                       Figure 8: Key Components of an SRA


                               Document                             Onsite
                                                                                                Scenarios
                                Review                            Assessment

                         Company's security               Observe project site and       Consider possible likely
                         practice and track record        security forces                scenarios based on risk
                                                                                         assessment
                         Company's security               Interview company and
                         policies, procedures, and        community representa-          Analyze likely security
                         other documents                  tives, private security        responses
                                                          provider, and local
                         Research country context         o cials
                         and security situation



                                    Prevention and                                      Security
                                      Mitigation                                        Expertise

                          Identify and prioritize key risks and           Ensure (internal or external) security
                          likely responses                                professional manages assessment

                          Develop or reﬁne prevention and                 Provide su cient resources and
                          mitigation measures to address                  access to support assessment
                          potential impacts




                       1. Document Review

                       Review of the company’s security practice and track record: Understanding the
                       company’s past experience can include a review of the historical security-incident
                       track record, if relevant, including how the incidents were managed and the outcome.

                       Review of the company’s security policies, procedures, and other documents,
                       such as the following:

                       •	 Corporate Security Policy

                       •	 Ethics and/or Human Rights Policy

                       •	 Use of Force Policy

                       •	 Project Security Risk Assessment and Security Management Plan (if they already
                          exist)

                       Other relevant documents can include employment contract/policies of a private
                       security provider; any Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) or similar agreement
                       with public security (if applicable); any analysis on the background and reputation
                       of individual guards or units; grievance mechanism and record of complaints or
                       previous incident reporting, including how these were handled; inquiry procedures;


34 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
and training materials and/or curricula provided to security personnel. A review
may also assess the historical and current security-management processes and
their appropriateness to the level of risk present in the external environment.

Research and analysis of the country context: Consideration of potential risk
in the broader operating environment may include inherent country risk, rule
of law, criminality, physical environment, socioeconomic context, governance,
conflict situation, and industry-specific information that could affect the security
situation. In addition to country-specific risk, it is also advisable to review the
strength and reputation of existing public security forces.

Research and analysis of the national and/or local security situation: Analysis of
the security situation often considers the availability and professional reputation
of private security, track record and human rights reputation of public security
forces (such as police or military), and any other significant elements in a company’s
particular circumstances.

2. Onsite Assessment

Observation of the project site and any existing security forces: This includes
simple visual observation of the guard force’s appearance, professionalism, actions,
and provision and storage of weapons and ammunition, as well as a review of
their knowledge/training, management and monitoring system, incident-reporting
system, and process of recording of allegations or incidents.

Interviews with company and
community representatives, as well
as the private security provider               “I want to know any issues of
and local officials, as applicable             concerns that our communities have.
and feasible, provide valuable
information.                                   If they don’t get solved proactively,
                                               they can end up at the gate. And that
3. Scenarios
                                               is often too late.”
Consideration of various security
scenarios and responses: In                                     —Security Manager at a large,
complex circumstances, there                                                        high-risk site
may be a range of possible
likely security responses to each
identified risk. To build understanding and prepare for potential outcomes, the
security team generally invests in an exercise of analyzing potential scenarios and
appropriate responses to likely security threats.




                                                                                 Assessing Security Risks | 35
                       4. Prevention and Mitigation Measures

                       Developing or refining prevention and mitigation measures often requires
                       consideration of how to address the wider range of potential impacts coming
                       out of the scenarios, potentially also including a prioritization process. The risk
                       response chart and heat map may assist a company in determining which risks
                       and impacts to address as the highest priority. Including Community Relations
                       staff in the design of mitigation measures can increase their overall effectiveness.
                       The initial, higher-level recommendations for mitigation suggested in the SRA
                       often form the basis for a more elaborated and formalized series of measures
                       subsequently developed and described in the Security Management Plan (see
                       Chapter V, “Preparing a Security Management Plan”).

                       5. Engagement of Competent Professionals

                       In high-risk contexts, the Security Risk Assessments (as well as the subsequent
                       Security Management Plan) must be especially detailed and analytically rigorous.
                       Companies may undertake this assessment (and develop the management plan
                       in-house), or they may hire an external security expert or firm. The security
                       professional(s) should have 1) sufficient experience, expertise, and access to people
                       and information within the company; 2) skills to identify and analyze the range
                       of relevant risks and responses (to the project, surrounding communities, and
                       the company’s reputation); and 3) capacity to propose risk-mitigation strategies
                       that meet Performance Standard 4 requirements.




36 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
DISTINCT SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN DIFFERENT PHASES
OF A PROJECT

For medium to large-scale projects, the phase of the project—whether construction
or operations—will affect the security risks and needs. Figure 9 summarizes the
key company responsibilities, which are further elaborated below.



Figure 9: Key Security Considerations in Different
Project Phases


     Construction               Transition from
                                Construction to              Operations Phase
        Phase
                                  Operations
 Maintain oversight            Manage expectations and      Ensure consistency of
 responsibility                support good communi-        professional security
                               cation
 Ensure contractor
 recruits, equips, pays,       Consider a wide range of
 administers, nad trains       potential threats and
 security forces consistent    implement well-devel-
 with company policies         oped security environ-
 and programs                  ment

 Carefully coordinate          Use highly experienced
 security between com-         and trained guards
 pany and contractor




I. Construction Phase

The construction phase comprises all activities prior to and during major construction.
It is characterized by intensive planning, preparation, and deployment of workers
and construction materials. Risks common to this phase include the following:

•	 The large number of workers (often brought in from other areas) and major
   movements of supplies and equipment can pose significant risks of theft, extortion,
   pilferage, and internal petty crime among the workforce or other individuals.

•	 This phase can also pose significant risks to local communities in the form of
   traffic accidents, conflict between workers and community members, sexual
   exploitation, strain on natural resources, and potential for introduction of
   alcohol and drug abuse, health risks, and so forth.




                                                                                    Assessing Security Risks | 37
                       The construction phase typically will be the most challenging period of the entire
                       project for security. Security activities during this phase have several objectives,
                       including the following:

                       •	 Establishing the security framework (the system to manage security, which includes
                          the resourcing, management structure, and policies that are documented in the
                          Security Management Plan), often involving consultation with key stakeholders,
                          including local communities;

                       •	 Protecting the preparatory project activities;

                       •	 Creating and building the capacity of the guard force; and

                       •	 Coordinating security plans and programs with the national regulatory agency
                          and government public security agencies.

                       When construction contractors deploy site security, the following requirements
                       apply:

                       •	 The company must still maintain oversight responsibility. Communities typically
                          do not differentiate between security guards managed by contractors and those
                          managed by the company, and they are likely to hold the company responsible
                          for any incident involving contracted personnel.

                       •	 The contractor should recruit, equip, pay, administer, and coordinate training
                          for the guard force, consistent with the company’s policies and programs. Ideally,
                          all contractors will use the same guard service contractor to prevent uneven
                          standards and confusion about guard policies. If not, these issues should be
                          agreed on and coordinated up-front.

                       •	 Security during this phase must be carefully coordinated between the company
                          and the contractor to prevent gaps, confusion, and loss of accountability. The
                          company will inherit whatever precedents are set by the third-party contractor,
                          so it is vital that these be consistent with its own policies.

                       II. Transition from Construction Phase to Operations Phase

                       In the transition from the construction phase to the operations phase, the major
                       construction contractor(s) will completely demobilize their workforce. The project
                       footprint and associated economic and employment impact on the local area may
                       diminish in the following ways:

                       •	 Management of expectations and good communication are key. As the project
                          moves from operations to construction, some contracts will end while others
                          may start—or be expected to start. Information (or misinformation) about



38 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
  project changes that will affect community members—particularly regarding
  labor and jobs—tends to spread quickly among the local population. When
  raised expectations for job continuity and benefits are not fulfilled, that can
  lead to local tensions and protests, creating a risk for security. It is important
  to understand what promises were made at various stages and by the different
  actors involved in the project.

•	 Historically, the transition period from operations to construction has created
   widespread uncertainty among affected communities. Groups seeking to extort
   continued economic opportunities (for benefits such as jobs or service contracts)
   often try to take advantage of the uncertain atmosphere.

•	 The Security Risk Assessment should anticipate potential security issues, such as
   random and coordinated labor strikes and slowdowns, harassment and detention
   of transportation and project personnel, legal challenges or other disruptions
   from concerned groups, and provocations by various factions. While a period
   of heightened threat is often unavoidable, it typically is of relatively short
   duration. The risk can be greatly diminished with proactive communication
   and a good community-engagement strategy, stakeholder-engagement plan,
   and grievance mechanism.

Before the transition from the construction phase to the operations phase, the
following should be in place or completed:

•	 A fully considered and well-developed security environment with access controls,
   physical security measures, plans, and procedures.

•	 A security-guard force with a high level of experience and training on basic
   guard skills and appropriate behavior as well as use of force. Note that the
   guard force will also gradually experience a reduction in manpower as the site
   becomes operational.

III. Operations Phase

In the operations phase, management is likely to scrutinize the security function
for cost efficiencies and workforce reductions. It is important to ensure consistency
of professional security into operations. Often, the greatest risk in the operations
phase is complacency.




                                                                                Assessing Security Risks | 39
CHAPTER III
    Managing Private Security
Managing Private Security


Engaging some type of private security—whether in-house employees or contracted
security providers—is common practice for many companies operating in emerging
markets. This may involve guarding a building in the center of a populated area
or patrolling more remote territories, and it can range from a single guard or



Figure 10: Fundamental Aspects of Private Security


                                       Contracted with the goal of
                                       providing physical protection
                                       and risk reduction


                                       Typically under company
                                       control and governed by
                                       contract provisions


              Private
                                       Properly vetted, trained,
              Security                 equipped, and monitored
             should be
                                       Unarmed unless shown to be
                                       necessary and appropriate by
                                       the risk analysis




                                                                         Managing Private Security | 43
                       night watchman to a large force of armed guards reporting up through several
                       layers of hierarchy. Decisions regarding the type, number, responsibilities, and
                       arming of private security forces should flow from an assessment of the security
                       risks and appropriate responses.

                       While private security may vary in form and tasks, the objective of its presence
                       should be about protection of people and property and the reduction of risk—
                       typically through managing access to property, deterring crime, protecting life,
                       and reporting incidents when they occur.

                       Performance Standard 4, paragraph 12, describes the requirements for assessing
                       risks and for hiring, rules of conduct, training, equipping, and monitoring. These
                       expectations apply equally to direct and contracted workers. Even when these
                       functions are undertaken by a security contractor, the company retains oversight
                       responsibility to ensure that these expectations have been met.




                            Key Takeaway for Lower-Risk Contexts

                            As with assessments, the management of private security can be relatively
                            straightforward in low-risk contexts. Companies should do the following:

                            •	 Vet contractors or employees,

                            •	 Set clear expectations regarding conduct, and

                            •	 Ensure managerial oversight by assigning responsibility.

                            If private security personnel are armed, extra vetting, training, and oversight
                            are required.




                       10 KEY CONSIDERATIONS WHEN HIRING PRIVATE SECURITY

                       When hiring private security (as employees or through a third-party firm), companies
                       should ensure consideration and integration of a wide range of issues into their
                       contracts and procedures. Performance Standard 4 includes the areas shown in
                       Figure 11 and discussed in more detail below.

                       1. Oversight

                       Outsourcing security to contractors does not outsource a company’s responsibility
                       for managing private security. A company’s leverage and oversight over the behavior
                       and quality of its employees or service provider is expected to be high. While


44 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Figure 11: Areas to Consider When Hiring Private Security


                         Oversight                Contract                Vetting
                         Retain control over      Include performance     Check backgrounds
                         and responsibility for   standards and           and avoid hiring
                         employees' behavior      monitoring provisions   anyone with history
                         and quality                                      of abuse




                         Conduct                  Use of Force            Training
                         Require appropriate      Ensure force is used    Train guards on use of
                         behavior through         only for preventive     force, appropriate
                         policies and             and defensive           conduct, and ﬁrearms
                         procedures, reinforced   purposes and in
                         through training         proportion to the
                                                  threat


 Equipping               Weapons                  Incidents               Monitoring
 Provide guards with     Equip guards with        Ensure ability to       Ensure appropriate
 identiﬁcation,          non-lethal force and     receive and assess      conduct through
 communications          arm them only when       incident reports and    document review,
 device, and any other   justiﬁed by SRA          other complaints        audits, training, and
 necessary equipment                                                      evaluation of incident
 for the job                                                              reports or complaints




a private security provider will have its own management hierarchy, someone
within the company should have formal responsibility for security, which includes
managing the private security provider.

2. Contractual Agreement

A company’s relationship
                                        A company can outsource its
with private security should
be managed through a                    security, but it cannot outsource               its
formal process. For security            responsibility.
personnel who are company
staff, this should be through
an employment contract and
internal company policies and procedures. For external private security providers—
as with any contractor—a company should make its performance expectations
explicit in the form of a detailed contract; the company also should ensure that
the provider’s own policies and procedures are adequate. It is recommended that


                                                                           Managing Private Security | 45
                       the contract include standards of performance for security tasks and expectations
                       of conduct as well as provisions for the company to review relevant documents
                       and materials and to audit the security provider periodically—and to terminate
                       a provider’s services if the standards are not met.

                       3. Vetting and Hiring Procedures

                       Who provides security is as relevant as how security is provided. Performance
                       Standard 4 expects companies to “make reasonable inquiries to ensure that those
                       providing security are not implicated in past abuses.”20 This could include, for
                       example, inquiries about a security provider’s reputation with other companies,
                       foreign government representatives, UN missions, the International Red Cross
                       and Red Crescent, and other entities. (Also, see Box 7.)

                       Companies should not knowingly employ or use any individuals or companies
                       that have abused or violated human rights in the past.21 Reasonable efforts should
                       be made to review employment records and other available records, including
                       any criminal records. Companies are advised to periodically review the security
                       provider’s hiring procedures to confirm that guards have been properly vetted.

                       Expectations regarding conduct and use of force should be communicated as terms
                       of employment and reiterated through regular training (see “Code of Conduct,”
                       “Use of Force Principles,” and “Training,” below).

                       4. Code of Conduct

                       Companies should require the appropriate conduct of security personnel they
                       employ or engage.22 A company should have a clear Code of Conduct policy, and
                       security personnel should have clear instructions on the objectives of their work
                       and permissible actions, based on good international practice and applicable law.23
                       It can also be very helpful for security personnel to be aware of how to access
                       the company’s grievance mechanism and register a complaint, as they are often
                       the first point of contact for visitors (including community members) to a site.




                       20
                            	 IFC Performance Standard 4, paragraph 12.
                       21
                            	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 31.
                       22
                            	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 28.
                       23
                            	Ibid.




46 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Box 7: Deciding Whether to Hire Local Security Guards

Companies should carefully assess the opportunities (and risks) of local
hiring practices. In some cases, this can be a welcomed and proactive means
of improving a company’s relationship with surrounding communities. Local
employment is often part of a company’s community-relations program,
and hiring locals as security guards can be one way to provide accessible,
good jobs to community members. Guards who are part of the community
and who are familiar with local customs may serve as a positive and visible
point of contact between the company and the community.

However, there have been instances where guards were coerced by family or
friends to act in a manner inconsistent with their role as security providers. In
some cases, hiring locally can lead to guards being put in the middle between
the company and their own community when tension arises between the two.

One company operating multiple sites in a single Middle Eastern country
analyzed each operation and decided to hire local security guards at one
project site, while at another it hired an international security firm employing
guards from outside the local area (but still familiar with local language and
cultural expectations). In the first instance, the company determined that
hiring members of the community to provide security offered sufficient local
benefit (through employment) and reassurance to surrounding communities
(to counter distrust of outsiders) to justify instituting more in-depth training
programs to help new hires meet international standards for security provision.
In contrast, at the second site, the company was concerned about local
factions and conflicts (identified in the risk assessment) and concluded that
highly trained external security professionals were best placed to address
the potential risks.

Companies are advised to assess their specific context, consider a range of
options, and carefully weigh the potential positives and negatives to determine
the most appropriate security solution for the particular project site.




                                                                              Managing Private Security | 47
                       5. Use of Force Principles

                       Private security guards should operate under a specific policy on the use of force,
                       often outlined in a guard’s employment contract and/or scope of work (for directly
                       employed security personnel) or enumerated as a standalone set of protocols and/
                       or included within the Security Management Plan and private security providers’
                       policies (for contracted security personnel). Guards should be clear on how to
                       respond and appropriately use available tools (for example, weapons or other
                       measures) in addressing a threat. The policy should specify that force will not be
                       sanctioned “except when used for preventive and defensive purposes in proportion
                       to the nature and extent of the threat.”24 Force should be used only as a matter
                       of last resort and in a manner that respects human rights.25 Appropriate use of
                       force should be included in the security training program, and any use of physical
                       force should be reported to and evaluated by the company.26

                       When the provision and/or possession of firearms is necessary, any weapons
                       issued, including firearms and ammunition, should be licensed according to
                       national laws, recorded, stored securely, marked, and disposed of appropriately.27
                       In addition to procedures for storage and disposal, the security provider should
                       have procedures for issuing weapons and safeguarding them while in a guard’s
                       possession. Companies are advised to review these procedures and periodically
                       request records for weapons issuance. Any security personnel authorized to carry
                       a firearm should be appropriately trained in its use.


                       24
                            	 IFC Performance Standard 4, paragraph 12.
                       25
                            	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 29.
                       26
                            	Ibid.
                       27
                            	Ibid.



48 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
6. Training

Companies should use only security professionals who are, and
continue to be, adequately trained.28 In particular, guards should
be trained on the use of force (including less lethal weapons and,
where applicable, firearms) and appropriate conduct (typically
focused on reinforcing respectful behavior) toward workers and
affected communities,29 often illustrated through examples and/
or scenarios. Use-of-force training includes less lethal weapons as
well as training on firearms in situations where guards are armed.

Depending on the level of need, security training can range from a
review of policies and procedures to in-depth sessions practicing
appropriate responses to various security threats. Many companies
have found scenario-based, performance-oriented (learning-by-doing) training to be
the most effective method. Training should include information on where, in which
circumstances, and under what conditions it is lawful and in accordance with company
policy to use force of any kind, and what is the maximum level of force authorized.
This should include options for nonlethal force and should strongly reinforce that
lethal force is acceptable only to protect human life. Instructions should emphasize
that “security personnel are permitted to use force only as a matter of last resort and
only for preventive and defensive purposes in proportion to the nature and extent of
the threat, and in a manner that respects human rights.”30 For example, security guards
should refrain from verbal or physical harassment of any kind. Lethal force should
be used only where other means are unsuccessful, and only to protect human life.

Training programs can be provided by the company, the security provider, and/or
qualified third parties. When training is designed and delivered by contractors,
companies should periodically review the training agenda, materials, attendance
log, and other aspects of the training, and the person responsible for security can
also attend a training session. (See Box 8.)

7. Equipping

All security guards should be provided with the appropriate equipment to undertake
their responsibilities. This equipment typically includes a proper uniform with
appropriate identification, radio or other communications device, and any other
equipment determined to be necessary by the Security Risk Assessment and required
by the Security Management Plan. Where security guards are armed, companies are
counseled to request evidence of legal permits for staff to carry firearms.

28
     	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 31.
29
     	 IFC Performance Standard 4, paragraph 12.
30
     	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 29.



                                                                                Managing Private Security | 49
    Box 8: Connection between Codes, Principles, and Training

    A company’s Code of Conduct and Use of Force Principles should not exist only on paper.
    Expectations for behavior, including when confronted with a situation potentially requiring force,
    are central components of good-practice training materials. Training programs for security
    personnel should focus on practical application. In some cases, companies have distributed
    copies of the “Universal Declaration of Human Rights” to guards and considered their training
    obligation to have been met. This is unlikely to translate to an understanding of appropriate and
    proportional responses.

    More important than referring to international documents or even to standards is straightforward
    explanation and experience—through role play or example—with practical application. Guards
    need to understand how they should behave and respond in various realistic scenarios, with an
    emphasis on when they should use different types of force. Any written materials should be brief
    and in the local language, and they should take into consideration the prevalent literacy level.

    One company in Central America undertook a training program in line with Performance Standard 4
    and the Voluntary Principles, which included brief but recurrent reminders of appropriate behavior.
    Posters throughout the project facilities—including in common areas such as the dining area—
    presented the practical highlights of the Voluntary Principles. Small laminated cards carried by
    each guard included a color-coded summary graphic of the well-known “Use of Force Model,”
    outlining the appropriate and proportional response to threats. This continuum ranges from no
    resistance (such as physical presence only), to passive/verbal resistance, to defensive resistance,
    to active resistance, to lethal resistance (for example, use of deadly force—only appropriate when
    required to protect life).




50 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
8. Decision to Arm

The decision whether to arm                  In some countries, legislation may
security guards is an important
                                             prohibit the use of armed private
one. Usually, guards should be
armed only when the assessment               security. For example, it is prohibited
of security risks shows that a
                                             in Democratic Republic of the Congo,
threat exists—one that can be
addressed only by arming guards,             Ghana, Nigeria, and Timor-Leste and is
thus equipping them to protect
                                             heavily restricted in China and Turkey.
human life. The default position
should be not to have armed private
security unless risk analysis shows
this to be necessary and appropriate. Depending on the type of weapon and the
level of training, arming private security personnel can sometimes increase rather
than decrease risk. (See Box 9.)

If a company elects to use armed private security, good practice is for security
guards be armed as follows:

•	 In defined and very particular roles;

•	 With the appropriate weapon for the level of risk;

•	 With the requisite training on use of firearms and clear rules for the use of
   force; and

•	 Equipped with nonlethal methods of protection to apply before resorting to
   use of lethal force.




                                                                            Managing Private Security | 51
                                Box 9: Making the Counterintuitive Decision
                                to Disarm Guards

                                In many countries and contexts, firearms are perceived less as a method for
                                mitigating risks and more as a standard-issue piece of equipment. However,
                                arming guards does not always increase safety; the decision whether to
                                arm should be based on proportionality to the assessed risks.

                                In one recent example from Central America, a company had issued firearms
                                to its guards. Under national law, guards were limited to carrying shotguns.
                                The company was confronted by a severe threat of violence from organized
                                crime and militant groups who were armed with more powerful automatic
                                firearms. While it could have been seen as reasonable for guards to possess
                                firearms to meet the threat of potential attackers, a careful assessment
                                demonstrated that the guards’ possession of firearms actually increased
                                the risk to the guards, the company, and the community. Beyond the safety
                                risk from accidental discharge, the armed guards were at risk because they
                                were targeted by attackers who sought to neutralize the threat they posed.
                                Having armed guards also presented an intimidating “barrier” between the
                                company and the local community and made it easier for the operation’s
                                detractors to link the guards (and the company’s operation) to any gun-
                                related incident in the area. Presented with the balance of risks, the company
                                elected to disarm its guards. In the years following that decision, the company
                                witnessed a significant reduction in gun-related incidents, and over time
                                the guards—and their families—actually reported feeling safer.




                       9. Incident Reporting and Inquiry

                       Performance Standard 4 requires companies to “consider and, where appropriate,
                       investigate all allegations of unlawful or abusive acts of security personnel, take
                       action (or urge appropriate parties to take action) to prevent recurrence, and
                       report unlawful and abusive acts to public authorities.”31 This begins with having
                       policies and procedures to accept and assess information about security incidents,
                       credible security-related allegations, and use-of-force incidents of any kind. It is
                       good practice for companies to be able to 1) accept security-related reports or
                       complaints; 2) gather and document relevant information; 3) assess the available

                       31
                            	 IFC Performance Standard 4, paragraph 14.




52 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
information; 4) protect the identity of alleged victim(s) and those reporting the
allegation or incident; and 5) report unlawful acts to state authorities (see Chapter VI,
“Assessing Allegations or Incidents Related to Security Personnel”).

10. Monitoring

It is good practice for companies, as part of their oversight responsibilities, to
monitor site performance of their security contractors on an ongoing basis to
ensure professional and appropriate conduct. This may include reviewing policies
and materials, undertaking periodic audits, potentially assisting with or supporting
training, and considering any allegations of unlawful or abusive acts by security
personnel (see Chapter VI, “Assessing Allegations or Incidents Related to Security
Personnel”). Speaking to employees and local community members who come into
regular contact with security staff can also provide valuable insights. Companies
are advised to consider including sanctions (such as withholding payment or
termination) in contracts with security providers to maintain leverage when
contractors do not meet performance expectations.


COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND GRIEVANCE MECHANISM
FOR SECURITY-RELATED ISSUES

Community engagement is a key component of an effective security strategy. Proactive
engagement and positive relationships with communities and workers provide the
best opportunity to ensure security.32 As part of their overall approach to stakeholder
engagement, companies should communicate their security arrangements to workers
and communities, subject to overriding safety and security needs.33 Working with
the Community Relations team may help create or identify opportunities to speak
with community members and involve them in discussions about the security
arrangements that may affect them.

The grievance mechanism required under Performance Standard 1 also provides
an important avenue for workers, affected communities, and other stakeholders
to address concerns about security activities or personnel within the client’s
control or influence.34 Concerns may come from a wide range of sources (for
example, communicated directly to Community Relations staff, through a hotline
telephone number, via tip boxes outside the project site, or through other means),

32
     	Performance Standard 1 identifies stakeholder engagement as “the basis for building strong, constructive, and
      responsive relationships that are essential for the successful management of a project’s environmental and
      social impacts.” IFC Performance Standard 1, paragraph 25.
33
     	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 26.
34
     	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 32.




                                                                                                            Managing Private Security | 53
                       but companies should ensure that security-related complaints are channeled to
                       the person or department responsible for security and community relations.

                       Performance Standard 1 and Performance Standard 4 cross-reference one another
                       regarding the establishment of a grievance mechanism and should be read together.
                       It is good practice for the grievance mechanism to facilitate prompt resolution of
                       concerns and to use a consultative process that is understandable, easily accessible,
                       culturally appropriate, available at no cost, and free of retribution.35 Companies
                       should emphasize to staff, including security staff, that intimidation of or retaliation
                       against those lodging complaints will not be tolerated.



                       35
                            	 IFC Guidance Note 1, paragraph 11.




54 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Figure 12 illustrates some important opportunities to engage with communities
and support the intersection of security and community relations functions, as
described above.


Figure 12: Potential Community Engagement Opportunities
for Security




     Communicate                                 Identify or create
        security                                  opportunities to
    arrangements to                               engage with and
   the extent possible                          involve community
                                                     members




                            Community
                            Engagement




   Collaboration with                                Receive and
      Community                                        address
    Relations team                                   grievances




                                                                        Managing Private Security | 55
C H A P T E R I V
       Managing the Relationship
       with Public Security
Managing the Relationship
with Public Security


Interaction with public security forces can be the most challenging aspect of security
for companies as they do not control the decisions or behavior of public security
personnel and may have limited influence in this regard. This issue often arises when
government security personnel are deployed to provide security services related
to a private sector project, such as at mines, ports, hydropower dams, airports,
or other key infrastructure developments. Public security may also be assigned
to provide regular—or extra—support to a local community where an operation
exists, but not be involved in protecting the specific project on a regular basis.



Figure 13: Company Engagement with Public Security Forces


                                           Focus on engagement,
                                           recognizing that public
                                           security forces report
                                           through a hierarchy
                                           external to the company



                                           Assess and document risks
                                           arising from the use of public
        Company e orts                     security forces
        regarding public
         security forces
                                           To the extent possible, seek
             should                        to inﬂuence public security
                                           to conform with good
                                           practice




                                                            Managing the Relationship with Public Security | 59
                                                                            Public security forces
                                                                            involvement in site security
                                                                            is typically driven by:
                                                                            1)  company request due
                                                                            to a perceived increase in
                                                                            the threat level; or 2) host
                                                                            government demand or
                                                                            requirement. Companies
                                                                            generally are encouraged to
                                                                            rely first on private security
                                                                            forces to solve site security
                                                                            problems, if possible, and to
                                                                            not think of public security
                                                                            forces as a replacement for
                       private security forces. Companies can lose control if public security forces are
                       engaged and take the lead; however, public security forces have broader roles
                       and responsibilities, and may be appropriate in certain situations, as outlined in
                       Figure 14. The type, strength, training, and equipment of security forces should
                       be proportionate and appropriate to the threats and tasks.

                       Even though the responsibility to maintain law and order lies with government,
                       and the company is not directly responsible for the actions of public security
                       personnel, the company may be associated with these actions in the eyes of
                       local communities and other stakeholders. The actions of public security forces
                       can pose a significant reputational risk and can increase tensions with the local
                       population. Consequently, in situations where public forces are responding to
                       incidents related to the project, companies have an interest in encouraging public
                       security personnel to behave consistently with the principles set out for private
                       security personnel in Performance Standard 4.36

                       Performance Standard 4 recognizes that companies have far less leverage over public
                       security forces than over private security forces. Accordingly, expectations for
                       companies where government security personnel are deployed to provide security
                       services focus on aspects within the company’s control (such as risk assessment and
                       documentation) and on the company’s relationship with public security (encouraging
                       appropriate behavior and public disclosure of security arrangements).




                       36
                            	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 33.




60 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Figure 14: Link between Level of Risk and Level of Public
Security Deployment


                                          On-call law enforcement
                                          from o -site

                                          General law enforcement
            Low-Level                     Security for hazardous
              Risk                        materials

                                          Convoy security



                                          Nearby o -site or on-site
                                          security backup

                                          Immediately available to handle
       Moderate-Level                     protests or civil disturbance
           Risk
                                          Armed convoy security

                                          Close personal protection



                                          Dedicated and heavy on-site
                                          security as protection from
                                          armed groupsPerimeter
            High-Level                    security
               Risk
                                          Defensive patrols outside the
                                          perimeter




   Key Takeaway for Lower-Risk Contexts

   Not all companies will need to develop an in-depth direct relationship with
   public security forces, but most are likely to at least need their support in
   the event of an incident, and it is advisable to reach out proactively, before
   any problem occurs. At a minimum, companies are encouraged to assess
   the risks posed by public security forces and seek opportunities to engage
   with them to try and reduce such risks. In low-risk situations, this may mean
   simply identifying key counterparts and initiating introductory conversations.




                                                            Managing the Relationship with Public Security | 61
                       ASSESSING PUBLIC SECURITY RISKS: 5 KEY QUESTIONS
                       FOR COMPANIES

                       Performance Standard 4 requires companies to “assess and document risks arising
                       from the project’s use of government security personnel deployed to provide
                       security services.”37 This is an important part of understanding the project’s
                       operating environment and the full spectrum of potential security-related risks,
                       and in most cases it is a task within a company’s control. Figure 15 lists five key
                       questions, which are discussed below.

                       1. What are the types of public security forces involved?

                       Companies should be aware of what types of public security forces will respond to
                       different kinds of incidents. For instance, the military will respond quite differently
                       than the police in most areas. As illustrated in Figure 16, there is a spectrum of
                       security risk and corresponding involvement of public security forces; the type of
                       deployment should be aligned with the level of risk. In some cases, public security
                       forces will respond to one-off incidents, while in other situations, companies will
                       have public security forces deployed permanently to the project site—at times even
                       being compelled to provide accommodations on the premises. Ideally, this can
                       be done outside the project’s boundaries to reduce the perception of “mingling”
                       between the company and public security forces.


                       Figure 15: Five Questions for Companies to Address Public
                       Security Risks


                                                                   1                        2
                                                                   What are the types of    What is the number
                                                                   public security forces   and role of public
                                                                   involved?                security personnel
                                                                                            involved?




                                   3                               4                        5
                                   What type of public             What is the              How should risks be
                                   security response is            background and track     documented?
                                   likely to be used?              record of these public
                                                                   security forces?




                       37
                            	 IFC Performance Standard 4, paragraph 13.



62 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
2. What is the number and role of public security
forces involved?

Where public security forces are deployed or may
respond to protect personnel, property, or other assets,
companies should understand the nature of the likely
involvement. This can range from a few people to a
large contingent, and from temporary protection to a
permanent deployment. In some circumstances, public
security forces provide a secondary source of temporary
security (responding to incidents); in other cases, public
security forces are permanently deployed (guarding
gates and maintaining perimeter security, providing
security for transportation convoys, protecting public
infrastructure assets such as airstrips, or protecting
and escorting dangerous and hazardous goods, such
as explosives).




Figure 16: Security Risk Spectrum and Public Security Involvement
Risk Level




                                                                                                                                                       Violent Demonstrations
                                             Unmet Expectations




                                                                                                 Threats of Violence




                                                                                                                                                                                     External Attacks
                           Peaceful Demos




                                                                                                                        Confrontations
                                                                  Labor Disputes




                                                                                                                                         Kidnappings
             Non-Violent




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Separatism
                                                                                   Criminality




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Insurgency

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Terrorism

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Conﬂict




                  Base                      Community                                                                  Police                                                                                    Military
                  Level                     Partnership




                                                                                                                                                                                Managing the Relationship with Public Security | 63
3. What type of public security response is likely to be used?

Companies should make an effort to understand the type of response public security
forces are likely to use. Some public security forces are well trained and are likely
to respond professionally and proportionately to a threat; others may present a
risk of unprofessional conduct or excessive force, which can be exacerbated if the
forces include new recruits with limited training and experience. This analysis can
be informed by discussions with, or observations of, public security personnel or
from discussions with other companies operating in the area and other stakeholders,
such as local authorities, community representatives, or employees.
4. What is the background and track record of these public security forces?

To the extent possible, companies are advised to research the operational background
of the government security forces operating on or near the site, particularly any
history of abuses. While clearly sensitive and often difficult, this research can be
done in a very low-profile manner and through a variety of discreet sources (such
as wire services or newspapers, human rights organizations, embassies, military
attaches, and local communities) and through direct observation of behavior and
performance for units already operating at a site. It is always good practice to
verify information by checking with multiple sources.

5. How should risks be documented?

Companies should document their assessment of risks from public security forces.
This can be as simple as keeping a written record of the analysis of the public
security forces, undertaken as outlined above, and including any relevant reports,
photographs, and discussions. This internal exercise is an important part of the
security-risk screening described earlier and can provide critical information about
whether a more elaborate Security Risk Assessment is required (see Chapter II,
“Assessing Security Risks”).


COMMUNICATION AND ENGAGEMENT WITH PUBLIC SECURITY

Companies are advised to communicate their principles of conduct to public
security forces and express their desire that the security provided be consistent
with those standards.38 The degree and formality of this communication will vary
according to the security risks and the nature (and appropriateness) of the security
arrangements involving public security personnel. Companies should keep a record
of any communication—and/or attempts at communication—with public security
personnel. Communication can vary according to the level of risk, as follows:

•	 Low-risk contexts:	
   If the number, type, and nature of the deployment appears appropriate and
   proportional to the assessed risks, the company may wish, at a minimum, to
   simply maintain contact and communication through check-ins with public
   security forces to help the company be confident that police will respond quickly
   and professionally if an incident occurs, or that suspects (including community
   members) caught trespassing or stealing will be treated fairly in police custody.

•	 High-risk contexts:	
   In high-risk contexts, having a more formalized and established relationship
   can be central to ensuring that any potentially tense and dynamic situations do

38
     	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 33.



                                                           Managing the Relationship with Public Security | 65
                          not escalate to become even more volatile due to police or military involvement.
                          The situation can be exacerbated if the risk of excessive force by public security
                          personnel seems high. Companies are advised to seek to influence arrangements,
                          to the extent possible, and explore the possibility of having more in-depth and
                          formalized engagements.

                       Who should engage?

                       •	 From the company:	
                          Having someone with a security background lead the engagement with public
                          security generally offers the best chance of success. Especially in high-risk
                          situations, someone with a security background or expertise, knowledge of
                          the country, and a network of contacts may be best positioned to understand
                          the public security and/or government hierarchy, identify the most effective
                          partner, and develop the most effective outreach strategy.

                       •	 From public security:	
                          Companies should try to identify the most appropriate counterpart within the
                          public security forces—ideally a champion with sufficient rank and authority
                          as well as willingness to engage constructively with the company. Often, the
                          local security force commander is the most appropriate contact, though it is
                          recommended that companies reach out to others in the hierarchy as well.
                          In some cases, someone who participated in a military exchange program
                          can be a great counterpart. Where both the police and the military may be
                          involved in security provision to the project, companies may do well to establish
                          relationships with both.

                       When to engage?

                       Early engagement with public security forces—before incidents arise—is key.
                       It is always advisable to build capital in a relationship before stressing it with
                       problems. Initial meetings are best used to identify appropriate counterparts,
                       develop rapport, and facilitate access. Once a relationship is established, the full
                       range of issues, both positive and negative, can be regularly discussed in a cordial
                       and diplomatic manner. This includes both the company’s needs and the security
                       forces’ logistical needs. These meetings also offer an opportunity for ongoing
                       assessment of security risk and threat analysis.

                       How to engage?

                       •	 Set the right tone:	
                          A constructive and respectful tone taken at the outset can establish a positive
                          trajectory for the entire relationship. Depending on the background and interests



66 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
  of public security command, discussions about how to support government
  security forces in their own professional objectives can sometimes be a constructive
  way to open a conversation. (See Box 10.)

•	 Make requests, not demands:	
   Private companies typically have little to no leverage over the actions of public
   security forces, and initial meetings especially are best framed as discussions
   rather than demands. Company representatives may wish to acknowledge
   how the company’s presence in the area affects security and resources; it can
   be helpful for companies to ask questions of their public security counterparts
   as a way to fully understand how the project increases the workload of public
   security forces in the area, what issues and concerns they may perceive, and
   what type of relationship they have with the local community.




    Box 10: Using Active Engagement with Government
    Authorities to Manage Security Risks and Avoid Escalation

    In one Eastern European country, protestors were blocking construction
    roads to the project, and local and national police were threatening to
    intervene and arrest people. The company clearly communicated its wish
    to the authorities (starting locally, but willing to go to higher levels to be
    sure of gaining sufficient attention) that any intervention be undertaken
    with a minimum use of force. Company representatives emphasized that
    the reputations of the company and its shareholders were on the line,
    underscoring that this was not a simple domestic matter. They requested
    that use of weapons be avoided at all costs, unless the police were under
    attack, which was deemed unlikely.

    The company prepared to remove its personnel and company vehicles from
    the site of the protests when public security forces arrived. This mitigated
    the risk of association with government personnel. The company also sought
    a neutral third party—a local nongovernmental organization (NGO)—to
    witness the process. While the company sought to disassociate itself to the
    extent possible from the actions of government security forces, company
    representatives did not entirely disengage. Based on their established
    relationship with public security forces, they were able to influence the
    situation to avoid escalation and achieve peaceful resolution.




                                                            Managing the Relationship with Public Security | 67
                       What to discuss?

                       Discussions between companies and public security forces can span a wide range
                       of topics. Figure 17 shows the most important areas to cover, and the discussion
                       below presents them in more detail.

                       1. The Engagement Itself

                       A company’s first topic of discussion with public security forces is often simply the
                       relationship between the company and public security forces. Early engagements
                       should focus on personal introductions and the basics of the potential relationship
                       and collaboration—the willingness to engage, identification of appropriate
                       representatives on both sides, and establishment of a regular pattern of meetings.



                       Figure 17: Topics for Companies to Discuss with Public
                       Security Forces


                                                   Engagement                   Deployment
                                                   Personal introductions,      Type and number of
                                                   willingness to engage,       guards and the
                                                   identiﬁcation of             competency,
                                                   appropriate represen-        appropriateness, and
                                                   tatives, establishment       proportionality of this
                                                   of regular meetings          deployment


                        Community                  Use of Force                 Security
                        Relations                  Security force
                                                                                Personnel
                        Potential impacts on                                    Background and
                                                   deployment and
                        communities, and any                                    reputation of security
                        engagement e orts,         conduct, including           personnel, to the
                        including grievance        desire for preventive        extent possible, and
                        mechanism and any          and proportional             engagement and
                        known complaints           responses                    monitoring e orts

                        Training                   Equipment                    Incidents
                        Current provision of       Existing needs and           Policies and proce-
                        any training and           potential o ers, expecta-    dures for recording,
                        opportunities to           tions, and conditionali-     reporting, and moni-
                        collaborate on             ties, including imple-       toring allegations of
                        capacity building, as      mentation of restrictions,   unlawful or abusive
                        appropriate                controls, and monitoring     acts




68 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
2. Deployment of Public
Security Forces
                                                   When public security is needed to
One straightforward topic
                                                   protect people and property, there
for initial discussions is the
government deployment of                           should be a handover of control from
forces, including the type
                                                   private security to public security—and
and number of guards
and the adequacy of this                           a way to manage handing the control
deployment for the situation                       back when the situation is stabilized.
with regard to competency,
appropriateness,      and              This can be a good topic to start a
proportionality. This can              discussion, because it focuses on public
also include any workplace
health and safety issues               security’s legitimate role and on assuring
and any expectations                   the greatest effectiveness and safety.
about reimbursement for
or provision of facilities,
equipment, or services for guards. It is also advisable to discuss procedures for the
interaction between private and public security forces, including for a handover,
if necessary.

3. Community Relations and Impacts

Conversations between companies and public security forces should include
consideration of potential security impacts on local communities. Topics could
include existing or planned community-engagement efforts—by the company,
by government, or through joint efforts—and any known community concerns
regarding the deployment, along with any available process for receiving grievances
from community members. Performance Standard 4 also asks companies to
“encourage the relevant public authorities to disclose the security arrangements
for the client’s facilities to the public, subject to overriding security concerns.” 39
(See Box 11.)




39
     	 IFC Performance Standard 4, paragraph 13.




                                                                Managing the Relationship with Public Security | 69
                            Box 11: Small Acts of Disrespect Can Escalate into Serious
                            Security Situations

                            While issues related to security forces may bring to mind a high-profile,
                            contentious interaction at a pressure point (such as protests at the front
                            gate or access road), these situations often arise after repeated, lower-level
                            behaviors eventually escalate.

                            In one example from a country in Africa, a military force frequently escorted a
                            commercial convoy through narrow rural roads also used by local community
                            members riding bicycles and motorbikes. Frustrated at being stuck behind
                            slow-moving local traffic, officers often threw water bottles at the community
                            members to get them to move out of the way—just to speed up the convoy
                            by a minute or two. Not only was this disrespectful, but those actions also
                            clearly upset community members, and resentment eventually led to hostility
                            toward the security forces and the commercial project.




                       4. Use of Force

                       As part of the conversation about the public security response—and any interaction
                       with private security, if applicable—companies can ask what forces will be deployed
                       and how they will respond to an incident. This can be a good entry point for
                       discussing the use of force and for communicating the company’s desire that
                                                                       force be used only for preventive
                                                                       and proportional responses and
                                                                       in a manner that respects human
                                                                       rights. They typically benefit from
                                                                       considering specific examples, such
                                                                       as protests, and from discussing
                                                                       possible likely scenarios and
                                                                       responses.

                                                                          5. Security Personnel

                                                                          Companies should attempt to
                                                                          understand the background and
                                                                          reputation of public security forces
                                                                          as part of their assessment of security
                                                                          risks, and they should monitor the
                                                                          situation so they can respond if any


70 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
issues arise with certain individuals or units. Discussions about the background,
reputation, or concerns regarding individuals or units can be quite delicate, so
companies are advised to assess their relationship with public security forces
to determine the most effective way to proceed—and use as much caution and
discretion as the situation requires. Companies are recommended to document
any such engagements and efforts to mitigate risk, even if unsuccessful. Where
company influence is limited, it can still be possible to attempt to address potential
problems by filling gaps through training or equipment, or to avoid asking for
support from units that have a record of abuse.

6. Training

Besides being central to capacity building, training can provide an opportunity for
companies to engage with and support public security forces, particularly when
they aspire to meet international standards but lack capacity and resources. If
public security forces provide their own training, companies should attempt to


                                                            Managing the Relationship with Public Security | 71
                       establish (through reviewing materials or even attending the training) that those
                       forces have adequate professional, technical, tactical, and equipment training,
                       including in the areas of use of force, human rights, and appropriate conduct.

                       Where public security forces do not provide their own training, companies are
                       advised to consider ways to help support this objective (for example, through
                       training public security forces directly, inviting public security forces to join
                       training exercises designed for the company’s private security, or offering to
                       support training done by a third party, such as the International Red Cross and
                       Red Crescent or another NGO). Where feasible, joint training can be particularly
                       effective at building relationships and ensuring that transitions from private to
                       public security forces are well coordinated, professional, and practiced. Some
                       companies have found it useful to invite public security forces to “observe” their
                       own training sessions, without undertaking a formal joint training program. Many
                       companies find scenario-based exercises to be the most successful form of training.

                       7. Equipment Transfers

                       Governments may request—or require—private companies to provide logistical,
                       monetary, and/or equipment support to assist police and military units as necessary.
                       This carries risks for the company if such equipment is misused in an unlawful
                       or abusive manner or implicates the company in actions undertaken by public
                       security forces. (See Box 12.) Companies should try to implement restrictions,
                       controls, and monitoring, as necessary and possible under the circumstances,
                       to prevent misappropriation or misuse of the equipment.40 At the same time, a
                       request for support can offer an opening for conversation and engagement, and
                       companies are strongly encouraged to ask for a written agreement (see “Consider
                       a Memorandum of Understanding,” on page 77), wherever possible. Company
                       options may include the following:

                       •	 Consider in-kind compensation. 	
                          If it is not possible to decline a request for compensation or equipment, companies
                          may wish to explore the possibility of providing in-kind contributions, such
                          as food, uniforms, or vehicles, rather than cash or lethal weapons. Companies
                          should still be aware that even otherwise “benign” equipment (such as a vehicle
                          or shipping container) can be misused by security forces if not monitored
                          effectively.

                       •	 Clarify expectations and specify intended use.	
                          Companies should seek to understand government expectations about
                          reimbursement for, or provision of, specific equipment and specify and document

                       40
                            	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 33.



72 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
    Box 12: Risks Related to Equipment Transfers

    Providing financial support or physical equipment (transportation, provisions,
    and so on) to police or military may increase a company’s exposure if it is seen
    as being in control of public security, even while public security remains under
    government control. Even seemingly innocuous equipment can be misused.

    In one case, public security personnel requested the transfer of empty shipping
    containers for the purported use of storing their own equipment, but instead
    they used the containers to detain prisoners. In a second case, night-vision
    goggles were requested to assist with perimeter patrols but instead were
    used to launch nighttime raids against opposition forces. In a third case,
    public security personnel requested the use of a company vehicle when their
    own vehicles were unserviceable. Seeing the military riding in identifiable
    company vehicles, the community not only associated them closely with
    the company, but also, when military personnel later engaged in abuses,
    community members saw them do so with the company logo prominently
    displayed on their vehicle.

    While companies cannot prevent every possible abuse or incorrect association,
    they should consider their actual or perceived association with the actions of
    public security forces—and make efforts to control the use of any equipment
    that they provide.




  the intended use of equipment provided. If this is not possible, the company
  should determine the risks associated with providing such support to public
  security forces and balance the positive benefits against the possible consequences.
  For example, if police assigned to the project are expected to face possibly
  violent confrontations but have only firearms, it may be in the company’s best
  interest for public security forces to have at their disposal nonlethal options
  for crowd control.

•	 Include conditionalities in a transfer agreement.	
   If companies provide equipment or support, it is recommended that they insist
   that the equipment will only be used lawfully and for the agreed purposes,
   and that it will not be transferred elsewhere without the company’s agreement.
   Companies are advised to document these conditions and include them as part
   of the transfer agreement. It is also suggested that companies list anything
   provided to governments, including to public security forces, in a regularly




                                                              Managing the Relationship with Public Security | 73
                              inventoried Record of Transfer Register, which identifies exactly what the
                              company provided, when, and for what purpose.

                       8. Recording and Reporting Allegations of Abuse by Public Security Forces

                       Companies receiving allegations of unlawful or abusive acts by public security
                       personnel are advised to record and report these to the pertinent authorities.
                       Companies are encouraged to actively monitor the status of any ongoing criminal
                       investigations led by government authorities.41 (See Box 13.)




                                Box 13: Reducing Risks Related to Public Security Forces

                                Even though companies are not directly responsible for the actions of public
                                security forces, they may be linked to their behavior in the eyes of community
                                members or other stakeholders. This can be particularly true where private
                                security hands off to public security, or where the perception is that public
                                security is acting at the request or on behalf of the company. It is advisable
                                for companies to take into consideration their potential association with
                                inappropriate actions—and take measures to mitigate these risks to the
                                extent possible.

                                For example, one security manager, who was concerned about the well-being
                                of people transferred to public law enforcement because of crimes committed
                                at the project site, established an internal company protocol for transferring
                                suspects from the company’s private security guards to the local police. In
                                an attempt to reduce risks of physical harm to these suspects, the company
                                handed them over to the police with a documented medical examination
                                and photographs of their physical condition at the time of transfer. The
                                company security manager made sure the authorities were informed about
                                this protocol in advance of instituting it, and he voluntarily followed up with
                                police regarding the health of incarcerated suspects following their transfer
                                from company custody.

                                This approach went beyond Performance Standard 4 compliance, but it
                                successfully reduced risks to the suspects as well as risks to the company from
                                actions associated with its operations in a particularly challenging country.




                       41
                            	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 32.



74 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
DOCUMENT ENGAGEMENT EFFORTS

Companies should document their attempts to engage with public security forces,
whether or not these efforts are successful. Companies able to establish a relationship
with ongoing engagement should record both the process and any outcomes. It is
good practice to keep a log of all relevant meetings and to note the major topics
discussed. This record is for internal purposes and does not need to be cleared or
countersigned by public security or any other parties to the discussion.

Companies unable to engage successfully with public security should also document
their efforts—and should incorporate into their assessment of security risks the
fact that the company does not have a collaborative relationship with public
security forces.


CONSIDER A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

A memorandum of understanding is a formal, written agreement between the
company and the government and/or its public security forces, which establishes and
documents agreed key expectations and decision-making processes and procedures.
It allows the company, government, and public security forces to delineate their
respective roles, duties, and obligations regarding security provision.

While an MOU can be a valuable record for clarifying commitments, it is the
process of engagement and discussion of critical issues between the company and
the government that is most important. However, a signed MOU is not always
achievable, or even legally possible. Companies are encouraged to focus on the
communication and collaboration with public security forces as the primary
objective—and on a formal (or even informal) agreement as the secondary goal.

There are many different ways to construct an MOU. Most MOUs include references
to company policies, national and international law, relevant UN protocols, and any
applicable international standards. An MOU typically also includes any financial
or resourcing issues (such as housing, food, stipends, transportation, and the like).
Where possible, it is recommended that companies include a provision allowing
them to request the removal of individual public security personnel from their
area of operations. (Note that this is different from asking to have individuals
removed from public security forces altogether, which exceeds a company’s remit.)




                                                             Managing the Relationship with Public Security | 75
C H A P T E R                V
      Preparing a Security
      Management Plan
Preparing a Security Management Plan


A Security Management Plan (SMP) is an important industry standard tool that
describes how security will be managed and delivered, and what resources will be
required. The Security Management Plan is the company’s overarching guidance
document for all other procedures and protocols related to security. It responds to
identified risks and provides direction, organization, integration, and continuity




Figure 18: Role and Scope of Security Management Plans

                                          Describe security functions,
                                          responsibilities, required
                                          resources, management, and
                                          delivery

                                          Respond to identiﬁed risks,
                                          with SMP size and scope
                                          based on the Security Risk
                                          Assessment

             Security                     Include all relevant policies
           Management                     and procedures guiding
                                          security provision
           Plans should
                                          Mitigation measures should
                                          address risks and impacts on
                                          communities as well as on
                                          company




                                                                   Preparing a Security Management Plan | 79
                       to the company’s security and asset-protection program. In developing its Security
                       Management Plan, a company should consider the following:

                       •	 Companies should consider the identification and management of security
                          risks to be part of the overall Environmental and Social Management System
                          (ESMS). The ESMS is the foundation for a company’s approach to identify
                          and mitigate environmental and social risks and impacts. Any company that
                          employs direct or contracted security personnel should consider not only the
                          risks and impacts of its security program, but also how it plans to manage these.

                       •	 The level of effort in assessing and managing security risks should be commensurate
                          with the level of security risk associated with the project and its operating
                          context. Projects in stable settings may be able to record and demonstrate
                          their decision-making processes and provisions without a formal, stand-alone
                          document (such as by integrating this information into employment contracts
                          or corporate policies or procedures related to appropriate behavior, ethics,
                          human rights, or other relevant topics). Operations in less secure environments




80 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
   likely will detail their proposed program to mitigate potential security risks
   and impacts in a more extensive, formally documented plan.

•	 Security Management Plans should also consider community risks and impacts
   posed by a company’s security arrangements and include provisions and mitigation
   measures to address these. Companies often find it useful to coordinate between
   their security and community liaison teams and include security issues in their
   community engagement and grievance processes.



    Key Takeaway for Lower-Risk Contexts

    Where risks are minimal, the Security Management Plan can be correspondingly
    simple. However, a plan of some form (stand-alone or integrated into broader
    management plans) should be documented and followed. It should focus on
    the functions and responsibilities of security—who does what, when, how,
    with what equipment, and accountable to whom. The person responsible
    for security (who may also cover other areas) should “own” the SMP, but the
    plan itself should provide continuity when there is a change of personnel in
    the security management structure.




KEY COMPONENTS OF A SECURITY MANAGEMENT PLAN

A Security Management Plan should 1) be developed in consultation with
management, 2) clearly link to the Security Risk Assessment, and 3) include
all relevant policies and procedures to guide the company’s security provision
over the life of the project. This document should include high-level overviews,
policies, and content on approaches and aspects related to security management,
with detailed procedures or design information following in an Annex. Figure 19
illustrates the key components typically included in a Security Management Plan,
which are described further below.

1. Objectives, Mission, and Approach of Company Security

•	 Objectives 	
   The Security Management Plan is designed to protect against and mitigate security
   risks at the project that could threaten communities, employees, facilities, and
   operations. It provides direction, organization, integration, and continuity to
   the security program.

•	 Mission 	
   Company security’s mission is to ensure that all staff, contractors, and visitors
   are able to work at the project in a safe and secure environment, that all facilities


                                                                     Preparing a Security Management Plan | 81
  Figure 19: Elements of a Security Management Plan




                                                      Overview of
                                                    Security Situation
                           Company Policies
                                                                            Physical
                            and Standards
                                                                            Security
                             Relevant to
                               Security



             Objectives,
             Mission, and                                                                 Security
             Approach of                                                                 Operating
           Company Security                                                              Procedures

                                                   Security
                                                 Management
                                                     Plan
              Community                                                                   Security
            Engagement and                                                             Supervision and
               Grievance                                                                  Control
              Mechanism




                               Incident                                  Private Security
                             Reporting and                                    Force
                                Inquiry                                   Management
                                                       Managing
                                                     Relations with
                                                     Public Security




                          are kept safe and secure, and that all project operations are unhindered, without
                          adverse impacts to communities. Security and respect for the human rights of
                          employees and communities are fully compatible.

                       •	 Approach 	
                          Company security recognizes the links between social issues and security, and
                          consequently fosters interrelationships between project Operations, Government
                          Relations, Community Relations, and Security staff. The company’s approach
                          also reinforces the importance of community stakeholders and the project’s
                          grievance mechanism. The company recognizes the importance of periodic


82 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
  revision of its Security Management Plan to ensure that it remains relevant
  and appropriate.

2. Company Policies and Standards Relevant to Security

•	 References to company policies and documents 	
   Cites company policies or documents that guide security management, such
   as Project Security Risk Assessment, Corporate Security Policy, Ethics and/or
   Human Rights Policy, Use of Force Policy, or other relevant policies.

•	 Other relevant laws and standards 	
   Cites other relevant laws, standards, or certifications related to security that the
   company will follow, such as national laws, applicable international laws, IFC
   Performance Standards, Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights,
   UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials, Basic Principles on the
   Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials, or other standard.

3. Overview of Security Situation

•	 Summary of key findings from the Security Risk Assessment 	
   Briefly reviews key security risks to the project (both internal and external)
   and to communities. (Note that this can also include a summary of proposed
   mitigation measures; however, the Security Management Plan itself should
   represent an elaborated program to address the identified security risks to the
   company and communities.) Links to the Security Risk Assessment.

•	 Security arrangements 	
   Provides an overview of the nature and role of private and public security
   arrangements, as applicable. (Note that additional details on supervision and
   control, comportment and management, procedures, and training are covered
   throughout the rest of the Security Management Plan.)




                                                                    Preparing a Security Management Plan | 83
                                  Private Security—Describes the private security provider; clarifies that its
                                  role is defensive and protective only, and that it has no law enforcement
                                  authority.

                                  Public Security—Describes local public security forces that would be called on
                                  to assist the project; clarifies that public security has primary responsibility for
                                  responding to and investigating all criminal activity, controlling demonstrations
                                  or civil disorder, or other responsibilities of public authorities.

                       4. Physical Security

                       •	 Overview of project security approach and systems 	
                          Describes security barriers, surveillance/electronic security systems, and security
                          control center (the means for reporting and controlling responses). Detailed
                          design information (such as CCTV camera positioning) belongs in an Annex.

                       5. Security Operating Procedures

                       •	 Key security operating procedures 	
                          Describes key procedures and how these fit together. Common procedures include, if
                          applicable, boundary security (perimeter and access control), access-point operations
                          (screening of people and vehicles), incident response (who will respond, and
                          how), security patrols, travel security, materials storage and control, information
                          and communication, and firearms security (firearms policy and procedures for
                          issuing and storing any security firearms, ammunition, and less lethal weapons).

                       6. Security Supervision and Control

                       •	 Management structure and responsibility 	
                          Describes lines of control, accountability, and supervision.

                       •	 Responsibility for conducting security risk assessments42 	
                          Identifies who is responsible, who participates, and what is covered.

                       •	 Cross-functional coordination 	
                          Describes interdepartmental coordination and any planning/coordination
                          activities with other relevant functions, such as Community Relations, Human
                          Resources, and Government Relations.

                       7. Private Security Force Management

                       •	 Security-guard force role 	
                          Underscores that private security’s role is preventive and defensive, with no law-
                          enforcement authority. The use of force by private security is only sanctioned


                       42
                            	When Security Risk Assessments are commissioned or undertaken as a package, as is often preferable, then
                             the same professional(s) can be responsible for both. When they are separated, this provision may focus on
                             subsequent security risk assessments.



84 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
  when it is for preventive and defensive purposes in
  proportion to the nature and extent of the threat.

•	 Provision and composition 	
   Confirms whether guards are in-house or provided
   by a third party, and specifies hiring policies. Where
   private security is contracted, the project assumes
   responsibility for security oversight. As applicable,
   additional sections describe private security provider
   selection, contract provisions, and active oversight of
   contractor performance.

•	 Background screening 	
   Describes vetting procedures.

•	 Equipment 	
   Describes equipment to be provided to guards, including
   radios, nonlethal weapons, and any firearms and
   ammunition. Includes a justification, based on the
   security risk assessment, if guards are armed with
   lethal weapons.

•	 Use of force	
   Confirms that the use of force by private security is
   only sanctioned when it is for preventive and defensive
   purposes in proportion to the nature and extent of the threat, and reiterates
   the need for proper training on using force effectively, proportionally, and with
   respect for human rights.

•	 Training	
   Describes the training program related to basic guarding skills and communication,
   guard-post orders and procedures, proper conduct and ethics/human rights,
   rules of engagement, use of force, weapons training (as applicable), and Health,
   Safety, and Environment training. Also outlines audit procedures.

(See Chapter III, “Managing Private Security,” for further details.)

8. Managing Relations with Public Security

•	 Public security force role	
   Reiterates that public security forces have responsibility for responding to and
   investigating criminal activity, controlling demonstrations or civil disorder,
   undertaking civil defense (such as responding to natural disasters), and responding




                                                                   Preparing a Security Management Plan | 85
                          to incidents involving criminal violations or potentially violent confrontations
                          or demonstrations.

                       •	 Engagement	
                          Describes company efforts to maintain constructive relations with public security,
                          and includes any MOU, if applicable.

                       (See Chapter IV, “Managing the Relationship with Public Security,” for further
                       details.)

                       9. Incident Reporting and Inquiry

                       •	 Describes the grievance mechanism, reporting requirements and structure, and
                          inquiry protocols with regard to security incidents, use-of-force incidents, and
                          allegations of abuse, misconduct, or other wrongdoing by security personnel.

                       •	 Outlines the responsibilities and timelines for conducting inquiries on allegations
                          and incidents.


86 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
(See Chapter VI, “Assessing Allegations or Incidents Related to Security Personnel,”
for more information about serious allegations and incidents involving security
personnel.)

10. Community Engagement and Grievance Mechanism

•	 Community engagement	
   Describes company efforts to engage with community members on matters
   related to security (ideally in coordination with the Community Relations team).

•	 Grievance mechanism	
   Describes risk-mitigation efforts related to potential security impacts on
   communities (such as regulations for guard off-site behavior, arrangements
   with public security, and shared information on security arrangements, as
   appropriate) and the grievance mechanism to receive and respond to community
   complaints or concerns related to security personnel or issues.




                                                                  Preparing a Security Management Plan | 87
change photo
C H A P T E R V I
       Assessing Allegations
       or Incidents Related
       to Security Personnel
90 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Assessing Allegations or Incidents
Related to Security Personnel


Performance Standard 4 states that companies “will consider and, where appropriate,
investigate all allegations of unlawful or abusive acts of security personnel, take
action (or urge appropriate parties to take action) to prevent recurrence, and
report unlawful and abusive acts to public authorities.”43 The scope and level of
effort should be commensurate with the severity and credibility of the allegation
or incident.

Figure 20: Core Considerations for Companies Regarding Security-
Related Allegations or Incidents

                                                   Scope and e ort should be commensurate
                                                   with severity and credibility of allegation or
                                                   incident

                                                   Companies should establish policies and
                                                   procedures for receiving, assessing, and
                                                   documenting security-related allegations
                                                   or incidents


       In Assessing                                Key aspects include documentation,
                                                   information collection, conﬁdentiality
     Security-Related                              protection, inquiry and assessment,
      Allegations or                               reporting, corrective action, and
                                                   monitoring and communicating
         Incidents
                                                   Unlawful or abusive acts should be
                                                   reported to authorities




43
     	 IFC Performance Standard 4, paragraph 14.



                                                            Assessing Allegations or Incidents Related to Security Personnel | 91
                       It is good practice and part of sound risk management for companies to have clear
                       policies and procedures for handling security-related allegations or incidents. While
                       companies should normally have internal protocols for dealing with a range of
                       security-related incidents such as traffic accidents, theft or protests, and use-of-
                       force incidents, this chapter focuses more narrowly on procedures for handling
                       allegations of misconduct or unlawful behavior involving security personnel.
                       This pertains to events occurring at the project site as well as off-site, if linked to
                       the project or involving public security forces providing security for the project.




                            Key Takeaway for Lower-Risk Contexts

                            Every allegation or incident related to security should be assessed, regardless
                            of whether in a low-risk or high-risk context. The level of depth and detail of
                            inquiry should flow from the seriousness of the allegation or incident. When
                            an allegation is made or an incident occurs, companies should document
                            as much as possible, collect and consider available information, and report
                            to authorities as appropriate.




                       POLICIES AND PROCEDURES

                       Companies are encouraged to have systems in place to receive and respond to
                       allegations or incidents. This includes a grievance mechanism and relevant reporting
                       and inquiry protocols, as follows:

                       •	 Establish a grievance mechanism to receive security-related concerns
                          or complaints.	
                          It is important to have a structured and accessible process for receiving and
                          responding to security-related complaints and to ensure that community members
                          are aware of it.

                       •	 Clarify reporting requirements and structure. 	
                          Good procedures normally specify which type of security-related allegations
                          and incidents should be reported, to whom, and in what time frame. Procedures
                          should clearly identify both the person(s) responsible for accepting and processing
                          allegations or incidents, and the escalation hierarchy to management.

                       •	 Develop inquiry protocols. 	
                          In addition to a routine process for recording all incidents (see Chapters III
                          and IV on “Managing Private Security” and “Managing the Relationship with




92 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
  Public Security,” for further details), more serious incidents or allegations
  related to security personnel conduct may require a more in-depth inquiry to
  determine whether policies and procedures were followed and if any corrective,
  disciplinary, or preventive actions are warranted.


KEY STEPS IN THE PROCESS

Companies should record and investigate security-related allegations and incidents
with the objective of determining whether company policies and procedures were
complied with and if any corrective or preventive actions are required for continuing
security operations. Any incidents that may be considered criminal should be
reported to the appropriate government authorities for investigation by the state.
Company actions should comply with local and national law.

All companies are encouraged to incorporate the good practices below in approaching
this sensitive topic, with the level of depth and breadth reflecting the severity
and credibility of the allegation or incident. This process is typically internal and
company-led, and it spans activities from recording and assessing complaints, to
initiating a more in-depth inquiry where appropriate, to documenting the process
and monitoring outcomes. Figure 21 lists the key steps, and the discussion below
presents them in greater detail.


Figure 21: Key Steps in Assessing Security-Related Allegations
or Incidents


                  Record the      Collect                           Assess the
                                                 Protect
Key Steps         incident or     information
                                                 conﬁdentiality
                                                                    allegation
                  allegation      promptly                          or incident




                 Take
 Monitor and     corrective      Report any      Document            Conduct further
 communicate     action to       unlawful act    the process         inquiry, if warranted
 outcomes        avoid
                 recurrence




                                            Assessing Allegations or Incidents Related to Security Personnel | 93
                       1. Record the incident or allegation.

                       All incidents and allegations should be recorded, whether they come from an
                       incident report, the grievance mechanism, or any other formal or informal means
                       of communication. Serious allegations and incidents should be reported to senior
                       management within a specified time frame, established in internal protocols.
                       Potentially criminal wrongdoing should be reported to the relevant authorities.

                       2. Collect information promptly.

                       Information should be collected as early as possible following an incident or receipt
                       of an allegation. This may include noting details related to the circumstance,
                       individuals involved, location, timing, and so forth, and taking statements and/
                       or photographs where relevant.

                       3. Protect confidentiality.

                       Companies are advised to consider confidentiality measures to protect alleged
                       victims, witnesses, and/or complainants—for example, identifying them by numbers
                       instead of names. Victims, witnesses, complainants, and other interviewees should



94 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
be informed as to whether and how their identities will be protected and whether
their names will be recorded and/or used.

4. Assess the allegation or incident and conduct further inquiry, if warranted.

After receiving and recording an allegation or incident report, companies typically
assess the seriousness and credibility of the claim against existing security policies
and procedures to determine any noncompliance by security personnel and whether
further investigation is needed. A more in-depth inquiry should be conducted in
cases of serious allegations or incidents, such as instances of unlawful or abusive
acts by security personnel, and/or where severe impacts result from a security
incident, such as injury, sexual violence, use of lethal force, or fatalities. Behavior
that may be considered criminal should be referred to the relevant authorities.

5. Document the process.

The allegation or incident and the inquiry process should be documented, including
sources of information, evidence, analysis, conclusions, and recommendations.
Where it is not possible to reach a conclusion (for example, due to limited or
contradictory information or evidence), this should be stated clearly, along with any
efforts to fill gaps and make assessments. It is good practice for information related
to security allegations or incidents to be classified and handled as confidential.
Any report should be objective, impartial, and fact-based.

6. Report any unlawful act.

Potentially criminal wrongdoing or unlawful acts
of any security personnel (whether employees,
contractors, or public security forces) should be
reported to the appropriate authorities (using
judgment about reporting in cases where there
are legitimate concerns about treatment of persons
in custody ).44 Companies are advised to cooperate
with criminal investigations and ensure that
internal processes and inquiries do not interfere
with government-led proceedings.

7. Take corrective action to avoid
recurrence.

Action should be taken to ensure that negative
impacts are not repeated. This may entail corrective
and/or disciplinary action to prevent or avoid

44
     	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 32.



                                             Assessing Allegations or Incidents Related to Security Personnel | 95
                       recurrence, if the incident was not handled according to instructions.45 In general,
                       companies are encouraged to identify lessons learned from the incident and take
                       the opportunity to revise internal company policies and practices as needed.

                       8. Monitor and communicate outcomes.

                       Because companies control their own internal processes, they can help ensure
                       that consideration of any allegation or incident is professional and progresses at
                       a reasonable pace. Additional oversight may be needed with regard to third-party
                       inquiries, such as those undertaken by private security providers. Companies are
                       encouraged to actively monitor the status of any ongoing criminal investigations
                       led by government authorities.

                       It is good practice to communicate outcomes to complainants and other relevant
                       parties, keeping in mind confidentiality provisions and the need to protect victims.
                       Where appropriate, it can also be constructive to also share relevant lessons
                       learned and any efforts to incorporate these into company policy and/or practice.


                       45
                            	 IFC Guidance Note 4, paragraph 32.



96 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
A N N E X E S
      Tools and Templates




                      Tools and Templates | 99
Annex A. Template Invitation to Bid and
Request for Proposals for Security Risk
Assessment and Security Management
Plan
                                COMPANY LOGO



This Request for Proposals is designed for a company seeking to hire an external
consultant. The parts in blue italics should be completed by the company. As with
any template, the content should be reviewed and adapted for the specific situation.


1. INTRODUCTION

[Project] in [location] is seeking a consultant to conduct a Security Risk Assessment
and provide a Security Management Plan that will increase the project’s capacity
to mitigate and manage risk for the project [and the neighboring communities].
This work should be undertaken in conformance with the security-related aspects
of IFC Performance Standard 4 [and the Voluntary Principles on Security and
Human Rights and/or guidance provided by the Voluntary Principles on Security
and Human Rights Implementation Guidance Tool].


2. PROJECT BACKGROUND

[basic information about the project, not necessarily security-related]


3. OBJECTIVES OF THE SECURITY RISK ASSESSMENT AND SECURITY
MANAGEMENT PLAN

•	 Identify inherent security risks to the project.

•	 Identify potential risks (created by the project) to local communities.




                                             Annex A. Template Invitation to Bid and Request for Proposals | 101
                       •	 Provide recommendations for managing risks associated with security management
                          that will be in conformance with IFC Performance Standard 4, paragraphs 12–14.

                       •	 In consultation with management, develop procedures and document these in
                          a Security Management Plan that is based on corporate policy and takes into
                          account the risks to the company (people, property, assets, and reputation) and
                          risks to communities identified in the Security Risk Assessment.

                       4. UNDERTAKE A SECURITY RISK ASSESSMENT

                       The Security Risk Assessment (SRA) should ensure that the company has accounted
                       for all foreseeable threats—to the project and communities—stemming from the
                       project’s presence and activities, so that it can develop effective mitigation measures.
                       The SRA is expected to include document review, a site visit, and interviews with
                       key internal and external security stakeholders, along with a final report with
                       recommendations.

                       The SRA should include a security due diligence review of the project and provide
                       a detailed due diligence report describing the level of conformance with local
                       laws, applicable security requirements, the Voluntary Principles on Security and
                       Human Rights, and security-related aspects of IFC’s Performance Standard 4.

                       The Security Risk Assessment should include information regarding relations with
                       public security and the ability of the company to contract appropriate private
                       security, plus any risks and recommendations regarding either of these issues.

                       The Security Risk Assessment should include a catalog of all known risks, and
                       it should evaluate their likelihood to occur, document the likely response(s), and
                       assess their potential impacts. For the report, the consultant will articulate risks
                       in either risk statements or risk scenarios. Mitigation measures to reduce these
                       risks should be identified.

                       Proposals should outline the consultant’s methodological approach and ability
                       to gather and analyze the information described above. The consultant should
                       include the types of documents to be requested as well as an illustrative list of
                       the types of stakeholders the consultant would want to meet to undertake the
                       Security Risk Assessment.


                       5. DEVELOP A SECURITY MANAGEMENT PLAN

                       The consultant will develop a Security Management Plan that is based on integrating
                       the principles of socially responsible security into management systems. The




102 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
following components must be included, but the structure can be determined in
conjunction with management:

•	 Purpose of Security Management

•	 Policies and Standards

•	 Situation Overview

•	 Physical Security

•	 Procedures

•	 Security Supervision and Control

•	 Guard-Force Management

•	 Security-Contractor Management

•	 Managing Relations with Public Security

•	 Incident Reporting and Inquiry

•	 Community Engagement

Proposals should demonstrate the consultant’s knowledge of and experience with
the topics and general principles that would guide the consultant in developing
the Security Management Plan.


6. PROJECT DELIVERABLES

The project deliverables include:

•	 At the conclusion of the site visit, a close-out review meeting with management
   [and lenders] to discuss findings and recommendations.

•	 A Security Risk Assessment report that conforms to Performance Standard 4
   and the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights.

•	 A Security Management Plan, written in conjunction with company management.

7. CONSULTANT BACKGROUND

The consultant can be an individual or a firm. The consultant is expected to have
at least 10 years of experience in security management. The following background
is preferable:

•	 [Language skills]

•	 Knowledge of and experience in [region/country]



                                            Annex A. Template Invitation to Bid and Request for Proposals | 103
                       •	 Experience in the management of security at projects in [industry sector]

                       •	 Familiarity with IFC’s Performance Standards, in particular Performance
                          Standard 4, and the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights

                       8. TIME FRAME

                       The consultant should outline a schedule that will demonstrate how this project
                       can be completed in 6–8 weeks.


                       9. PROPOSED BUDGET

                       The proposed budget should include labor and all projected expenses.




104 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Annex B. Guidance for Drafting
a Security Management Plan


There are many ways to structure a Security Management Plan. The topics below
are commonly included in comprehensive Security Management Plans. These
can be used by companies developing their own security plans in-house, or by
companies evaluating the security plans delivered by external consultants.

Text in black is sample text to use or modify. Text in blue italics is guidance to
be considered and then replaced or removed.


A. OBJECTIVES, MISSION, AND APPROACH

1. Objectives of a Security Management Plan

•	 The plan is designed to guide the company’s actions at the project in protecting
   against and mitigating risks of a security (as well as a human rights) nature
   that could threaten communities, employees, facilities, and ability to operate,
   as well as the reputation of the company and its global operations.

•	 The plan provides direction, organization, integration, and continuity to the
   security and asset-protection program. It is written with the understanding
   that effective security and regard for human rights are compatible.

•	 The systems outlined in the plan will be maintained throughout the lifetime
   of the project.

•	 The plan will be reviewed on an annual basis and after any change in the
   security-related context in which the project operates.




                                              Annex B. Guidance for Drafting a Security Management Plan | 105
                       2. Mission of Company Security

                       •	 The mission of company security is to ensure that all staff, contractors, and
                          visitors working at the project site and in the project area are able to do so in
                          a safe and secure environment. It also ensures that all facilities are kept safe
                          and secure, and that all project operations are unhindered. It provides effective
                          security-operational support to all project activities.

                       •	 Project security will approach its mission with the understanding that good
                          security and respect for the human rights of employees and communities are
                          fully compatible, as reflected in security forces’ behavior, communication, use
                          of force, etc.

                       •	 If applicable, describe the relationship between and relative responsibilities
                          of project security and other third-party contractors and affiliated companies,
                          such as Engineering, Procurement, and Construction (EPC) contractors.

                       3. Approach of Project Security

                       Discuss the project’s overall integrated approach for security. For example:

                       •	 Many security risks flow out of both inherent local social issues, such as ethnic
                          tensions, and unrecognized issues between the project and local communities.
                          As such, project Operations, Government Relations, and Community Relations
                          staff are all involved in the security process.

                       •	 Key stakeholders from local communities are also included in assessing security
                          risks and in considering how to mitigate and manage those risks. Security
                          arrangements are transparent, to the extent possible and appropriate, and are
                          included in disclosure to and consultation with the local communities.

                       •	 The project’s grievance mechanism is an important tool for reducing potential
                          security risks.

                       B. POLICIES AND STANDARDS

                       1. References to Company Policies and Documents

                       The following company policies and documents guide security management:

                       •	 Project Security Risk Assessment

                       •	 Corporate Security Policy

                       •	 Ethics [and/or Human Rights] Policy

                       •	 Use of Force Policy




106 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
2. Other Relevant Laws and Standards

The company adheres to the following guidelines, standards, and laws:

•	 National laws

•	 Applicable international laws

•	 IFC Performance Standards

•	 Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights

•	 UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials

•	 Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials

C. OVERVIEW OF SECURITY SITUATION

1. Project Setting

Provide a general description of the national and project-area security environment.
This would include descriptions of:

•	 Relevant demographic information, such as population age breakdown,
   unemployment, poverty, and inequality;

•	 Crime levels and type;

•	 Endemic political, social, or labor unrest;

•	 Terrorism or insurgency; and

•	 General attitude toward the project and associated issues.

2. Security Risks

(Attach security risk matrix and Security Risk Assessment as annexes.)

This section should be based on the project Security Risk Assessment and should
discuss:

Internal Risks

•	 These are caused by the illegal, unethical, or inappropriate behavior of project
   personnel or those directly affiliated with it.

•	 Most common risks would be employee theft, workplace violence, and labor
   unrest, potentially with associated sabotage.

•	 A security response might result in risks to employees or other individuals.




                                                 Annex B. Guidance for Drafting a Security Management Plan | 107
                       External Risks

                       •	 These are caused by the actions of people outside the project who seek to
                          take advantage of opportunities presented by the development and operation
                          of the project.

                       •	 These may include common criminal activity; disruption of the project for
                          economic, political, or social objectives; and other deliberate actions that have
                          a negative impact on the effective, efficient, and safe operation of the project. In
                          extreme cases, these could include terrorism, armed insurgency, coups, or war.

                       •	 A security response might result in risks to communities or individuals.

                       •	 The presence of security forces might pose additional risks to communities
                          or individuals.

                       3. Security Arrangements

                       Private Security

                       •	 Describe who provides basic project-site protection, such as the project private
                          security force (in-house or contracted).

                       Public Security

                       •	 Describe briefly the local public security forces that would be called on to
                          assist the project. This would briefly outline location, capabilities, mission,
                          and relation to the project.

                       D. PHYSICAL SECURITY

                       Provide an overall description of the project security approach and systems. More
                       detailed design information (such as exact CCTV camera positioning) belongs in
                       an annex. Ideally this section includes a description of the project’s:

                       •	 Security Barriers—such as fences, gates, locks, fortifying facilities, and means
                          of access control.

                       •	 Surveillance/Electronic Security Systems—including CCTV, Intrusion Detection
                          Systems, and surveillance guard posts and patrols.

                       •	 Security Control Center—describing the means for bringing together reporting
                          and controlling response.




108 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
E. SECURITY OPERATING PROCEDURES

Provide a brief description of key security operating procedures. Detailed standards
and procedures that provide a transparent and accurate process for managing
security functions (such as checklists) should be contained in an annex. Key
procedures should include a brief description of the following (as appropriate)
and how they fit together:

•	 Boundary Security—how security will maintain control of the project’s perimeter
   and channel people to access-control points.

•	 Access-Point Operations—the types of checks and screening for both people
   and vehicles at gates or other access points. Include entry and exit searches and
   purpose, and who is subject to it. Outline key ground rules, such as:

  ŊŊ Searches will only be conducted by security personnel who have received
     instruction and information regarding the procedure and the legal aspects
     of search and seizure; and

  ŊŊ Body searches will only be conducted by security personnel of the same gender.

•	 Incident Response—how security will respond to an incident and who is responsible
   for responding. Responses should be based on proper and proportional use
   of force. Describe the role of public security, including when they are called
   and by whom.

•	 Security Patrols—what patrols check and how often.

•	 Travel Security—(if applicable) any special procedure for off-site travel security.

•	 Materials Storage and Control—(if applicable) any controls over the transport,
   inventory, and maintenance of any commercial explosives or chemicals (e.g.,
   cyanide) necessary for the project. Note that these are stored in accordance
   with appropriate national laws and regulations.

•	 Information and Communication—procedures for categorizing, handling, and
   controlling sensitive information.

•	 Firearms Security—project policy regarding firearms on-site, as well as the
   responsibilities and procedures for issuing and storing any security firearms,
   ammunition, and less lethal weapons. This should include:

  ŊŊ Location for storage,

  ŊŊ How weapons are secured during storage,




                                               Annex B. Guidance for Drafting a Security Management Plan | 109
                          ŊŊ Records for issuance,

                          ŊŊ Who they may be issued to,

                          ŊŊ Safeguarding while in possession of the guard, and

                          ŊŊ Audits.

                          Include in an annex detailed standards and procedure for weapons issuance,
                          storage, and audit.

                       F. SECURITY SUPERVISION AND CONTROL

                       1. Management Structure and Responsibility

                       •	 Explain the overall lines of control, accountability, and supervision for the
                          security effort.

                       •	 Define who supervises daily performance of the security-guard force and who
                          has authority.

                       •	 Describe who has overall responsibility for security information sharing and
                          communication.

                       2. Responsibility for Conducting Security Risk Assessments

                       •	 Discuss the responsibilities for conducting risk assessments, who participates in
                          them (e.g., senior management, Community Relations team, key stakeholders
                          from communities, etc.), and what the assessments cover.

                       3. Cross-Functional Coordination

                       •	 Describe interdepartmental coordination. Community Relations, Human
                          Resources, and Government Relations are important partners in project security.

                       •	 Outline any planning/coordination activities between security and other
                          departments, which may range from participation in security risk assessments
                          to weekly meetings.

                       G. PRIVATE SECURITY FORCE MANAGEMENT

                       1. Security-Guard Force Role

                       •	 Private security’s role is to provide preventive and defensive services, protecting
                          company employees, facilities, equipment, and operations wherever they are located.

                       •	 Private security personnel have no law-enforcement authority and will not
                          encroach on the duties, responsibilities, and prerogatives reserved for public
                          security forces.




110 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
2. Provision and Composition of the Security-Guard Force

Describe whether members of the guard force are direct employees or from a
third-party security provider.

In developing its guard force, the project (or its third-party provider) will:

•	 Hire in accordance with national labor laws,

•	 Give preference in hiring to qualified local candidates where possible, and

•	 Promote diverse hiring practices, including gender and indigenous inclusiveness.

Security Contractor Management (if applicable)

•	 The project assumes responsibility for the oversight of security.

•	 Describe how the project will actively set the standards for and oversee private
   security contractor selection and performance.

•	 Selection—In selecting a security provider, the project will perform proper
   due diligence that will include screening for institutional reputation, training
   standards, procedures for screening employees, and any history of allegations
   of human rights abuses or other criminal behavior.

•	 Contract provisions—Include any provisions (e.g., for uniforms and equipment).

•	 Active oversight of contractor performance—To ensure proper performance,
   the project will undertake audits, assist with training, inquire into any credible
   allegations of abuse or wrongdoing, and monitor site performance on an ongoing
   basis.

3. Security Guard Background Screening

•	 The project will perform and/or require its security provider to perform valid
   background checks on potential employees to screen for any allegations of past
   abuses, inappropriate use of force, or other criminal activity and wrongdoing.

•	 No guard or employee on whom there is credible negative information on these
   checks will serve on the project.

•	 These checks will be documented and maintained in individual personnel
   records, which are subject to review by the project.




                                                Annex B. Guidance for Drafting a Security Management Plan | 111
                       4. Security-Guard Force Equipment

                       •	 Describe equipment to be provided to guards, including radios, nonlethal
                          weapons, and any firearms and ammunition. Guards should only be armed if it
                          is justified by the Security Risk Assessment and is the only viable and effective
                          mitigation measure for a clear threat.

                       5. Security Guard Use of Force

                       •	 The use of force by private security is only sanctioned when it is for preventive
                          and defensive purposes in proportion to the nature and extent of the threat.

                       •	 When it is necessary to arm the guard force, the project will ensure that those
                          who are armed exhibit high levels of technical and professional proficiency
                          and clearly understand the rules for the use of force. This means being properly
                          trained on using force effectively, proportionally, and with respect for human
                          rights.

                       6. Security-Guard Force Training

                       •	 The project commits to maintaining the highest standards of guard-force technical
                          and professional proficiency through a comprehensive training program. Outline
                          the training responsibilities of either the security provider or the company, as
                          applicable. The project will review any third-party security provider’s training
                          program and, where necessary, augment the training through the use of qualified
                          third parties or direct instruction.

                       •	 The project will ensure that security personnel receive procedural or knowledge
                          training in:

                          ŊŊ Basic guarding skills,

                          ŊŊ Guard-post orders and procedures,

                          ŊŊ Proper conduct and ethics/human rights,

                          ŊŊ Rules of engagement,

                          ŊŊ Rules for the use of force,

                          ŊŊ Adequate weapons training (as applicable), and

                          ŊŊ Health, Safety, and Environment (HSE) mandatory training.

                       •	 Outline how training completion records will be kept. Training will be open
                          to inspection/audit.




112 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
H. MANAGING RELATIONS WITH PUBLIC SECURITY

1. Public Security Force Role

•	 Public security forces have responsibility for responding to and investigating
   all criminal activity. They also have the primary responsibility for controlling
   demonstrations or civil disorder. For incidents involving criminal violations
   or potentially violent confrontations or demonstrations, they are requested to
   respond to protect company personnel and property.

2. Engagement with Public Security Forces

•	 Describe how the project will maintain constructive relations with public
   security (typically the police and, under certain circumstances, the military)
   operating in the project area or responsible for assisting project security. The
   depth of this section will vary with the security arrangements involving local
   public security forces.

  ŊŊ If it is only normal law enforcement activities, such as investigating reported
     crimes or responding to an incident, ongoing engagement or liaison activity
     may be sufficient.

  ŊŊ If public security forces are actually assigned to the project to provide
     some aspects of security, then this section should describe provision of
     any equipment or other support, the role of the public security force, joint
     contingency planning, and coordination mechanisms.

  ŊŊ It should also discuss the establishment of any memorandum of understanding
     necessary to make the arrangements transparent.

I. INCIDENT REPORTING AND INQUIRY

•	 Outline the grievance mechanism, reporting requirements and structure, and
   inquiry protocols about security incidents, use-of-force incidents, and allegations
   of abuse, misconduct, or other wrongdoing by security personnel.

•	 Discuss the responsibilities and timelines for conducting inquiries on allegations
   and incidents, including:

  ŊŊ The company makes a commitment to expeditious inquiry into any allegations
     of abuse or wrongdoing.

  ŊŊ The private security contractor may conduct its own inquiry of an incident
     or allegation, but the project can conduct an independent inquiry on any
     serious abuse allegation or use-of-force incident.

  ŊŊ The inquiry findings will include a recommendation of any appropriate
     disciplinary action and policy or procedure changes that may be needed.



                                                Annex B. Guidance for Drafting a Security Management Plan | 113
                       J. COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT

                       •	 Describe how the company will engage with communities on matters relating
                          to security. This may be done in coordination with the Community Relations
                          department, depending on the project.

                       •	 The project acknowledges that it may have an impact on communities and
                          strives to mitigate risks. It will do this by providing:

                          ŊŊ Regulations for guard off-site behavior,

                          ŊŊ Protocol for arrangements with public security,

                          ŊŊ Shared information on security arrangements (as appropriate), and

                          ŊŊ Grievance mechanism for community members to report issues.




114 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Annex C. Template Contract
with a Private Security Provider
                                 COMPANY LOGO


This template is designed for a company seeking to hire an external private security
provider. The parts in blue italics should be completed by the company, based
on the particular context. As with any template, the content should be reviewed
and adapted for the specific situation.

Company Name hereinafter referred to as “company” enters into this contract
with Private Security Contractor Name hereinafter referred to as “contractor”
for the provision of services effective as of Date.


A. CONDUCT

•	 Contractor and its employees must adhere to the company’s policies for ethical
   standards and human rights.

•	 Contractor and its employees must maintain confidentiality of sensitive information.

•	 Contractor and its employees must not use torture, cruelty, or inhumane treatment.

•	 Contractor and its employees must ensure the health of those in custody and
   provide medical assistance when needed.

•	 Contractor and its employees must not engage in corrupt practices.

•	 Contractor must treat its employees in accordance with national law (and in
   accordance with Performance Standard 2).




                                                 Annex C. Template Contract with a Private Security Provider | 115
                       B. USE OF FORCE

                       Restraint and caution must be exercised consistent with international guidelines
                       on the use of force; in particular, the Basic Principles on Use of Force and Firearms
                       by Law Enforcement Officers and including the following key elements:

                       •	 Use of force should be evaluated and use of weapons carefully controlled.

                       •	 Nonviolent means should be used before resorting to force and firearms.

                       •	 When force must be used to protect human life, it should be proportionate to
                          the threat and should seek to minimize injury.

                       •	 Medical assistance should be provided as soon as safely possible.

                       C. POLICY

                       Contractor is required to have or produce key internal policies that commit the
                       organization to proper standards, to ensure that its employees understand and
                       adhere to the standards, and to enforce them. This includes:

                       •	 Having written policies on conduct and use of force.

                       •	 Having a policy to perform preemployment screening for all supervisors,
                          guards, consultants, security specialists, and other staff, which identifies any
                          history of abuse or wrongdoing. At a minimum, these checks should include
                          police records and criminal litigation checks, as well as checks with former
                          employers.

                       •	 Having a policy on reporting and inquiry into allegations of unlawful or abusive
                          behavior and all use-of-force incidents, followed by appropriate disciplinary action.
                          [Note: although the contractor should be required to conduct an inquiry when
                          its people are involved, ultimate responsibility remains with the company.]

                       D. TRAINING

                       1. Weapons Training

                       (This includes firearms, if issued, and any less lethal weapons systems, if used.)

                       •	 Each security guard must be certified as qualified for use of any weapon, by
                          pass/fail standard, before being issued a weapon.

                       •	 Qualification should recur every six months.




116 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
2. Use-of-Force Training

This should include:

•	 Force continuum or proper use of force training.

•	 Materials based on a framework such as the widely accepted force-continuum
   model.

•	 Use-of-force technique training and practice through structured, scenario-based,
   performance-oriented (learning-by-doing) training.

•	 Where, in what circumstances, and under what conditions it is lawful and in
   accordance with company policy to use force of any kind.

•	 The maximum level of force authorized.

•	 Emphasis that any use of force must be a last resort and proportionate and
   appropriate to the threat.

•	 Emphasis that lethal force can only be used if there is an imminent threat to
   life or of great bodily harm.

3. Appropriate Conduct

Training should emphasize avoidance of unlawful or abusive behavior. This training
should clearly define abusive behavior in relation to proper behavior and point
out sanctions; it should also inform trainees of national laws and international
standards on human rights that the company—and they as employees of the
contractor—must observe. Two important documents include:

•	 UN Basic Principles on Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officers.

•	 UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials.

4. Equipment

Contractor must ensure that all employees are provided with the appropriate
equipment to undertake their responsibilities. This equipment includes a proper
uniform with appropriate identification, radio or other communication device, and
any other equipment as determined by the Security Risk Assessment or Security
Management Plan as being required.




                                              Annex C. Template Contract with a Private Security Provider | 117
                       5. Auditing

                       The company reserves the right to conduct periodic audits of the security provider to:

                       •	 Ensure contractor’s background-check process.

                       •	 Audit and review contractor employee background checks.

                       •	 Review the provider’s personnel records for all of the guards and security staff
                          it provides.

                       •	 Audit incident/allegation responses.

                       The company further reserves the right to conduct both scheduled and unannounced
                       reviews and audits of the training program and observation of training events.
                       This may include:

                       •	 Reviewing the provider’s training program to confirm that the training is
                          scheduled and being conducted.

                       •	 Reviewing lesson plans to make sure they meet the proper standard.

                       •	 Confirming the qualifications of the instructor(s).

                       •	 Ensuring that there is a pass/fail performance test to verify that the student
                          mastered the material.

                       •	 Reviewing the certification process to guarantee that all the security personnel
                          assigned to the company attended the training and have passed a minimum
                          standard.

                       6. Sanctions

                       •	 The company will apply sanctions, including but not limited to withholding
                          payment for services, if the contractor does not meet the performance expectations
                          outlined in this contract.

                       •	 The company will terminate the contract where there are multiple failures to
                          meet expectations or there is evidence of unlawful or abusive behavior by the
                          contractor’s employees.

                       SIGNATURES OF BOTH PARTIES

                       DATE




118 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Annex D. Sample Incident Report
Summary Template
                              COMPANY LOGO


Incident Report Summary                 Reference #:


Month:                                  Year:


Incident type:


Date and time of incident:


Location of incident:


Description of the incident (include situation leading up to the incident):




Individuals involved (include contact details):




                                                                    (continued)




                                                   Annex D. Sample Incident Report Summary Template | 119
                        Assessed consequences to the company and to community members (include a
                        description of injuries or damage sustained, if applicable):




                        Management actions:




                        Prepared by:                                     Approved by:


                        Date:                                            Date:


                        Distribution:




120 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Annex E. Template Memorandum
of Understanding


This template is designed for a company seeking to establish a memorandum
of understanding (MOU) with a government and/or its public security forces.
The parts in blue italics should be completed based on the particular context.
This template outlines key topics typically included in an MOU, and it provides
examples and/or sample text in some cases. It should be noted that there is
no single approach for establishing and documenting an MOU, and, as with
any template, the content should be reviewed and adapted for the specific
situation.



Memorandum of Understanding
between Company and Host Nation

A. BASIC REFERENCES

•	 Constitution and national laws

•	 Company’s relevant policies (e.g., Security Policy, Ethics Policy, Human Rights
   Policy, Code of Conduct, etc.)

•	 Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights

•	 Relevant United Nations protocols and standards




                                                     Annex E. Template Memorandum of Understanding | 121
                       B. PURPOSE

                       To clarify and define the relationship and responsibilities of the Company and
                       the Host Nation Security Forces (e.g., police, army, navy, etc.) in maintaining
                       and supporting law and order at and in the vicinity of the Company’s facilities
                       and in its activities.


                       C. GENERAL PRINCIPLES

                       Company (“the Company”) joins with the Host Nation Security Force or appropriate
                       ministry in agreeing with the following principles:

                       •	 The Host Nation government, through its police or other public security forces,
                          has the primary responsibility to provide security, enforce the law, and maintain
                          order in the country.

                       •	 Both the Company and the Host Nation police pledge to respect human rights
                          at all times.

                       •	 Both will approach all issues, including those affecting local communities, on
                          the basis of mutual respect, with a commitment to discuss and solve all issues
                          without resorting to violence or intimidation.

                       •	 In providing a safe and secure environment, both agree that force will only
                          be used as a last resort and then only the minimum force necessary to restore
                          peace and to prevent injuries and fatalities.

                       •	 In safeguarding the integrity of company personnel and property, the Company
                          is committed to obey the laws of Host Nation and to promote the observance
                          of applicable international law enforcement principles.

                       •	 The Company’s security will not act as part of the public security forces, will
                          not undertake activities outside the Company’s property, and will not take
                          offensive action.

                       •	 The Company and its security retain the right of self-defense in the event of
                          attack.

                       The Company commits that its security personnel will comply with the standards
                       of and be trained with regard to the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human
                       Rights and the UN Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Treatment of Offenders.




122 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
The Company requests that public security adhere to the same standards when
working with the Company and supporting company security. In the event that force
must be used, any injured persons will be provided medical attention regardless
of who perpetrated or initiated the incident. Any incident resulting in a fatality
will be investigated by the relevant Host Nation authorities, and any appropriate
disciplinary action will be taken.


D. JOINT SECURITY MEASURES

This section describes any relevant joint undertakings, as appropriate. This may
include joint efforts to manage specific threats, procedures for the Company
to request police assistance, coordination and communication mechanisms, etc.

This section may also delineate responsibilities, hand-over mechanisms (both from
private security to public security and back again after a threat is contained),
and other coordination obligations. For example, “In principle, the Company’s
security will enforce the Company’s policies on company property and only ask
for help from the Host Nation police if the private security guards cannot manage
the situation.”

Nothing in this memorandum restricts the authority of the Host Nation government
or public security forces operating under its orders to defend the nation, maintain
law and order, and enforce the Constitution.


E. JOINT TRAINING

In accordance with the provisions of this memorandum, the Company shall
undertake training to make its personnel aware of their responsibilities.

Where relevant, this section describes joint training efforts—either aspirations to
“explore opportunities to work together” or specific already agreed undertakings,
such as training events, rehearsals, walk-through exercises, and other preparations.


F. ADMINISTRATION AND SUPPORT

Both the Company and the Host Nation police bear the cost for their normal
and routine operations as they provide security to the Company’s operations.




                                                      Annex E. Template Memorandum of Understanding | 123
                       If the Company requests security assistance from the police, the Company is
                       prepared to support with assistance under the following formula:

                       •	 The Company will make payments for transportation, food, and lodging in
                          accordance with Host Nation law, but only to an institutional account, not
                          to an individual.

                       •	 The assistance, financial or in-kind, must conform to Host Nation law and must
                          be transparent and documented; a written receipt is required for all transfers.

                       •	 The Company will not provide weapons, ammunition, or funding to purchase
                          lethal weapons for the police.

                       •	 The Company reserves the right to make all such transactions public at its
                          discretion.

                       This memorandum is in effect until it is nullified by either party. Cancellation or
                       nullification requires 30 days’ notice in writing. In such cases, a new memorandum
                       may be negotiated between the parties at any time.




124 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Annex F. Resources for Further
Guidance on Use of Security Forces


INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS ON SECURITY

•	 IFC’s Performance Standard 4: http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/a40bc60049
   a78f49b80efaa8c6a8312a/PS4_English_2012.pdf?MOD=AJPERES.

•	 International Code of Conduct for Private Security Service Providers: www.icoca.ch/.

•	 UN Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials:
   www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/UseOfForceAndFirearms.aspx.

•	 UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials: www.ohchr.org/EN/
   ProfessionalInterest/Pages/LawEnforcementOfficials.aspx.

•	 Voluntary Principles (VPs) on Security and Human Rights: http://www.voluntary
   principles.org/what-are-the-voluntary-principles/.

SPECIFIC GUIDANCE DOCUMENTS

•	 IFC’s Guidance Note on PS4: http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/e280ef804
   a0256609709ffd1a5d13d27/GN_English_2012_Full-Document.pdf
   ?MOD=AJPERES.

•	 ANSI’s Management System for Quality of Private Security Company Operations:
   http://www.acq.osd.mil/log/ps/.psc.html/7_Management_System_for_Quality.pdf.

•	 International Association of Oil and Gas Producer’s Report on Firearms and
   the Use of Force: http://www.ogp.org.uk/pubs/320.pdf.




                                          Annex F. Resources for Further Guidance on Use of Security Forces | 125
                       •	 MIGA’s Implementation Toolkit for Major Project Sites: https://www.miga.org/
                          documents/vpshr_toolkit_v3.pdf.

                       •	 Voluntary Principles Implementation Guidance Tool:1 http://www.voluntary
                          principles.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/VPs_IGT_Final_13-09-11.pdf
                          (English); http://www.voluntaryprinciples.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/
                          IGT-SPANISH1.pdf (Spanish).

                       GENERAL SITES WITH NUMEROUS RESOURCES

                       •	 ICRC and DCAF’s Security and Human Rights Toolkit: http://www.security
                          humanrightshub.org/content/toolkit.

                       •	 University of Denver’s Private Security Monitor: http://psm.du.edu/.

                       •	 Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights: http://www.voluntaryprinciples
                          .org/resources/.




                       1	 As mentioned throughout the Handbook, the Voluntary Principles provide good-practice guidance related to
                       security and human rights but are not synonymous with Performance Standard 4.



126 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
Stay Connected


SCRIBD:

http://www.scribd.com/IFCSustainability



LINKEDIN:

http://www.linkedin.com/pub/ifc-sustainability/1b/729/1ba



CONTACT:

asksustainability@ifc.org



ACCESS THIS AND OTHER IFC SUSTAINABILITY PUBLICATIONS ONLINE AT:

http://www.ifc.org/sustainabilitypublications
2121 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20433
Tel. 1-202-473-1000
www.ifc.org/sustainability
asksustainability@ifc.org
 128 | Use of Security Forces: Assessing and Managing Risks and Impacts
