CASE STUDY


Achieving Pharma and Medical Synergies
through Mergers and Acquisitions
Ascendis Health: Bringing High-Quality Pharmaceuticals
and Medical Devices to over 100 countries


December 2016
ABOUT IFC
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution focused exclusively on leveraging
the power of the private sector to tackle the world’s most pressing development challenges. Working with private
enterprises in more than 100 countries, IFC uses its capital, expertise and influence to help eliminate extreme poverty
and promote shared prosperity

ABOUT THE CASE STUDY
Expanding access to quality and affordable health care is a central element to eliminating extreme poverty and
promoting shared prosperity. The World Bank Group has a goal to end preventable deaths and disability through
Universal Health Coverage (UHC). In many developing countries, governments do not have the capacity to service the
entire population and private health care providers often play a critical role in meeting societal needs.

IFC’s health practice is developing case studies that demonstrate the ability of the private sector towards achieving
global and national health care goals. Through a focus on efficiency and innovation, certain business models can
provide better outcomes at a lower overall cost to society.

WRITTEN BY
This case study was authored by Ann M. Casanova with valuable inputs from IFC colleagues Pushpinder Bindra, Leticia
Crentsil, Charles Dalton, Radwa El Sharkawi, Edward Hsu, Srividya Jagannathan, Chris McCahan, and Elena Sterlin.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A special note of appreciation is extended to Ascendis, especially Dr. Karsten Wellner, Kieron Futter, Chris Swanepoel,
Tony Lowther, John Backman, Jose Luis Berenguer, Charalambos Pattihis, Michalis Neoptolemou, Chantal Burgers,
Julliette Morrison, Jeremy Nel, Rihard de Villiers, for sharing their experience and data with us. The author is grateful
for the many insights provided by IFC colleagues. Special thanks to Elizabeth Price for communications advice, and
Borys Mar for the creative design. 

DISCLAIMER
The findings, interpretations, views and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) or of the World Bank or the
governments they represent. While IFC believes that the information provided is accurate, the information is provided
on a strictly “as-is” basis, without assurance or representation of any kind. IFC may not require all or any of the
described practices in its own investments, and in its sole discretion may not agree to finance or assist companies or
projects that adhere to those practices. Any such practices or proposed practices would be evaluated by IFC on a case-
by-case basis with due regard for the particular circumstances of the project.

RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
© International Finance Corporation 2015. All rights reserved.

The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law.

COVER PHOTO
© Ascendis
                                                                                                     Photo © World Bank
Table of Contents
  Saving the Next Generation with Modern Medical Devices in South Africa 	          1

  From Incorporation to Multinational in Eight Years 	                              5

  The Business Model from the Corporate Perspective	                               13

  The Role of IFC	                                                                 17

  Conclusion	17




                                                                             Ascendis Health | iii
                       Photo © World Bank




iv | Ascendis Health
SAVING THE NEXT GENERATION WITH
MODERN MEDICAL DEVICES IN SOUTH
AFRICA
Gwen Burger, a young South African woman, was heartbroken at the prospect of not
being able to have children. She suffered a painful medical condition that affects as many
as 40 percent of women in South Africa. For five years, she had dealt with the symptoms
of two large uterine fibroids. The larger fibroid was the size of a baseball and caused
excessive bleeding during her menstrual cycle. Her sales job was more difficult because
of her condition. She constantly had to change her clothes during the work day, which
was difficult when she was on the road. The blood loss was
so significant that her hemoglobin, a measure of iron in the
body, dropped to a level of three, far below the normal level
of twelve, requiring her to be admitted to the hospital three




                                                                                                                        Photo © Ascendis
times for treatment to improve her hemoglobin level.

Gwen sought a medical opinion from five different gynecologists, all of whom
informed her that the only solution was to have a hysterectomy. The surgery
was highly invasive and had a long recovery period. She would be out of             “South Africa, like most
work for four to six weeks and would lose income from her sales job. Most           of the countries on the
of all, she was distraught at the thought of never bearing children. This was a     African continent, does
terrible option.                                                                    not have a medical
                                                                                    devices manufacturing
Dr. Nhlanhla Sithole offered Gwen a new possibility. He performed a Uterine
                                                                                    industry. Ascendis
Fibroid Embolization (UFE), a minimally invasive treatment that selectively
                                                                                    facilitates the
targets fibroids and spares the uterus and ovaries. It is internationally
recognized as a highly effective treatment for uterine fibroids. In collaboration   importation of a
with Ascendis Medical, Dr. Sithole performed the surgery using radiological         large percent of these
equipment to guide a catheter which introduced microspheres that suffocated         medical devices, which
the blood supply to the fibroid. She was in the hospital for one day and she        would not otherwise
was back at work within three days.                                                 be available to help
                                                                                    patients like Gwen
Reflecting on the surgery, Gwen remarked, “It has been a month since my
                                                                                    avoid invasive surgery.”
UFE. I have had my second menstrual cycle and it was at least 60 percent
                                                                                    Dr. Karsten Wellner
lighter than normal. This has finally improved my quality of life. Without this,
                                                                                    CEO of Ascendis
I would have lost my womb and been off from work, which I cannot afford
to do.”




                                                                                                  Ascendis Health | 1
Dr. Karsten Wellner, CEO of Ascendis Health explains, “South Africa, like most of the countries on the African
continent, does not have a medical devices manufacturing industry. Ascendis Health facilitates the importation of
a large percent of these medical devices, which would not otherwise be available to help patients like Gwen avoid
invasive surgery.”

Established in 2008, Ascendis Health is a publically traded, South African company focused on a holistic
view toward “health and care.” What started as a consumer care products company, has now evolved into a
multinational company with a holistic view on health, combining prevention and intervention. It is organized
into three major divisions: Pharma-Med, Consumer Brands, and Phyto-Vet, which have performed well. In Fiscal
Year 2016, Ascendis Health had revenues of R3.9 billion ($290 million).1 More than half of its revenues were
generated by the Pharma-Med division. Further, in 2015, the Medical subdivision had annual turnover in excess
of R1 billion ($74 million), making it the second-largest medical device business in South Africa, behind the
subsidiary of one of the major global healthcare companies.

In 2016, IFC played a catalytic role in the growth of Ascendis by providing a $30 million equity investment
for the acquisition of Remedica, an important European generic pharmaceutical manufacturing company. The
acquisition was a game changer that gave Ascendis immediate access to a broad basket of important medications
- including for the treatment of cancer. The deal transformed Ascendis into a multinational company overnight
and gave access to emerging markets for pharmaceuticals in Asia, the Middle East and Africa.

The Pharma-Med division, which is the focus of this case study, is divided into two subdivisions. The Pharma
subdivision imports, manufactures, and distributes over 850 generic prescription medications and over-the-
counter (OTC) medicines. The Medical subdivision, imports and distributes over 7,000 products, consisting
of hospital equipment, surgical devices, and diagnostic laboratory equipment. The Consumer Brands division
manufactures and distributes nutritional products and supplements, vitamins, complementary medicines, sports
nutrition, and high end skin care products. The Phyto-Vet line consists of plant and animal health and care.

The Pharma subdivision reaches the most vulnerable patients with its drugs in four ways: (1) selling generic drugs,
which are priced lower than originator drugs thus promoting affordability, (2) selling through dispensing doctors,
which helps reach low income patients in remote areas in South Africa, (3) selling generic drugs in large volumes
to public hospitals through government tenders, and (4) selling to international relief organizations working with
refugees and victims of conflict. By providing low-cost generic drug alternatives to the market, Ascendis increases
access and improves availability of high-quality medicines to people in over 100 countries. IFC estimates that the
company has already benefited 2.2 million people with its generic drugs and it is targeted to reach 3.2 million
people by 2020.

The Medical Device subdivision provides a “one-stop shop” solution for private and public hospitals,
laboratories, and specialist surgeons. Its products are used in general surgery, gynecology, urology, ear, nose and
throat, cardiology, as well as diagnostics used in radiology. It has strategically positioned itself in segments that
need education and servicing but do not require large capital investments, such as MRI’s. In the growing area
of preventative care, it offers diagnostic laboratory equipment and support to help doctors diagnose and treat
illnesses earlier. By expanding the scope of the product line with high-quality medical products, it has helped
many South African hospitals to extend reach and improve access to quality. By offering service agreements to
maintain and repair equipment regionally, it reduces equipment downtime and cost. It has a footprint that covers
all of South Africa and several countries in the Southern Africa region.

  1
   	 Ascendis’ fiscal year ended on June 30, 2016. The exchange rate on November 10, 2016 was 1 USD: 13.4 ZAR. www.oanda.com



2 | Ascendis Health
KEY SUCCESS FACTORS
Ascendis’ business strategy is to create a synergistic group of health product brands that cover the value
chain ranging from the importation of raw materials, to manufacturing, to distribution via direct selling
and retail channels. The key factors that have contributed to the company’s success are (1) economies
of scope (efficiencies formed by variety), (2) shortening time to market delivery, and (3) its ability to
raise capital for strategic or complementary acquisitions.


EFFICIENCIES THROUGH MERGERS                                 inorganic growth allows it to get some products to
AND ACQUISITIONS (M&A)                                       market in under two years, thereby improving health
PARTNERSHIPS                                                 outcomes and the quality of life sooner.
Since 2013, the Pharma-Med division has established
                                                             ABILITY TO RAISE CAPITAL
M&A partnerships with eight companies. This has
                                                             Ascendis gained credibility when it listed on the
allowed Ascendis to find efficiencies through expansion
                                                             Johannesburg Stock Exchange in November 2013. The
of its range of product offerings and reduce costs. The
                                                             IPO allowed the company to raise R450 million ($45
acquisitions create value throughout the value chain.
                                                             million at that time) through the private placement of
In the Pharma subdivision, the partnerships allow
                                                             its shares. The placement was oversubscribed. It sold
it to address more therapeutic areas with additional
                                                             shares at R11 ($1), which provided Ascendis with more
generic formulations and serve more markets. In the
                                                             than double the equity it needed. The capital allowed
Medical Device subdivision, Ascendis has partnered
                                                             it to refinance its debt and to fund the next two
with over 100 respected international companies to
                                                             transactions. As of November 10, 2016, its share price
carry its products. By bundling the sale of products,
                                                             had increased to R26.50 ($1.96) and it has a market
providing training on the equipment—even training
                                                             capitalization of approximately had R10.2 billion
in the operating theater—and providing equipment
                                                             ($760 million), with annualized sales of approximately
maintenance through service contracts, the company
                                                             R6.8 billion ($506 million). The listing also helped
solves problems in the industry. The strategy allows the
                                                             the company to get additional local and international
company to scale the distribution of a broader number
                                                             investor support from the debt and equity side, thus
of products. Further, by importing and distributing
                                                             allowing it to pursue its growth strategy.
specialized knowledge, it is cultivating trust and loyalty
to the brand.                                                It was able to achieve positive results because of its
                                                             dedicated Mergers and Acquisitions teams that went
SHORTENING TIME TO MARKET                                    the extra mile to support the acquisition and the
DELIVERY                                                     integration of the acquired subsidiary, as well as its
The acquisitions reduce the time requirements to
                                                             strict adherence to financial models that prescribe how
introduce its highly regulated products to new markets
                                                             to financially structure its deals.
because the company leapfrogs over the typical early
stage research and development activities. Given that
the gestation period for developing pharmaceuticals
and medical products, getting regulatory approval,
and commercialization takes several years, the path of




                                                                                                             Ascendis Health | 3
                      Photo © Ascendis




4 | Ascendis Health
FROM INCORPORATION TO
MULTINATIONAL IN EIGHT YEARS

Ascendis was founded in 2008 by Coast2Coast, a privately held investment holding company which aligns its
vision, in part, to Berkshire Hathaway. Coast2Coast focuses on the healthcare sector and the consumer health
products sector with a passion for value creation. It takes a semi-active ownership role in its portfolio companies,
and currently owns about one-third of Ascendis. It seeks to create value by partnering management teams to
improve strategic, operational, and financial performance.

In 2010, Dr. Karsten Wellner, was recruited to become the CEO. He had previously managed the South African
subsidiary of a global pharmaceutical company from Germany. Karsten changed the name of the company from
“Nutrivest” to “Ascendis Health,” with the intention of rebranding the company with a name symbolizing the key
role of pharmaceuticals in its growth strategy.

Pharma-Med Vision: Ascendis wants to cover three distinct aspects of health care: prevention, intervention, and
chronic care. The company’s Consumer Brands division is focused on preventative care and health maintenance.
The medical device division attends to the intervention of a patient in critical stages of care, while the pharma
division provides pre- and post-intervention medications. In South Africa, there are no other companies
combining preventative and intervention care as part of their overall strategy. This holistic vision on health is
increasingly important as the focus on prevention and health maintenance helps societies and health insurance
providers to reduce the occurrence of diseases. By promoting preventative care and reducing “interventive” care,
it contains or reduces costs in the overall healthcare system.

Early Growth: Ascendis entered the pharmaceutical sector in March 2013 when it acquired its first pharma
company with the purchase of the South African Pharmachem and its two subsidiaries, Dezzo Trading and
Pharmadyne. At the time, Pharmachem was a 13-year-old South African pharmaceutical company engaged in the
manufacture and importation of generic drugs that addressed illnesses with a line of antibiotics, anti-diarrhea
medication, and anti-psychosis medication. In addition, it produces OTC medications that alleviate pain, cough,
and flu symptoms. The deal gave Ascendis a foundation with a platform company in South Africa that provided
access to government hospitals and dispensing doctors who were serviced by wholesalers or its own sales force.

By January 2014, it had acquired a second company in the Pharma-Med division, with the purchase of Surgical
Innovations (SI), a six-year-old South African company that imports and distributes various surgical devices
used in general surgery, urology, obstetrics and gynecology, cardiology, ear, nose and throat, spinal surgery, and
neurology. It sells surgical equipment such as 3D endoscopes for minimally invasive surgery, surgical side implants
such as screws for the head, and hip joints to hospitals in South Africa.

These two acquisitions, and the ones that followed them, positioned the young company to enter the Pharma-Med
market on a fast-track basis by leapfrogging over the typical research and development and greenfield investments
necessary to bring a product to market.




                                                                                                     Ascendis Health | 5
                   Acquisition Strategy: Ascendis’ fundamental approach is to acquire platform companies in all three divisions it
                   wants to be active in and then add profitability to the division through “bolt-on” acquisitions. A “bolt-on” is a
                   company or part of a company that can be affixed to the platform company in a way that leverages the existing
                   strength of both. Bolt-ons can be a pharma dossier, a term for a collection of documents containing detailed
                   data pertaining to the administrative, chemistry, pre-clinical, clinical, and permissions granted by the regulatory
                   agencies of a country. Bolt-ons can be other brands, or partial businesses, which can share production facilities,
                   sales and marketing teams, accounting, and other administrative functions. Ascendis looks to acquire brands with
                   a strong export component and with a proven ability to integrate and extract efficiencies, as well as opportunities
                   where it can cross-license pharma dossiers.

                                                        When evaluating a target company, Ascendis looks for companies that have
                                                        a strong profit growth history and have good brands with market-leading
                                                        products that are ranked in the top three. The brands themselves must have
Photo © Ascendis




                                                        a good business proposition. Ascendis does not buy turn-around companies.
                                                        Instead, it buys established, healthy companies that are cash positive, and
                                                        have weathered storms, so as to minimize the possibility of any turn-around
                                                        work.

                       “In two years, Ascendis          Pharma Growth Trajectory: The 2015 calendar year was a seminal year
                       acquired five pharma             for the company’s growth. The Pharma-Med division completed a total of
                       companies which gave             four acquisitions, including one international acquisition in the Pharma
                       it newer, more effec-            subdivision.

                       tive drugs, as well as           In Pharma, the Bio Swiss bolt-on gave Ascendis entry into the diabetes
                       entry into treatments            market with insulins, diabetes care devices, diabetic OTC products, and
                       for cancer and chronic           oral hypoglycemic medications. Akacia (finalized in April 2016), also
                       lifestyle diseases”              a bolt-on, provided high volume, low-cost essential drugs and OTC
                                                        formulations, including a Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) accredited
                                                        manufacturing plant formerly owned by a multinational. The acquisition
                   strengthened market shares in the retail pharma, dispensing doctor, and public hospital channels, as well as in
                   several export markets. Ascendis then bolted on registered dossiers by purchasing them from Sandoz, the generic
                   pharma division of Novartis, a worldwide leader in generic medicines. The deal added 130 dossiers and market
                   authorizations in the areas of oncology, women’s health and urology and shortened market delivery to less than
                   two years.

                   Ascendis’ first international acquisition of a pharma platform company was Farmalider, a business-to-business
                   pharma company based in Spain, which included a portfolio of over 200 generic and OTC dossiers, its GMP
                   accredited production facility in Madrid, as well as a pipeline of products that were complementary to Ascendis’
                   existing product basket. Most importantly, Farmalider brought a strong Research and Development (R&D)
                   component. It has consulting agreements with several universities who help advance R&D. The acquisition is also
                   important because it is expected to position Ascendis to accelerate cross-border licensing of dossiers for use on
                   the African continent, thus opening new markets and reaching more patients with new drugs.

                   In 2016, Ascendis topped its pharma portfolio with the acquisition of Remedica, a 50-year-old generic company
                   based in Cyprus that manufactures over 300 products and holds over 1,700 marketing authorizations registered




                   6 | Ascendis Health
in five continents. Remedica manufactures a wide range of generic pharmaceutical products that are sold in a
variety of dosage forms. These medications address a number of therapeutic categories such as cancer, antibiotics,
analgesics, cardiovascular drugs, Central Nervous System (CNS) agents, drugs for the Gastrointestinal (GI) tract,
diuretics, antihistamines, antidiabetics, antiparkinsonian agents, hormones and synthetic substitutes, vitamins,
cough medicines, and expectorants.

The Farmalider and Remedica deals together provided Ascendis with a portfolio of 20 approved and
manufactured oncology products (most of the drugs have more than one indication) as well as additional
molecules that are under development. The acquisitions gave entry into chemotherapy treatments.

Pharma Therapeutic Portfolio: As of September 2016, Ascendis had almost 900 generic dossiers, about 2,800
market authorizations, and about 1,000 market authorizations under registration processes globally. The business
now has the typical basket of drugs in the following therapeutic classes: anti-infectives, cardiovascular, central
nervous system, anti-inflammatory, oncology, diabetes, and respiratory illnesses.


     FIGURE 1: ASCENDIS 2016 FISCAL YEAR SALES BY THERAPEUTIC CLASSES (EXCLUDING REMEDICA)




                            Anti-infectives                                 Oncology
                                     34%                                    20%




                                                                                  Cardiovascular
                                                                                  16%


                          Respiratory
                                  3%
                                      Anti-
                               inflammatory                          Central Nervous
                                         6%      Diabetes            System
                                                 7%                  14%




The Remedica acquisition complements the drug portfolio with newer generation medicines. Many of the
drugs the company had owned were older generation drugs primarily from the essential drugs list of the WHO
addressing the most common diseases like infections, malaria, and waterborne diseases. In the case of antibiotics,
it relied on first generation medicines such as penicillin, but with Remedica, Ascendis can now introduce more
effective, second and third generation antibiotics to patients in many countries. The newer generation drugs are
either more effective or address chronic lifestyle diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, and respiratory related
illnesses.




                                                                                                    Ascendis Health | 7
Regulatory Approval: Given the recent timing of the Remedica and Farmalider acquisitions, drugs from these
deals have not yet been introduced to South Africa and other new African markets because they have to undergo
the regulatory approval process. In South Africa, it takes three to five years for generics to be approved by the
Medical Control Council (MCC). In the rest of Africa, the typical approval timetable takes about one to two
years. Internationally, the benchmark is about one year, since these generics are already approved in the European
Union and will be entering the market at a lower price point as compared to the originator.

Global Footprint: In addition to complementing the therapeutic basket, the Remedica deal doubled Ascendis’
global footprint overnight, providing market access to a total of 107 countries.


                      FIGURE 2: ASCENDIS GLOBAL FOOTPRINT, 2016 (INCLUDING REMEDICA)




Expansion - Product and Market Alignment: Now that Ascendis has a broader basket of pharmaceuticals in its
portfolio, the next step is to enter new pharma-emerging markets. Given the size of the global demand, Ascendis
determines which drugs it will seek approval for in a given market by analyzing future trends and specific market
needs, both locally and globally. For instance, heart disease, diabetes, and cancer are all on the rise globally. Then,
they work closely with market experts and with key opinion leaders within each disease and therapeutic area to
get a greater understanding of the potential incidence and prevalence in local markets. Following that analysis, a
commercial decision is taken, drugs dossiers are developed in-house, and the registration for market authorization
is brought in or submitted.

R&D: Until recently, Ascendis Health in South Africa was importing generic drugs that were manufactured
in other countries under the Ascendis brand name. Now, Ascendis has started developing generics through its
own R&D in South Africa, as well as through Farmalider and Remedica’s work. Ascendis is positioning itself,




8 | Ascendis Health
especially via Remedica, to be the “first to market” with some of its generic drugs. They monitor patents that are
expiring, reproduce the dossier, get market authorizations, and launch the generic drugs. Dr. Wellner explains, “It
is a constant cycle of finding new dossiers and launching fast and early because as there are more entrants into the
market the price typically decreases.”

In 2016, the work of the South African regulatory team positioned
the company to be first to market with the launch of two new epilepsy
generic drugs, Clonam and Phlexy, both of which were developed in
South Africa and were developed organically. New product development




                                                                                                                           Photo © world Bank
and innovation is key to maintaining its competitive advantage and will
help in bringing the latest generics to market more cost effectively.

Medical Device Growth Trajectory: Given the conspicuous absence
of current, high-tech medical devices in the African continent, the
significant demand for modern equipment in private and many state          Now that Ascendis has
hospitals, and the very high R&D costs, Ascendis decided that it           a broader basket of
would import and distribute medical devices rather than innovate.
                                                                           pharmaceuticals in its
As such, it has exclusive agent distribution agreements with some
                                                                           portfolio, the next step is
of the biggest medical device companies in the world. These are
                                                                           to enter new, “pharma-
companies that invest heavily in R&D. Its partners include Olympus,
Medrad, Applied Medical, Merit, Hill-Rom, Mindray, CareFusion,             emerging” markets
Fisher &Paykel, Horiba ABX, Becton Dickinson, and Ortho Capital
Diagnostics. Further, it relies on its key opinion leaders and marketing
team to lookout for new, emerging trends that can be introduced to its markets.

Continuing on its growth trajectory, in 2015, the Medical device subdivision acquired two companies,
Respiratory Care Africa (RCA) and The Scientific Group, both strong bolt-ons. RCA provides medical equipment
for ICU and trauma in public and private hospitals and offers end-to-end solutions on a complete turnkey basis
for hospitals. Together with Surgical Innovations and The Scientific Group, it can supply large parts of hospital
equipment ranging from simple, hospital beds, to complex products and solutions. Its respiratory equipment
includes ventilators, laryngoscopes, phototherapy, and oxygen analyzers. It provides entire operating theaters,
including specialized lighting and pendants, ICU’s, trauma units, maternity wards, neonatal and pediatric ICU,
general wards, and some diagnostic equipment for radiology.

In a strategic move to complement the medical device portfolio, Ascendis entered a new market segment when it
acquired the clinical diagnostics portion of The Scientific Group, which designs laboratory layout, workflow, and
automation. Its laboratory systems include clinical chemistry, immunology, serology, hematology, histology, rapid
assays, and microbiology. It provides laboratory equipment and consumables, as well as continuous training and
after sales support and efficiency monitoring. Through its well-established network of distributors and agents,
The Scientific Group has expanded exports to 16 countries in Africa and 36 percent of its revenues in FY 2016
were from exports to Africa.

This acquisition was strategic given the global trend toward preventative care where populations are more
educated, are caring more for their health, and public and private health insurers are paying for earlier diagnosis
to reduce treatment costs. Ascendis expects that diagnostic markets will continue to grow — more than classic
healthcare markets.




                                                                                                     Ascendis Health | 9
                       Photo © World Bank




10 | Ascendis Health
Product Maintenance / Technology Service Centers: A key differentiator that sets Ascendis apart from other
distributors is its service agreements. Previously, if equipment broke down, it would have to be sent to Europe or
other industrialized markets for repair. This would take a long time before the equipment was returned and would
be very expensive as prices were in hard currency. Now, Ascendis can service the equipment from South Africa, or
one of its own service centers in Zambia, Botswana, and Namibia.

“As technology has become more important, there was a need
to upscale our technical know-how. The service agreements
only work if you have a service center working well with good
technicians,” Dr. Wellner explained. Staff are trained overseas to
service new and older products. Typically, a technician can only
service their own brands but Ascendis leverages its technicians and
salesforce to represent a large number of brands in its portfolio.
Charges are in local currency so it is much more affordable and
equipment down-time is minimized, resulting in a win-win for
doctors and patients.




                                                                                                                         Photo © Ascendis
Med-Tech Portfolio: With the consolidation of these three South
African companies, Ascendis has become the second-largest
medical device distributor in SA, providing a range of medical
device solutions, covering over 7,000 products and 110 supplier
agreements. Surgical Innovations (SI) holds 56 active agency             The technicians at Ascendis’
relationships encompassing 4,150 products. In addition, SI               service centers represent a
just received MCC approval for two drug eluting stents, which            large number of brands. Its
should hit the market in early 2017. RCA has 1,600 products and
                                                                         Southern Africa presence
Scientific Group has 2,100 products. Ascendis sees the synergies
                                                                         means that equipment can be
from the three subsidiaries as a possible game changer that will
open new opportunities to provide turn-key solutions to hospitals,       repaired regionally and more
improve efficiencies, and introduce new synergies for clients.           affordably.




                                                                                                  Ascendis Health | 11
                       Photo © Ascendis




12 | Ascendis Health
THE BUSINESS MODEL FROM THE
CORPORATE PERSPECTIVE
Ascendis’ corporate growth strategy is viewed through four angles. For 2016, it set a target of 50 percent of
revenues to be generated from international activities—both organically and acquisitively. It aims to generate 20
percent of revenue growth from acquisitions where it seeks to purchase complementary brands and dossiers or
platform companies. It has set targets of 10 percent of growth to originate from organic growth of established,
strong resilient brands. Lastly, it is working to create 5 percent of synergistic growth-on-profit levels by managing
the value chain (vertically) and via bolt-on acquisitions (horizontally).

Synergies: Ascendis seeks to extract synergies vertically along the value chain, and horizontally between brands
and divisions. For instance, Remedica’s production shifts are not running at full capacity, yet Farmalider
outsources 80 percent of its production. It plans to shift some of Farmalider’s outsourced production to
Remedica’s facilities. Similarly, it hopes to shift some production currently done in India to Akacia in South
Africa, to take advantage of special government incentives for domestic manufacturers. The focus on efficiencies
and cost control is expected to improve margins and could reduce end-user costs.

Further, it can seek sales synergies by cross-selling other Ascendis products and by consolidating the pharma and
medical device sales forces. For instance, Ascendis is now introducing some of Akacia’s products to the dispensing
doctors market. As a larger company, it hopes to achieve better procurement terms as well as distribution terms
with retailers. Thus far, it is too early to achieve significant distribution synergies on the pharma businesses, but
it has already started to leverage the services of a specialized distributor who is combining pharma and consumer
products. By pooling the work-flows and getting better rates from the transport company it is reducing costs.
Lastly, it extracts synergies by using shared back-end services in the areas of finance, treasury, IT, HR, marketing,
legal, regulatory, and the supply chain for most of companies.

The company targets five percent of profits to come from synergistic savings per year. Interestingly, when
calculating its acquisition models, it is conservative and does not forecast potential synergies but rather views
these as the cream on top - a value that it passes on to its shareholders.

Management of Acquired Companies: With eight different Pharma-Med companies in its portfolio, it could
be tempting to consolidate management of these companies but Ascendis recognizes that the strengths of its
entrepreneurs are its most critical asset. As such, the owners of the acquired companies become part of the larger
group and run the respective acquired business more like an equity fund, who have a fair bit of independence as
entrepreneurs. For instance, Remedica’s CEO, Mr. Charalambos Pattihis, will remain at the helm of the company
along with the existing executives, with full operational control for at least three years. To ensure that the
company is actually performing well, Ascendis tries to pay one-third of the total purchase price of the acquisition
as a deferred payment, plus an earn-out on top, which is made three years after the acquisition. This ensures
continuity of the acquired business, and focuses on growth and with minimal intervention from the Ascendis
management.




                                                                                                     Ascendis Health | 13
                     Product Co-Branding: When it comes to branding, Ascendis keeps the original branding of the acquired company
                     but adds its brand, “Part of the Ascendis Group,” on a very small side of the primary or secondary packaging.
                     In South Africa, government controls prohibit the advertising of Schedule 3 drugs and all of Ascendis’ generic
                     products are above Schedule 3. The parent company’s branding is not a focus and patients preparing for surgery
                     would not request Ascendis products.

                                                          Distribution Channels: Ascendis’ pharmaceutical products are typically
                                                          sold through dispensing doctors, wholesalers, pharmaceutical retailers,
                                                          public and private hospitals, aid organizations, and to other pharmaceutical
                                                          companies. Similarly, medical devices are sold to private and public
Photo © world Bank




                                                          hospitals, medical practices, pathology laboratories, research institutions,
                                                          and scientific companies.

                                                          Pharma Pricing: The pricing of generic drugs varies globally. In some
                                                          countries, even though the price of a generic drug is required to be below
                         Ascendis successfully            that of the originator, the range can vary between 5 and 25 percent below
                         compensates for                  the originator. This depends on a variety of factors such as whether the
                         increased product costs          product is a branded generic or a “generic/generic.” Other factors are
                         resulting from imported          whether the drug is first to market, or how much competition exists. As
                         inflation and FX                 there are more new entrants in a given segment, over time margins are
                         volatility by increasing         eroded, thus speed is essential.
                         prices in its consumer
                                                          A key factor in the South African system, as in many countries, is that the
                         brands and medical
                                                          government regulates pharmaceutical market prices through the “Single Exit
                         device division.
                                                          Pricing” system. The government sets a single exit price (at the ex-factory
                                                          level) for all prescription medicines, regardless of the size of the customer.
                                                          Further, most of the hospital tenders are for essential drugs, as defined by
                     the WHO, where the prices of drugs in the tender business are extremely competitive. Suppliers work on thin
                     margins and rely on volumes. This fixed price introduces other issues that pharmaceuticals must contend with,
                     such as imported inflation of raw materials and foreign exchange volatility.

                     Inflation and Foreign Exchange (FX) Risk: Pharmaceutical products require the importation of Active
                     Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API) that are mostly demoninated in US dollars. Further, South African government
                     tenders are subject to a lag factor when adjusting to FX variations, which has the propensity to put pressure on
                     margins if the foreign exchange requirements are not hedged. With a strong US dollar and a South African Rand
                     that has been depreciating, fixed prices could have an adverse impact on margins.

                     To hedge this risk, Ascendis has a target to generate 50 percent of revenue outside of South Africa in hard
                     currencies (Euro and Dollar) in 2017. It is aiming to increase this to 60 percent by 2018, up from 22 percent
                     in 2016. Karsten explains, “This provides a natural hedge against imported inflation through Rand weakness.
                     Further, by acquiring companies whose revenues are denominated in US dollars or Euro’s, they can mitigate the
                     impact of the FX movements.” To further reduce its FX risk, it will move some production from India to South
                     Africa to have more of the value chain under its control.




                     14 | Ascendis Health
Protecting Margins: Since generic customers are more price sensitive and there is little-to-no capacity to
absorb price increases due to product cost increases, the company relies on speed to market (via Remedica),
diversification, and economies of scale to protect its margins. Ascendis successfully compensates via price
increases in its consumer brands and medical device division, as well as through strict hedging policies and
economies of scale in sourcing, manufacturing and its routes to market.

Competition: For a multinational company, the competition in generics will depend on the market. In some
markets, it may have 10 to 12 competitors. What sets Ascendis apart is that it is the only company that has
a very diversified health business, does not deal in branded generics, and has picked relevant niches such as
generic oncology drugs or the dispensing doctor channel, where they are very strong. This enables it to be either
dominant or quick in a particular segment.

Other competitors are structured as classical pharmaceutical
companies, which are not diversified into other sectors like wellness
products. Key competitors have branded generics that are priced
just below the originator, so that any generic that Ascendis owns
would be cheaper than theirs even if they are not competing head-to-
head. Competitors also participate in big South African government
tenders for antiretroviral for HIV, but those margins have
historically been too small to sustain Ascendis. Notwithstanding,
Remedica has a range of selected HIV generics and others under
development. These could be used in the South African market with
better margins but they have not been registered yet.




                                                                                                                            Photo © World Bank
Revenues: In FY 2016, Ascendis had revenues of R3.9 billion ($290
million). The Pharma-Med division was responsible for the largest
share of revenues at 58 percent, with each subdivision contributing
about half. Consumer brands represented 24 percent and Phyto-
Vet brought in 18 percent of revenues. The important acquisition
of Remedica will contribute, on an annual basis, more than $80               What sets Ascendis apart is
million in sales at an EBITDA margin of approximately 30 percent.            a diversified business model,
This deal was concluded in August 2016 after Ascendis’ 2016 fiscal           a focus on generics, and
year closed. Annual sales are now approximately R6.8 billion ($506           relevant niches, such as the
million).                                                                    dispensing doctors channel,
                                                                             where they are very strong.
In the Pharma-Med division, about 12 percent of overall Pharma-
Med sales came from international sales. Slightly more than one-
third of international sales was from the export of medical devices to
other African countries. About 40 percent of South African generic sales went to dispensing doctors in rural areas
outside big urban areas. Government tenders accounted for about 40 percent of total revenues for pharma and
about 20 percent for medical devices.

Globally, Ascendis is well diversified across currencies, markets, sales channels and customer groups. Further, it is
not dependent on a single client for revenues or growth, as a result in FY 2016, no single customer accounted for
more than 6 percent of sales.




                                                                                                     Ascendis Health | 15
                       Photo © World Bank




16 | Ascendis Health
THE ROLE OF IFC
IFC had been absent from the South African market for six years and was looking for opportunities to return. In
January 2016, IFC called on Ascendis and discovered the timing could not be better. Ascendis was in the middle of
conducting its due diligence for two major acquisitions that would need to be financed by a capital raise. It was pushing
to increase its international shareholder base, which would provide insulation from the contagion of weak currencies
affecting other emerging markets.

In May 2016, IFC took a $30 million equity investment in the company. Dr. Wellner reflected, “The timing was
excellent. It was the right partner at the right time. IFC, with its AAA credit rating gave Ascendis access to its foreign
capital and helped to attract additional international investors, which enabled the company to finance the two
acquisitions that were completed in August 2016.”

Ascendis was also able to leverage IFC’s expertise in other ways. As part of the due diligence process, Pushpinder
Bindra, IFC’s pharmaceutical expert, did a walk-through of the pharma plant in Johannesburg and shared his insights.
Kieron Futter, the CFO explains the value IFC added to the transaction, “This was great because Pushpinder has seen
the best and the worst across the globe. Other investors would not typically give us that kind of advice. He shared his
knowledge and his expertise to help us improve operations and processes, and ultimately that helps us to decrease costs
and offer cheaper products to more people who need it.”

IFC also supported Ascendis with regard to environmental and social (E&S) impact issues. It is helping the company
to develop and implement an environmental and social due diligence process that will be applied prior to acquisitions
or establishment of any new business, to identify the E&S risks while taking local legislation and the performance
standards into account.

The deal was attractive to IFC because a company like Ascendis fits well with IFC’s strategy for improving supply of
high-quality medical products in developing countries by helping efficient manufacturers and distributors grow and
enter new markets.

Ascendis has plans to enter into new markets in Asia and Latin America and IFC will help the company expand by
continuing to provide market expertise and assist in identifying new partners for acquisition. Dr. Wellner added, “We
were impressed with IFC’s global network of relationships across a diverse range of stakeholders and we look forward
to working together with them and capitalizing on their global pharmaceutical expertise as they help us grow and
expand our global footprint.”




CONCLUSION
Ascendis’ buying spree of the last three years catapulted the company from a local South African venture with a
growing health product portfolio to that of a multinational with thousands of products, more than 3,300 employees,
and a presence in over 100 countries, in five continents. Through a relentless focus on good execution of its M&A
strategy, it has acquired good performing subsidiaries with leading products that provide the parent with entry into
strategic healthcare segments that are growing in importance globally, such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, and
diabetes.

A key feature of its successful integration approach is that it keeps the former owner on board as an entrepreneur, on
a delayed earn-out model, to ensure continued performance and realization of synergies. It has the right mix of people,
with the benefit of corporate scale, and the financial and intellectual backing of the group.

The sum of its parts yields a variety of products that it bundles together to achieve economies of scope. This leads
to more pharma-med products to be introduced in emerging markets on a faster basis - which leads to better health
outcomes and better quality of life for patients like Gwen.




                                                                                                            Ascendis Health | 17
STAY CONNECTED

WEB: www.ifc.org/health

LINKEDIN: www.linkedin.com/company/ifc-health

TWITTER: #ifchealth
For more information about IFC’s investments in health please contact:

Elena Sterlin                                    Chris McCahan
Global Manager, Health and Education             Global Lead, Health Care
Email: Esterlin@ifc.org                          E-mail: cmccahan@ifc.org
Washington, D.C., USA                            Washington, D.C., USA
www.ifc.org/education                            www.ifc.org/health
www.ifc.org/health




2121 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20433
Tel. 1-202-473-1000
