This publication is a compilation of abstracts of submissions made by procurement entities from
Government, Public Sector, Autonomous, University or Research and Training Institutions following
the Public Procurement regulatory    framework, and NGOs/CBOs involved in Public Procurement
Management and Oversight Support in the South Asian countries of Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
India, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka for South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016. This
compilation of abstracts is prepared as a knowledge product for wider dissemination of innovative
procurement practices in South Asia. It is based on the original submissions, edited and with additional

researched inputs, for providing a consistent presentation of all cases. The original submissions by the
Award Winners are available at “https://www.procurementinet.org/southasiappinnovationawards/”.

This publication has not undergone the review accorded to official World Bank Publications. The
                         interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of author(s) and
findings, presentations, 
                                            International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The
do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
World Bank and their affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or
the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.

Copyright ©2017 by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank.
Foreword

South Asia Public Procurement Network (SAPPN), an initiative of Heads of Public Procurement
in the region, supported by ADB and World Bank, is actively involved in knowledge exchange
and networking for collective improvement of procurement management in the South Asian

countries. Successful regional public procurement conferences conducted at Kathmandu
in 2011,  Islamabad in 2014, Dhaka in 2015, and the 2017 conference in Colombo are a
testimony to this partnership. Knowledge exchange programs for Heads of Procurement in
South Asian  countries, organized in Brazil and Mexico in 2014, and Australia in 2015; Launch
of jointly certified learning programs through www.procurementinet.org, Knowledge and
Networking portal of World Bank in Public Procurement etc. are some of the other major
initiatives of the partnership between SAPPN and World Bank.

In continuation of these technical cooperation and knowledge development / dissemination
initiatives, World Bank has launched the South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016,

in partnership with SAPPN and Asian Development Bank, through Procurement iNET. The key
objective of these Awards is to enhance learning and promote knowledge sharing through

innovative approaches adopted and adapted by Procurement entities and systems across

the region.

I am pleased to note that all Public Procurement offices of SAPPN have promoted the Awards
and encouraged entities in their countries to participate in the competition. We have received
an overwhelming response of 84 entries in the very first edition of the Award. Government
and public sector procurement organizations, universities, research institutions, and NGOs
/ CBOs have actively participated.

The Awards Secretariate reports that more than 50 submissions have very rich elements of
(i) Innovation (ii) Replicability, and (iii) Sustainability. The entries show a very wide diversity,

width, and depth of innovative efforts. They range from using technology for e-marketplace
to mobile app for rural roads’ monitoring and applying procurement as a tool for regional

development objectives of the Government. This augurs well for development objectives of
the respective Governments and the procurement fraternity as a whole.

With awards and recognitions adorning the efforts of entities and individuals, we are
committed to wide dissemination of these innovative ideas and institutionalizing this Award
for the coming years. This publication is one of those efforts. I congratulate all winners and
participants and hope you will find this compilation of award winning submissions interesting
and useful.



Felipe Goya Goddard

Practice Manager
Solutions and Innovations in Procurement (SIP)
Governance Global Practice (GGP), The World Bank
Introduction

“Never before in history has innovation offered promise of so much to so many in so short
a time.”
                                                                     Bill Gates, Microsoft

Estimated globally at US$ 9.5 trillion, procurement is no more considered a transactional
or compliance function in public expenditure management. Till recently, procurement
meant  reporting mundane non-compliance instances in audit reports and the focus
remained on   ensuring that rules are met when spending the money, rather than
getting ‘value for the money’ spent. However, the discourse on procurement is now
changing to using procurement as an effort towards ‘effective service delivery of a
Government’, ‘as a testimony for    transparency and openness’, ‘using procurement as
a tool for local development’, etc. among many others. Digitization, Open Contracting,
Citizen Engagement, and Strategic Sourcing are now being welcomed with open arms by
Government and public sector staff.

A new wave of procurement reforms and modernization has been underway for more than
10 years in most countries of South Asia. All countries have an institutional structure at the

national level for policy development and are modernizing procurement operations using
the advances in technology and e-GP. Beyond these, inspired by individual and institutional
leadership, there are many other innovations undertaken by public procurement entities

in South Asia. The desire to identify and disseminate impactful innovations saw the birth
of ‘South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards’.

The competition received 84 submissions and out of these, 12 submissions were selected
for Awards based on the criteria of extent of innovation, replicability, and sustainability.
The awarded submissions from 8 countries reflect the socio-economic and political
diversity we have in the region. They range from adapting advanced private e-commerce
               setting up a Government electronic marketplace to value addition offered
principles for 
by close monitoring of procurement in a fragile and difficult environment. Seen from the
specific context of stability, development, and capacity, each of these submissions offers
immense lessons for others to   emulate.

This compilation is brought out as a knowledge product for wide dissemination of select

innovations to benefit procurement practitioners in South Asia and other parts of the
World. The abstracts in the compilation are adaptations of the original submissions
– abridged in a standardized format, along with additional researched details incorporated
            understanding the context. The original submissions by the Award Winners are
for ease of 
available at “https://www.procurementinet.org/southasiappinnovationawards/”.

South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016 became a reality due to the efforts of a
large number of partners and many well-wishers and supporters. We would like to express
    sincere gratitude to Mr. Felipe Goya, Practice Manager – Governance, World Bank, for
our 
    leadership and guidance in conceptualizing and implementing the program. We are
the 
Introduction
also grateful to Mr. Priyanga Algama and Mr. Md. Faruque Hossain, current and outgoing
Chair, SAPPN, for their active support in launching the awards. Mr. Hiro Maruyama
from Asian  Development Bank and Mr. Issa Modi Ide from Islamic Development Bank
have actively contributed towards making the regional network cooperation a reality.
Without the support of Heads of Procurement from all the South Asian countries, who
actively promoted,   disseminated, and solicited submissions, we would not have had the
                    institutions that made these Awards such a success. World Bank Country
participation of 84 
Focal Points for Procurement and staff have actively encouraged their counterparts to
participate. We would also like to thank Mr. Abduljabbar Al-Quathab, Mr. Plamen Kirov,
Mr. Naushad Khan, Ms. Payal Malik Madan, and Mr. Varun Malhotra, colleagues from the
World Bank, who played pivotal roles in the Awards Secretariat and in its delivery. We are
also thankful for the technical and publication support offered by C&K Management team
led by Mr. Ravi Ramakrishnan.

I do hope these innovative experiences fuel your curiosity and spark your imagination to

venture into more rewarding innovations. Limits are only in the mind!


A K Kalesh Kumar

Coordinator, South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards
Solutions and Innovations in Procurement (SIP)
Governance Global Practice (GGP), The World Bank
Contents
Afghanistan                                                            Page

Winner	             Close and Personalized Procurement Monitoring,       1
                    Leading to Procurement Efficiency in Irrigation
                                          Challenging Environments
                    Sector in Fragile and 
                    of Afghanistan	
First Runner-Up	    Establishment of Grant and Service Contract	         5
                    Management Unit (GCMU) to Manage Contracting
                                           n Afghanistan
                    Out of Health Services i
Bangladesh	
Winner	             Citizen Engagement During Public Procurement        11
                    Implementation in Bangladesh
Bhutan
Winner	             Development of Procurement Cadre as Part of         17
                    Holistic Procurement Reforms in Bhutan
India
Winner	             Government e-Marketplace (GeM), India	              21
First Runner-Up	    Citizen Monitoring of Rural Roads under Pradhan     27
                    Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), India
First Runner-Up	    Redefining Procurement as an Innovative and         33
                    Collaborative Centre of Excellence for
                    Best-in-Class Sourcing Solution
Second Runner-Up	   Establishment of Technology-Based Health 	          39
                    Procurement and Supply Chain Management
                    System, and Capacity Development
                    in Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation
                             Tamil Nadu, India
                    Limited, 
Second Runner-Up	   Community-Based Procurement in AACP, Assam,	        45
                            Power of Grassroots Procurement Leading
                    India – 
                                ew Green Revolution
                    Assam to a N
Nepal
Winner	             Implementation of National e-GP System in Nepal	    51
Pakistan
Winner	             PPAF Community-Driven Development (CDD)             55
                    Procurement Model, Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Winner	             Procurement for Regional Development – Public	      59
                           Initiative in Sri Lanka
                    Policy 
                 Close and Personalized Procurement Monitoring, Leading
                 to Procurement Efficiency in Irrigation Sector in Fragile and
                 Challenging Environments of Afghanistan




          “    Due to personalized and close monitoring of procurement
               process and execution of works, most of the works got
               completed in time. This has been a significant factor for the
               
               overall project rating being changed from “Unsatisfactory”
               to “Satisfactory” with regard to award and completion of

                                                          ”
               irrigation works in Afghanistan
               




        {This article is an abridged version of the submission on “Expediting Procurement, Reducing
        
        Procurement Time, and Achieving Cost Savings through Innovative Procurement and Contract
        Management Solutions for Challenging and Fragile Environments” made by Mr. Pervaiz Ahmad Naseri,
        
                                                                                           Afghanistan, for the
        Project Manager, Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock, Government of 
        South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards.}



        Summary
        The On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) Project mainly aims at improving the efficiency of
        water use to increase agricultural production, building capacity of local staff in implementing
        similar projects in the country, and educating farmers about the need to improve their
        agricultural practices and adopt high-efficiency irrigation.
        
        A Kabul-based Project Implementation Unit, headed by the Project Director / Manager, with
        
        assistance from a Core Team of Specialists and Support Staff, is responsible for execution
        of the project. By following a desk-oriented approach of designating one staff responsible
        for end-to-end management of procurement, using IT for followup, and through regular
        interactive sessions with contractors, the project team gained considerable efficiencies in
        process management.

Close and Personalized Procurement Monitoring, Leading to Procurement Efficiency in                          1
Irrigation Sector in Fragile and Challenging Environments of Afghanistan
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                             Background
                             The OFWM Project, funded by Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF)
                             under the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock, was approved
                             in January 2011. Five regional area teams – one each in Kabul, Nangarhar
                             (Jalalabad), Mazar-i- Sharif (Balkh), Baghlan, and Herat, have been established
                             
                             for implementation of various field activities under the OFWM Project.
                             The Project Implementation Unit found that the following were needed for
                             successful implementation of the OFWM Project: i) Expedite the designing
                             of various irrigation schemes, which have already been surveyed, but
                             preparation / finalization / review / approval of designs is pending at various
                             
                             stages in the five area offices / regions of the project as also at the head office
                             in Kabul. ii) Prepare the bidding documents immediately after       completion of
                             designs. Advertize all irrigation schemes as soon as drawings and BoQs are
                             made available to the Procurement Unit. iii) Expedite selection and survey
                             of new irrigation schemes, so that momentum is maintained to achieve the
                             periodical targets stipulated by World Bank. iv) Arrange meetings of Bid
                             Evaluation Committees and prepare / finalize draft Bid Evaluation         Reports
                             (BERs) immediately after the meeting. v) Deploy an efficient           monitoring
                             system for supervising all procurement activities to expedite            technical
                             scrutiny of bids, seek clarifications from bidders, and verify      credentials of
                             the recommended bidders. {It is worth mentioning that due to wide-spread
                             submission of fake qualification documents by many bidders in Afghanistan,
                             World Bank has made it mandatory (for all cases) to verify the documents
                             for similar works and liquid assets from the concerned employer and bank
                             respectively.}

                             Challenges Addressed
                             The OFWM Project was delayed by about 15 months, resulting in extremely
                             poor utilization of the funds granted. The country’s environment was then
                             fragile and quite challenging, with several problems being faced: i) Though
                             the post-conflict environment in Afghanistan was gradually improving after
                             the prolonged civil wars, infrastructure facilities were very much limited,
                             particularly skills related to the use of high technology. ii) Due to frequent
                             
                             terrorist and suicide bombers’ attacks, the overall working environment
                             was very much insecure. iii) This was the first On-Farm Water Management
                             
                             Project in Afghanistan. As such, there was limited technical experience of
                             survey and design, procurement of irrigation works, and implementation of
                             such works by the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock. iv) The
                             Procurement capacity within Afghanistan in general and OFWM Project in
                             particular for proper / timely bidding and evaluation of bids for various goods,
                             works, and consultancy contracts was very much limited. v) Due to a number
                             of development projects going on under different ministries, the turnover of
                             staff was very high and their level of involvement / devotion /  initiative was
                             quite low. vi). An inappropriate decision for major use of high     technology

Close and Personalized Procurement Monitoring, Leading to Procurement Efficiency in                           2
Irrigation Sector in Fragile and Challenging Environments of Afghanistan
                        Pre-Cast Parabolic Structures (PCPS) for lining the various irrigation channels
                        had already been taken. The procurement of these PCPS was imposing a major
                        challenge because of inadequate technical capabilities and skills available within
                        Afghanistan for manufacturing them. In addition, unreasonably high prices were
                        being sought by vendors for manufacturing and transporting PCPS.

                        Innovations in the Solution
                        Following were the innovations made in implementation of the OFWM Project:
                        i) Introduction of a “Desk-Oriented” system of working, making one procurement
                        
                        staff responsible for all procurement activities of a particular procurement
                        package. ii) Designing / Developing and introducing standard formats for
                        almost all non-   standard procurement documents, such as Procurement
                        Requests, Requests for Quotations, Minutes of Bid Openings, Bid Evaluation
                        Reports, Proposal for Variations / Contract Amendments etc. iii) For preparing
                        most of the documents listed above, using Mail/Merge option of MS Word.
                        iv) Introducing Procurement Request Registers and other related documentation.
                        v) Improving interaction with vendors by having frequent Vendor’s Workshops
                        and educating them about proper preparation of their bids, and providing proper
                        response to various requests for clarifications and proper execution of contracts.
                        vi) Introducing monitoring and follow-up procedures at          various stages.
                        vii) Proper training and capacity development of the procurement staff.

                        Impact Generated
                        Innovative solutions to the problems / issues faced led to the following impacts:
                        
                        i) Due to proper and timely coordination with design units, and monitoring of
                        receipts related to Procurement requests, the average time taken in completing
                        
                        survey and designs was reduced from the earlier 219 days to 59 days. ii) Total
                        time taken in awarding NCB works’ contracts was reduced from about 165 days
                        to 76 days {by completing bid evaluation only in average 5 to 13 days (averages
                        of latest 2 periods of year 2016) against earlier average of about 40 to 53 days
                        (averages of earlier 2 periods of the year 2012)}. iii) Due to quick evaluation of
                        bids and award of contracts and also improved monitoring of payments, the
                        confidence of bidders / contractors in the project increased day by day. They
                        got encouraged to bid for various other work packages, resulting in healthy
                        competition among bidders / contractors. Thus, in most of the later cases,
                        award of contracts was at prices about 25% lower than the estimated costs. {The
                        award cost of all works awarded in the year 2016 has been about 8.4 Million
                        USD (against the estimated cost of about 11.2 Million USD), leading to saving of
                        about 2.8 Million USD}.
                        Due to close monitoring of execution of works, most of the works got completed
                        in time. It is worth mentioning that this has been a significant factor in timely
                        award and completion of irrigation works, due to which the overall project rating
                        was changed from “Unsatisfactory” to “Satisfactory”.


Close and Personalized Procurement Monitoring, Leading to Procurement Efficiency in                     3
Irrigation Sector in Fragile and Challenging Environments of Afghanistan
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                             Scalability and Sustainability
                             Though they seem to be simple in a normal environment, these steps have
                             already been replicated within the OFWM Project. The innovation has also
                             
                             positively impacted other processes and projects under the Ministry of
                             
                             
                             Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock.
                             Being related to only general initiatives, common sense, and use of
                             MS Office products (with MS Access), and email facilities, which are available
                             everywhere these days, replication of these innovations can be made within
                                       organizations of Afghanistan or even in a different country.
                             the other 
                             Lessons Learned
                             The OFWM Project experience shows that following are the prime factors
                             for its success: i) Regular interaction within the Technical and Administration
                             teams, Finance Unit, and World Bank. ii) Commitment of the management in
                             monitoring various procurement activities, motivating the procurement staff,
                             and taking interest in solving various procurement and contract management
                             problems and issues. iii) Timely updating of data in the database and proper
                             use of various exception reports, and iv) Regular training of the staff.
                             It is also essential that various procurement delays and issues are properly
                             analyzed within time and remedial actions taken in a timely manner. This will
                             
                             help avoid similar delays and issues in future.




Close and Personalized Procurement Monitoring, Leading to Procurement Efficiency in                       4
Irrigation Sector in Fragile and Challenging Environments of Afghanistan
                  Establishment of Grant and Service Contract Management
                  Unit (GCMU) to Manage Contracting Out of Health Services in
                  Afghanistan




         “    GCMU’s system of open and transparent competitive
              procurement has considerably lowered the costs of providing
              
              medicare in Afghanistan. Its ability to manage contracts
              
              successfully has steadily grown since 2003, when only
              9c ontracts (value USD 30 million) were contracted. This has

                                                                                        ”
              increased to 49 contracts (value USD 129 million) as on 2016
              




        {This article is an abridged version of the submission on “Establishment of Grant and Service Contract
        Management Unit (GCMU) to Manage Contracting Out of Health Services in Afghanistan” made by
        Mr. Khwaja Mir Islam SAEED, Head of Grant and Service Contract Management Unit (GCMU), Ministry
        of Public Health, Government of Afghanistan, for the South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards.}

        Summary
        Established by the Government of Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in 2003, Grants and Service
        Contract Management Unit (GCMU) is a consultancy service procurement unit / department
        of the Ministry of Public Health (MoPH). Its main goal at the time of its formation was to
        contribute to reduction of high levels of maternal and child mortality and morbidity, by
        
        ensuring efficient and effective use of available resources and providing equitable and quality
        health services.
        GCMU, now a highly respected institution in GoA., has been certified by the USAID, World Bank,
        EU, and GAVI as a capable and transparent entity to conduct procurement and management
        of health services financed under the ordinary and development budgets. In a fragile and




Establishment of Grant and Service Contract Management Unit (GCMU) to                                       5
Manage Contracting Out of Health Services in Afghanistan
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                            conflict-affected environment, GCMU has successfully met its pre and post
                            formation challenges by being professional and innovative, and producing
                            impressive procurement / contract management results.


                            Background
                            The Ministry of Public Health in Afghanistan (MoPH), in collaboration with
                            donors, introduced in 2003 the Basic Package of Health Service (BPHS)
                            for rural setting, defining and targeting primary curative and preventive
                            interventions as integrated packages. Later, in 2005, Essential Package of
                            
                            Health Services (EPHS) was launched to provide further specialized curative
                            healthcare and referral service to the needy people of Afghanistan. Under
                            strong international community support, the required institutional      capacity
                                                                                                 proceed with
                            within the Ministry was built to fulfill its stewardship role and to 
                            a contracting out mechanism through a competitive        procurement process.
                            Thus, a consultancy service procurement unit / department, called Grants
                            and Service Contract Management Unit (GCMU), was established within
                            the structure of the Procurement Directorate to proceed with service
                            procurement and to manage grants for the Health Sector, particularly the
                            
                            BPHS and EPHS packages. The scope of work of the GCMU mainly involves
                            service procurement, contract management, and coordination of the
                            external and internal assistance provided by international donors, such as
                            
                            ARTF, World Bank, EU, USAID, GAVI, Global Fund, and other donors, as well as
                            the fund extended by the Ministry of Finance, Government of Afghanistan.

                            Challenges Addressed
                            In addition to the challenges posed by a fragile and conflict-affected
                            environment, problems were faced by GCMU prior and post its
                            
                            
                            establishment. In 2003, the newly formed Afghan Government and foreign
                            donors faced numerous challenges in rebuilding the country. They grappled
                            with providing health care services to people of Afghanistan, where Public
                            Health Care system was almost non-existent / in dismal condition. The
                            multiple challenges included: (1) Institution Development, (2) To acquire
                            
                            stakeholders’ acceptance, and (3) To gain credibility and respect required
                            for developing a competent management system, along with robust
                            procurement management of consultancy services by utilizing qualified
                            
                            procurement management staff.
                            
                            GCMU was able to transform itself into a credible institution by providing
                            
                            relevant training to its staff for increasing capacity, adopting new innovative
                            systems, such as performance-based payments / new monitoring techniques,
                            and by handling large procurements successfully. Difficulties it faced at the
                            beginning were overcome gradually.


Establishment of Grant and Service Contract Management Unit (GCMU) to                                      6
Manage Contracting Out of Health Services in Afghanistan
                        Innovations in the Solution
                        GCMU has displayed considerable innovation, including introduction of third-
                        party monitoring to verify a contractor’s performance and introducing payment
                           contractors based on results. There were difficulties in knowing whether the
                        to 
                        services were delivered by the contracted health providers in a satisfactory
                        manner, as many locations are in security-sensitive areas, not normally accessible
                        to the government. To solve this issue, GCMU devised an innovative approach
                        by placing a further   contract to a qualified third party having access to such
                        localities. The results show a steady improvement in performance by the health
                        providers, documented through “The Balanced Scorecard Report”. For example,
                        in 2016, 18 BPHS indices showed    improvement in standard when compared to
                        2015, while only 5 showed a decrease in standard. The innovation of third-party
                        monitoring is sustainable, as the GCMU will have funds to continue its initiatives
                        in the future.
                        To improve performance by contractors delivering health services (normally
                        NGOs), GCMU moved away from payment of a basic fee to an innovative
                        incentive system, where payment was based on performance. The third-party
                        monitoring system has allowed improved monitoring of contractors delivering
                        health services, particularly in remote areas. The concept is innovative, as extra
                        costs are outweighed by the benefits of ensuring delivery of proper health care
                        to provinces.
                        Impact Generated
                        GCMU, since its formation, has made a significant impact. Some of the positives
                        have been institutional strengthening, improved health outcomes, ability to
                        manage contracts with civil society organizations, inbuilt technical capacity due
                        to its constant interaction with health issues, and general capacity improvement
                          evelopment in Afghanistan government procurement. Procuring health
                        / d
                        consulting services has been institutionalized. Before the formation of GCMU,
                        
                        
                        procurement was in an ad-hoc manner. With the formation of this institution,
                        Government of Afghanistan has been able to create an infrastructure that has
                        
                        enabled procurement of health consulting services worth hundreds of millions
                        
                        of dollars, and has provided delivery of government health services to all the
                        
                        provinces in Afghanistan. Health outcomes have improved – Maternal Mortality
                        Rate (MMR) of 1,600 per 100,000 live births in 2002, fell to 327 in 2010; Under
                        5 Mortality Rate (MR) in 2000 of 257 per 1,000 live births has come down to
                        97 in 2010.
                        Assistance of GCMU has often been requested by other MoPH departments in
                        technical matters related to policy and planning, child health and immunization,
                        nutrition, communicable diseases, and reproductive health sectors. Its success
                        has been noted by other organizations within the Government of Afghanistan
                        and they are using it as a role model for developing their own procurement
                        capability.


Establishment of Grant and Service Contract Management Unit (GCMU) to                                   7
Manage Contracting Out of Health Services in Afghanistan
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                            Scalability and Sustainability
                            The GCMU success in creating a strong internal government organization,
                            with good capability in management of procurement, has been noted by
                            other  organizations. Replication of its structure and operating methodology
                            is now being evidenced in other Afghanistan government institutions. The
                            staffing structure of GCMU has clear lines of decision-making and contains
                            all positions needed for successful procurement, not only procurement
                            specialists, but  personnel of other disciplines, such as legal, finance,
                            information technology, and health experts. All procurement decisions of
                            GCMU are subject to audit by the government and fund donors. GCMU’s
                            performance-based system for     payments is providing more value for money
                            in its procurement.
                            These innovative ideas are measures that can be studied by other countries
                            looking at ways to achieve better outcomes in their health procurement,
                            
                            particularly when they are operating in difficult and fragile environments,
                            and performance requires measurement and improvement.




                            Lessons Learned
                            There were many lessons learned while establishing and running the
                            GCMU. Among these were procurement cost reductions, institutional
                            structure, necessity for monitoring, and the role of medical doctors in
                            health procurement. GCMU’s system of open and transparent competitive
                            
                            procurement has considerably lowered costs. Continuing to operate since
                            fourteen years, GCMU procurement provides ample evidence of cost savings.
                             An analysis of GCMU costs showed that its cost of procurement to the value
                             of consultancy services / services procurement is 2%. This contrasts with an
                             accepted international norm of 10%.
                             




Establishment of Grant and Service Contract Management Unit (GCMU) to                                  8
Manage Contracting Out of Health Services in Afghanistan
                        Initially, in the early GCMU operations, medical practitioners did not view any
                        potential career role in procurement. Their role in procurement was seen by
                        both management and medical practitioners themselves as transitory, with
                        the thinking that after a relatively short period, they would move to positions
                        in the medical mainstream. This thinking, however, gradually changed, as it
                        became apparent that medical expertise was a very vital resource in both the
                        GCMU and health procurement. Contract management involved in          managing
                        / monitoring of district health public resources requires considerable health
                        knowledge to execute it properly. One of the lessons learned by GCMU was that
                        better outcomes are obtainable by having medical doctors as    permanent staff
                                                                             management. Significantly, all
                        for all health procurement, particularly in contract 
                        the above lessons were learned while delivering health services in a fragile and
                        geographically challenged country as A  fghanistan.




Establishment of Grant and Service Contract Management Unit (GCMU) to                                    9
Manage Contracting Out of Health Services in Afghanistan
                  Citizen Engagement During Public Procurement
                  Implementation in Bangladesh




         “                                                            oluntary
              A Pilot Project of Bangladesh has shown that citizens’ v
                                                          ubstantially
              involvement in public procurement projects s
              reduces the cost of monitoring, ensures quality, bridges the
              information gap, develops ownership among local people, and

                               ”
              builds trust




                                                                                                Procurement
        {This article is an abridged version of the submission on “Citizen Engagement in Public 
        Implementation in Bangladesh” made by Mr. Mirza Hassan, Social Accountability   Consultant, PPRP II,
        BRAC Institute of Governance and Development, BRAC University, Dhaka,    Bangladesh, for the South
        Asia Procurement Innovation Awards.}

        Summary
        A significant portion of the expenditure of Government of Bangladesh is on public
        procurement. Each year, Bangladesh spends more than BDT 72,000 Crores {USD 9 Billion
        (1 BDT = 0.013 USD)} on government procurement (Lomborg 2016). This huge investment,
        if not managed efficiently, can result in substandard output, cost overruns, and project
        implementation delays. Citizen engagement in public procurement can deter these by ensuring
        greater accountability and transparency, and consequently increase in quality of public goods
        and services. The  challenge, however, is to devise a mechanism for citizen engagement that
        offers sustainability (in terms of cost efficiency) and potential replicability (in wider societal
        contexts).




Citizen Engagement During Public Procurement Implementation in Bangladesh                                 11
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                            Background
                            The Government of Bangladesh is currently implementing with World
                            Bank financial assistance its Public Procurement Reform Project (PPRP) II,
                            with project design, management, and      research support from the BRAC
                            Institute of Governance and Development (BIGD), BRAC University, Dhaka.
                            One of the main focuses of this project is to  successfully engage citizens in
                            the monitoring of public procurement. For the purpose, BIGD has designed
                            a citizen engagement strategy that includes      establishment of a Citizen
                            Committee, complemented by Local Community         Mobilization surrounding
                            the project sites. To identify and test which strategy, or rather, combination
                            of strategies, produced the best results, BIGD implemented a Pilot Project in
                            four Upazilas in two districts of Bangladesh: Rangpur and  Sirajganj.

                            Challenges Addressed
                            The project aimed at addressing a few major challenges at the implementation
                            level. The first is improving the project quality (ensuring that appropriate
                            
                            materials and procedures are being used). Through close monitoring, Citizen
                            Committee members and the Local Community attempted to ensure that
                            quality specified in the contract is maintained. Another major challenge is
                            reducing the transaction cost. Citizens’ voluntary involvement substantially
                            reduces the cost of monitoring and also ensures quality.
                            Incentive / motivation problem of local people (sense of ownership over
                            
                            projects) is another major challenge, which is felt at the local level. As a
                            result, project monitoring remains the responsibility of only government
                            officers. The project utilized several strategies to reduce citizens’ lack of
                            sense of ownership: it ensured supply of relevant information to the local
                            people, made community aware of the importance of local monitoring and,
                            most importantly, by acting on their feedback, ensured that the community
                            felt engaged.

                            Innovations in the Solution
                            Even though similar projects are being implemented by engaging local citizens,
                            the BIGD Pilot Project adds more to this aspect for a few reasons. Firstly, it
                            includes two alternative designs of monitoring, which work simultaneously,
                            
                            
                            reinforce each other, and also produce comparable results. By testing the
                            two models together, this project gives great insights into the intervention,
                            which can be very helpful for replication. While other projects in citizen
                            engagement do not directly involve government authorities, the Pilot Project
                                              participation of government officials. Since the beginning
                            ensures effective 
                                           monitoring, the Citizen Committee members maintained close
                            of the project 
                            coordination with engineers. This actually turned out to be a more effective
                            mechanism than   Citizen Committee acting as an independent actor. Citizen


Citizen Engagement During Public Procurement Implementation in Bangladesh                               12
                        Committee members received updates of the project work from engineers
                        and planned their visits at crucial stages of project. Contractors also took the
                        committee visits seriously due to Citizen Committee’s affiliation with engineers.

                        Impact Generated
                        The project successfully addressed the challenges and ensured significant
                        
                        improvement in quality of the procurement process. The project had impact on
                        all three stakeholders: citizens, government officials, and contractors, who were
                        in charge of the implementation. The impact was by way of:
                          1. Reduced information gap,
                          2. Developing ownership among local people,
                          3. Information at low cost, and
                          4. Trust.
                        Of these, the most important impact is reduced information gap. The project
                        made information available at the local level, which raised the interest of local
                        people   regarding the project. They learned about specifications and could
                        oversee whether these were being met during the construction process. The
                        project also successfully reduced the incentive problem of local people in
                        relation to monitoring. By engaging people from the locality in monitoring by
                        equipping them with information and      technical details, along with briefing
                        about the need of local ownership, the classic problem of free riding on public
                        good was reduced. The project had a major impact by reducing the information
                        cost. The local people and Citizen Committee members frequently visited
                        project offices and reported anomalies to the engineer’s office. It thus solved
                        monitoring-related transaction costs of the state agency significantly. Along with
                        that, the engagement of citizens in monitoring reduced the need for      frequent
                        visits from Local Government Engineering Department (LGED) office, which also
                        reduced the transaction costs.
                        Significant lack of trust among relevant actors is a major problem, which impedes
                        transparent and efficient working of the project. Citizens do not trust contractors
                        and contractors view citizens as opportunity seekers. Citizens also perceive
                        engineers as corrupt and having a corrupt nexus with contractors. By engaging
                        citizens in the monitoring process, the project was able to generate trust among
                        
                        all stakeholders. Contractors, when brought under group monitoring, were then
                        trusted by the community. Since citizens are monitoring the projects based on
                        specifications, contractors are compelled to follow the project specifications.




Citizen Engagement During Public Procurement Implementation in Bangladesh                              13
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                            Scalability and Sustainability
                            One major concern of this project was to ensure its replicability in other
                            regions and other projects. The simplicity of the design makes it easier to
                            replicate it in other places and other projects. All it needs is commitment
                            from government officials that they will motivate and engage local people
                            to get involved in the monitoring. The cost is minimal, as it does not need
                            any facilitation activities or travel. The model can also be replicable in any
                            other context, any other country, or level. For example, if instead of village-
                            level roads, the project includes a district-level road, all it needs to do is to
                            inform more people living close to that highway. Government officials can
                            hold public meetings at every few miles and provide people with necessary
                            information to initiate a local monitoring system.
                             ilot PPRP II project has already been tested in three different types
                            P
                            of  implementation of procurement process, such as road and school
                            
                            constructions, and textbook monitoring. The same citizen engagement
                            model has worked in every case.




                            Lessons Learned
                            Substantial difference in response to citizen engagement has been noticed
                            among government officials (engineers specifically) within the hierarchy.
                            Executive engineers at the districts and upazilas provided considerable
                            
                            assistance by providing necessary information and guidance to the Committee
                            
                            Members. However, such assistance was difficult to obtain from the field-
                            level officials (sub-assistant engineers, supervisors etc). This was evident
                            from their use of dilatory tactics in handing out the necessary documents
                            to Citizen Groups or deliberately providing incorrect information regarding
                            the status of the project. Further probing indicates that such avoidance and
                            non-cooperation actually originated from their fear of losing control over



Citizen Engagement During Public Procurement Implementation in Bangladesh                                 14
                            construction processes. The involvement of third-party actors in monitoring
                        the 
                        projects is viewed by them as interference by unwelcome external actors.
                                                                                                     further
                        In this regard, one major learning of the project is to develop the strategy 
                        to ensure better engagement of field-level government officials. The project
                        tested two different methodologies – Monitoring Through Committee and
                        Monitoring Through Local Citizens. The findings suggest that compared to the
                        committee-based approach, monitoring through local citizens generates a more
                        efficient result. Committee-based approach needs facilitation role from third-
                        party actors to ensure group formation and group functionalities. It also involves
                        travel cost and organizing cost.
                                                                                                       citizen
                        It has been also felt that incentives of monitoring vary and in certain areas, 
                        committees are more proactive compared to other areas. In such cases, site-
                        specific monitoring by local people seems a more plausible option      compared to
                        committee formation. It has near zero transaction cost, as no travel cost or third-
                        party engagement is necessary, and ensures better o     wnership.
                        Another major learning of the project is that the citizen engagement process
                        needs to be built into the official system. Government officials should start
                        the initiative to engage local citizens effectively. Any third-party engagement
                        would not be necessary then. Local people will get the information directly from
                        officials and will report back to them. The project experience also suggests that
                        
                        to make citizens more engaged in the process, the feedback system should be
                        strengthened. Grievance should be filed properly and it should be addressed
                        properly. In such a case, a systematic complaint-filing mechanism needs to be
                        developed, such as telephone hotlines or mobile messages. This way, local
                        government officials can also be brought under monitoring and would feel
                        
                        accountable to act on the feedback they receive from citizens.
                        




Citizen Engagement During Public Procurement Implementation in Bangladesh                                  15
                   Development of Procurement Cadre as Part of Holistic
                   Procurement Reforms in Bhutan




          “   Bhutan’s efforts towards developing a Procurement cadre
              with defined competency framework based on National
              Occupational Standards were spearheaded by the Royal Civil
              
              Services Commission and the Finance Ministry. This focus
              on human resources, along with introduction of e-GP and
              standardization of procurement documents, made the 
                                                                   country’s

                                                                   ”
              procurement reform initiatives holistic




        {This article is an abridged version of the submission on “Procurement Cadre in Bhutan” made by
                                                                                               Innovation
        Ms. Jamyang Dema, Ministry of Finance, Thimphu, Bhutan, for the South Asia Procurement 
        Awards.}

        Summary
        The Royal Government of Bhutan embarked on reforms in its National Procurement System
        very early (September 2005). The Royal Civil Service Commission has played an enormous
        role in taking these procurement reforms forward. The Government recognized the need
           professionalize procurement within its civil service and also approved the creation of the
        to 
        Public Procurement Policy Division (PPPD) under the Ministry of Finance to allow the latter to
        take procurement reforms forward in an exponential way.
        Coupled with other initiatives, like e-procurement and standardization of bidding documents,
        these reforms in human resources for procurement have contributed significantly towards
        development of an efficient and effective procurement system in Bhutan.
        




Development of Procurement Cadre as Part of Holistic Procurement Reforms in Bhutan                   17
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                            Background
                            Landlocked between China and India, Bhutan is a small kingdom covering
                            nearly 38,500 square kilometers in the eastern Himalayas. In the last
                            couple of decades, the Kingdom of Bhutan has experienced rapid social and
                            economic development, as a result of prudent macroeconomic management,
                            beneficial exploitation of hydropower resources, and substantial support
                            from development partners. As part of the reforms to ensure good
                            governance, the Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB) has undertaken various
                            steps towards creating an efficient, effective, transparent, and fair national
                            procurement system.
                            The Public Procurement Policy Division (PPPD) was established within the
                            
                            Ministry of Finance in August 2008 to facilitate policy and professional
                            development in the field of procurement. After establishment of the
                            
                            PPPD, the Royal Civil Service Commission felt the need to create a Cadre of
                            Procurement staff and station procurement officers in different departments
                            to carry out     Government procurement efficiently. The Competency
                            Framework for    Procurement positions and job descriptions was approved
                            by the Royal Civil Service Commission. The Procurement Cadre System has
                            been so integrated that it ensures career development of civil servants
                            in the country, which makes it a unique innovation from Bhutan. This
                            experiment of stationing procurement    officers in Ministries, Dzongkhags
                            and Autonomous agencies, coupled with other initiatives like e-procurement
                            and standardization of bidding documents, has led to major improvements
                            in efficiency of procurement and public expenditure management in RGoB.

                            Challenges Addressed
                            The challenges addressed by introduction and establishment of procurement
                            cadre are as follows: 1) Introduction of the Procurement Cadre System to
                            
                            establish a clear line of reporting, where Procurement personnel report
                            directly to the Public Procurement Policy Division (PPPD). 2) Capacity
                            development issues were addressed by imparting awareness and training on
                            public procurement. 3) Professionalization of procurement personnel under
                            Government agencies was taken up as one of the topmost priorities after
                            implementation of Cadre System. 4) Performance of procurement personnel
                            was improved.  5) Under-utilization of procurement expertise issues were
                            addressed through clear lines of responsibilities within the job description
                            and Competency   Framework.

                            Innovations in the Solution
                            Procurement cadre is one of the tools used by RGoB to professionalize
                            Procurement personnel and improve the efficiency, effectiveness, and
                            
                            efficacy of the Procurement process. The Cadre System has enhanced the


Development of Procurement Cadre as Part of Holistic Procurement Reforms in Bhutan                     18
                        competence of national procurement, and strengthened the Procurement
                        Competency Framework. It will enable individuals to identify gaps in their
                        current competencies related to their current roles, and assist in training needs
                        analysis and development of future personnel development plans. A consistent
                        point of reference and benchmark for procurement performance can be set with
                        implementation of the Cadre System.
                        The Procurement Competency Framework, based on National Occupational
                        
                        Standards in Procurement Management and collective analysis of other
                        Government procurement frameworks internationally, provides an opportunity
                        for procurement to be consistent across all departments at each of the levels
                        in the Himalayan  Kingdom. This will enable RGoB to be more confident in its
                        capability internationally.

                        Impact Generated
                        The Cadre System, introduced and implemented by the Royal Government of
                        Bhutan, has brought in many positive impacts. They are:
                        	    •	   Introduction of training course - Certificate in Procurement Compliance
                                  (CPC) for all personnel involved in procurement, including tender
                                  committee members at all levels of the Government.
                        	    •	   Incorporation of a Module on Public Procurement in Post Graduate
                                  Diploma in Financial Management (PGDFM) Course at the Royal Institute
                                  
                                  of Management.
                        	    •	   The Competency Framework enables RGoB to align procurement roles
                                  with its objectives and overall business requirements. It can be used to
                                  design different roles for different levels of seniority. The identification
                                  of key core business skills versus procurement skills can be balanced
                                  against the requirements of different Government departments and
                                  contextualized to individuals who operate in these departments.
                                  
                        	    •	   The aim is that in the future, the Competency Framework will align
                                  the skills for the job role, and not the job holder, which will assist in
                                  recruitment and career progression.
                                  
                        Job description for Procurement Personnel, revised to include core
                        responsibilities, included:
                        
                        	    •	   Timely procurement and supply of goods, works, and services essential
                                  for smooth running of the Government organization.
                        	    •	   Consolidation and restructuring of the procurement Human Resource
                                  cadre, with creation of an additional level, making it more amenable to
                                  efficient and effective delivery of procurement and supply services.
                        	    •	   Provision is also being made for supporting staff to assist officers of the
                                  cadre.

Development of Procurement Cadre as Part of Holistic Procurement Reforms in Bhutan                         19
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                            Scalability and Sustainability
                            The Procurement Cadre System can be replicated in other countries across
                            the world, weighing the benefits that the Cadre System brings in the
                            Government Organization, from the impact it makes, and the lessons learned
                            from such a system. Organizations in other countries can set Bhutan’s Cadre
                            System as an example and pilot it in their organizations and, if proven
                            successful, they can adopt the Bhutan’s Procurement Cadre System itself.
                            The Competency   Framework and job description of Procurement personnel
                            are designed in a very systematic and motivational way, which facilitates its
                            replication anywhere in the world.

                            Lessons Learned
                            With implementation of the Procurement Cadre System, the Royal
                            Government of Bhutan has learned lessons, including:
                            
                              1. A detailed research on the existing system will have to be carried out
                                 before introducing a new system.
                              2. Acquire necessary approvals and recommendations from the relevant
                                 agencies for support during implementation.
                                 
                              3. Incorporate feedback, comments, and suggestions from the relevant
                                 
                                 stakeholders to keep them informed.
                              4. Carry out consultative workshops with the stakeholders concerned to
                                 incorporate their needs and opinions on the cadre system.
                                 
                              5. There is a need to incorporate international best practices from other
                                 
                                 countries that have implemented such a system.
                              6. Harmonization of existing Government policies and practices within
                                 the Cadre System.
                              7. Attainment of transparency, competitiveness, cost effectiveness, and
                                 professionalism in the Public Sector Procurement System.
                                 




Development of Procurement Cadre as Part of Holistic Procurement Reforms in Bhutan                    20
                 Government e-Marketplace (GeM), India




         “    An online procurement system for commonly used items,
              developed using private e-marketplace design and processes,
              

                                                       ”
              resulting in about 10% cost savings




       {This article is an abridged version of the submission on “Government e-Marketplace (GeM)” made
       by Mr. Binoy Kumar, Director General, Supplies and Disposal, Government of India, for the South Asia
       Procurement Innovation Awards.}

       Summary
       Government e-Marketplace (GeM) is an end-to-end online procurement system for commonly
       used items of the Directorate General of Supplies and Disposal, (DGS & D), Government of
       India. Developed using private e-marketplace design and processes, GeM offers buyers a
       huge list of products for individual categories of Goods/Services to shop for. Search, Compare,
       Select and Buy facility, a continuous Vendor-Rating system, and an easy Return policy makes
       GeM a  convenient platform for buyers.
       GeM is revolutionizing Indian public procurement scenario by making it paperless, cashless,
       and faceless. It is helping in cutting down administrative and transaction costs significantly for
       buyers and bidders. The innovation, built on modern e-commerce technologies, coupled with
       verifiable means of authenticity of suppliers and purchasers, allows a fully reliable procurement
       transaction to be done completely online. Within a few months of launch, GeM has become



Government e-Marketplace (GeM), India                                                                   21
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                           popular with over 19,000 users registering on the platform. It has integrated
                           1,036 Government department-buyers, 2,580 sellers, 81 service providers,
                           8,270 products / services, and delivered 1,074 orders worth USD 16 million
                           as of January 2017.

                           Background
                           The Good Governance initiative of the Government had a stated objective
                           of Minimum Government and Maximum Governance. As part of this, two
                           Groups of Secretaries to the Government of India recommended that the
                           current Government procurement system be reviewed and redesigned. They
                           went on to state their preference for a market-based, open, and transparent
                           framework in line with the Digital India Vision — Paperless, Cashless, and
                           Faceless.
                           Procurement operations in India are typically delegated to procurement
                           entities on a deconcentrated model based on the financial delegation
                           
                           levels permitted. These are covered by the regulatory framework of
                           General Financial Rules (GFR). Directorate General of Supplies and Disposal,
                           established for procurement for the Union Government, has a facilitating
                           
                           role in establishing rate contracts (similar to framework agreements). Over
                           the last 65 years, DGS & D has set up over 3,000 rate contracts covering over
                           20,000 products. In an economy with a $2.3 trillion GDP and an estimated
                           15% of that being public procurement, around 700,000 tenders are issued
                           every year by Government procuring entities. The aspiration was to leverage
                           the technologies that were available and transform the way Government
                           procured its daily use goods and services, leading to higher efficiency in cost,
                           
                           time, and efforts.
                           GeM (https://gem.gov.in/) was developed under the guidance of Directorate
                           of Supplies and Disposal, Department of Commerce, Government of India,
                           with technical collaboration of National e-Governance Division, Ministry of
                           Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India.

                           Challenges Addressed
                           The key challenges that are addressed by GeM include:
                             1. Crafting a solution that cut down significantly on administrative and
                                
                                transaction costs on commonly and repeatedly procured items for both
                                Government buyers as well as suppliers, for example transportation (or
                                
                                taxi) services.
                             2. Eliminating multiple levels of manual, sequential verification and
                                
                                decision-making to bring down lead-time in procurement.
                             3. Instilling confidence amongst all stakeholders, including vendors, of an
                                open, inclusive, and competitive process.


Government e-Marketplace (GeM), India                                                                   22
                       	 4.	 Reducing the physical means of financial transactions of various types of
                             payments.

                       Innovations in the Solution
                       The idea of a Government procurement marketplace was an out-of-the-box
                       
                       approach to the challenges faced and has many elements of innovation.
                       	 1.	 The ability of Government-buyers to interface and transact directly with
                             potential suppliers in a manner that was faceless, paperless, and cashless
                             conformed c  ompletely to the Digital India vision of governance.
                       	 2.	 The end-to-end platform was able to get a strong buy in from multiple
                             
                             stakeholders with varied objectives on the aspect of procurement. They
                             ranged from Finance, Audit, Accounts, and Vigilance functions within the
                             Government to market providers that included Industry, OEMs, Retailers,
                             and Banks, among others.
                       	 3.	 GeM introduced many new ways of efficient procurement, particularly
                                 services, which the Government had not done ever before e.g. the
                             for 
                             provisioning of transportation (taxi) services with spot-hiring, leasing,
                             renting, among other options, in collaboration with global leaders Uber
                             and Ola.
                       	 4.	 GeM successfully addressed various entry barriers for vendors by
                             simplifying the onboarding process and reduced the time frame
                             dramatically. The traditional vendor rate contract cycle that lasted for
                             6 to 8 months was transformed to an online vendor registration that just
                             took 20 minutes! This was achieved by securing offers through eSign that
                             established an audit trail.
                       	 5.	 GeM leverages cross-platform authentication of seller credentials, with
                             individual identities verified through Aadhaar (the Unique Identification
                             program of the    Government of India) and the financial standings of
                             individuals and supplier  organizations through their Permanent Account
                             Number (PAN) issued by the Income Tax Department.
                       	 6.	 The platform features include best-of-breed e-commerce functionalities,
                             such as Easy search, Price comparisons, Selection, Order placement,
                             e-Bidding, Reverse   auction, Demand-aggregation, Dynamic pricing by
                             sellers/service providers amongst many more.

                       Impact Generated
                       GeM has rationalized the procurement processes, brought in complete
                       transparency and traceability, reduced lead-time, enabled parallel auditing, and
                       increased the overall effectiveness of procedures.
                       Successful roll out of GeM has impacted many facets of procurement policy and
                       management, and demonstrated high value. At a policy level, a new service level

Government e-Marketplace (GeM), India                                                               23
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                           of “Payment within 10 days of delivery and its acceptance” was introduced as
                           a new Rule in the GFR to enable procurement through GeM. In a very short
                           time, GeM has gained the confidence of multiple stakeholders, as seen from
                           the high number of vendor and product registrations.
                           Within 120 days of launch, GeM has         integrated 1,036 Government
                           department-buyers, 2,580 sellers, 81 service    providers, 8,270 products
                           / services, and delivered 1,074 orders worth USD 16 million as of January
                           2017. GeM’s acceptance by various Government departmental buyers is a
                           testimony of its success. Trends indicate that there will be bigger growth
                           in procurement transactions with more Government-buyers,      national and
                           state, queuing up to be onboarded on GeM. The World Bank has     permitted
                           purchasing of up to USD 30,000 on GeM portal for bank-funded   projects.




                           Above all, GeM is setting the benchmark for Government agencies to adopt
                           usage of newer and faster technologies, even if it means borrowing from the
                           private sector. It is a proud addition to the national repository of effective,
                           transparent, user-friendly IT-based platforms that take the Digital India
                           agenda forward to a digitally-empowered society and nation.

                           Scalability and Sustainability
                           GeM is conceptualized around generally acceptable / prudent financial
                           rules in Government departments, making it easy to replicate, adopt, or
                           adapt the  solutions by any Government entity, be they from the central or
                           state governments, PSUs, or autonomous-bodies. GeM’s architecture has
                           been  designed to make it easy to scale-up and up-scope, as it is modular.
                           Functionalities of the portal have been so formatted to allow modification
                           
                           for use by other institutions or national states with minimal efforts, thereby
                           
                           reducing wastage. By doing this, GeM curbs the need for Government buyers
                           starting individual e-solutions and seeks to bring them all under one roof of



Government e-Marketplace (GeM), India                                                                  24
                       a universal procurement solution. GeM is developed as a full stack Open Source
                       application platform and deploys effective load balancing and caching to make it
                       a high-availability solution even during peak loads.

                       Lessons Learned
                       While a number of lessons came up during the design, development and
                       
                       deployment of GeM, the key lessons include:
                         1. The architecture and technology stack for a solution like GeM needs to be
                            agile to dynamically keep up with demands of both vendors and buyers.
                            On an average, the team addresses about 250 queries per week.
                         2. To build confidence in a buyer, concurrent oversight and auditing by
                            
                            competent agencies need to be enabled.
                         3. To keep up with the pace of such e-solutions, there needs to be constant
                            feedback and repetitive training sessions of levels that operate the system
                            to ensure no inadvertent errors or erroneous decisions are taken. Buyers,
                            vendors, and providers need training and continuous handholding on
                                            on-boarding products.
                            registering and 
                         4. Any process-oriented application that generates documents needs to have
                            a foolproof audit trail with an efficient document management system.




Government e-Marketplace (GeM), India                                                               25
                  Citizen Monitoring of Rural Roads Under Pradhan
                  Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), India




          “   Introduction of ‘Meri Sadak’, the citizen feedback mobile
              application, has paved the way for promoting
              
              self-sustainable rural road asset management and better
              contract management during construction and the

                                                         ”
              five-year defect liability period




        {This article is an abridged version of the submission on “Citizen Monitoring of Rural Roads Under
        Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)” made by Mr. Rajesh Bhushan, Joint Secretary, Ministry of
        Rural Development, and Director General, NRRDA, for the South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards.}

        Summary
        The national rural roads development program of Government of India, “Pradhan Mantri
        Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)”, launched in 2000, aims to provide road connectivity to 167,000
        unconnected habitations in India. About 65% of the targeted 740,000 km roads, either new or
        
        under upgradation, have already been achieved. To ensure the program’s effectiveness, with
        citizen / user involvement in service planning and delivery, NRRDA, the national authority
        
        under Ministry of Rural Development, has also implemented a pilot Citizen Engagement
        program in  7 Indian States, defining the responsive role of citizen / user in PMGSY, from
        construction to maintenance of the rural roads constructed.
        The pilot program involves identifying volunteers and their capacity building, developing a
        citizen-friendly toolkit to test various basic parameters of roads, IEC leaflets on awareness,
        




Citizen Monitoring of Rural Roads Under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), India                27
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                            and the role of citizen in monitoring and training modules. “Meri Sadak”, a
                            mobile app launched to enable users to give their feedback regarding the
                                                                       photographs and simple data entry,
                            pace of works, quality of works etc. using 
                            has had more than 500,000 downloads in 3 years. The inclusion of citizens
                            in the PMGSY has paved the way for promoting self-      sustainable rural road
                            asset management, better contract management, and better service from
                            contractors during the five-year defect liability period.

                            Background
                            Government of India launched the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY
                            – Prime Minister’s Rural Roads Scheme) in 2000 to provide    connectivity to
                            Unconnected Habitations, as part of a poverty reduction strategy. According
                            to the latest figures from a survey to identify the Core Network as part of
                            the PMGSY program, about 167,000 Unconnected Habitations are eligible
                            for coverage under the program. This involves construction of about 371,000
                            km of roads for New Connectivity and 368,000 km under upgradation. So far,
                            493,300 km of road works have been   completed under both the categories.
                            The PMGSY Program is implemented under the aegis of National Rural
                            Roads Development Authority (NRRDA), Ministry of Rural Development,
                            Government of India.
                            PRIs or Panchayat Raj Institutions and the local community are involved in
                                                                                                facilitates
                            identification of the networks to be constructed and upgraded. This 
                            involvement of users, citizen community, and all stakeholders in Government
                            programs at the lowest level and makes PMGSY a sustained    initiative across
                            sectors. The emphasis of this citizen engagement is to bring in an aspect of
                            ownership among local communities. Using the “Meri Sadak” mobile app,
                            users of PMGSY roads can also contact the Nodal Departments in State
                            Governments / NRRDA and give their feedback on the pace and quality of
                            road works. According to Google Play Store, total downloads of “Meri Sadak”
                            Mobile Application crossed 500,000 by December 2016. In addition, the
                            overall increase in reviews rose from 718 to 7,508 in its three-year period,
                            demonstrating the success of NRRDA’s efforts.

                            Challenges Addressed
                            The pilot program faced many challenges during design and development
                            due to the diversity in target rural population across the country:
                            	    •	   The most significant challenge addressed was establishment of a
                                      unified process / methodology of responsive involvement of citizens
                                      in PMGSY across the country.
                            	    •	   Another major challenge in defining a responsive citizen engagement
                                      process in PMGSY was the need to create awareness among citizens
                                      on their role in construction and maintenance of rural roads, and


Citizen Monitoring of Rural Roads Under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), India                 28
                                  capacity building of identified volunteers on technical aspects in a much
                                  simpler way.
                        	    •	   Addressing the issue of reaching out to ordinary citizens with technology
                                  was also a significant challenge.
                        	    •	   Willingness of the political system is one significant concern, which
                                  draws limitations in implementation of various programs.
                        	    •	   Finally, women’s participation is one serious issue the program
                                  addressed, 	particularly the anticipation that women need to travel to
                                  different places.

                        Impact Generated
                        Inclusion of citizens in the PMGSY has paved the way for promoting self-
                        sustainable rural road asset management. The major benefits from citizen
                        engagement in terms of monetary and non-monetary terms are as follows:
                        	    •	   Though the Government nodal department is in-charge of the quality
                                  of construction and maintenance, impact on road condition and
                                  maintenance due to involvement of citizen monitoring led to in-time
                                  corrective measures, thus reducing depreciation of assets.
                        	    •	   Constant monitoring and persuasion to maintain these roads keeps
                                  them in a serviceable condition during all seasons.
                        	    •	   This led to empowerment of citizens from the grass-root level. With
                                  requisite technical knowledge, citizens are now able to also address
                                  technical issues. It has empowered women and ordinary citizens in
                                  monitoring the rural roads of PMGSY and similar projects in their locality.
                        	    •	   The engagement led to huge sustained increase in connectivity to
                                  markets, healthcare and education centres, and local area headquarters.
                        	    •	   Vigil of the community ensures adept monitoring of rural roads in their
                                  region.

                        Innovations in the Solution
                        The innovativeness of the solution was in developing, testing, standardizing, and
                        piloting in two phases over 3 years (a) Simple citizen-friendly toolkit to capture
                        
                        and analyze data during construction and in maintenance. (b) A methodology
                            selecting Citizen Volunteers. (c) Data sheets for reporting. (d) Comprehensive
                        for 
                        training module including audio-visual and hands-on components in the
                        
                        module, considering the socio-economic-educational background of volunteers.
                        (e) Developing master trainers on this.
                        
                        The “Meri Sadak” mobile application developed is so simple and hassle-free that
                        rural citizens have been able to embrace this technology and provide feedback


Citizen Monitoring of Rural Roads Under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), India                   29
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                            on condition of roads. Inclusion of ICT has made it effortless to establish a
                                    nformation cycle, from citizens to authorities and vice versa.
                            healthy i
                            The tools developed and practices enabled data collection and reporting
                            through a simplest process, which can be easily undertaken by an ordinary
                            citizen. Making citizen as an asset in the system of PMGSY, which brings
                            in benefits across sectors in rural development, was another innovation
                            that directly contributed to more effective Social Audit processes in many
                            other grassroot-level programs. Above all, this has efficiently and effectively
                            brought in transparency and  accountability into the system of rural roads.

                            Scalability and Sustainability
                            This process of citizen engagement can be replicated in all similar rural roads’
                            projects. “Meri Sadak”, the mobile application, is a state-of-the-art Citizen
                            Feedback system that can be taken up as a redressal system for infrastructure.
                            Capacity building by the program at grassroot level organizations, like
                            
                            Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRI) and Women Self Help Groups across
                            the country, has built a critical mass of empowered stakeholders for any
                            developmental efforts of the Government. Since the Indian sub-continent
                            
                            has a varied socio-economic status across geography, this system of citizen
                            engagement can be easily adopted by developing countries in their programs.
                            
                            The ability of the program to instill ownership of roads within the community
                            ensures sustainability of this monitoring system.




                            Lessons Learned
                            Ensuring effective contract management of rural assets by involving
                            and empowering community is the most significant lesson from PMGSY
                            experience. Citizen engagement in monitoring of these roads has led to a
                            more systematic maintenance of roads as well as quality assurance during
                            construction and maintenance of these roads. The five-year Defect Liability
                            Period (DLP) under the contract makes the contractor responsible for



Citizen Monitoring of Rural Roads Under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), India                  30
                        maintaining the constructed road in a serviceable condition for 5 years post
                        construction. However, it has been found that contractors were not responsible
                        enough in maintaining these roads.
                        Participation of women was found to increase when their involvement was
                        sought for assets in their proximity. As training of volunteers through Master
                        Trainers took place in the respective village itself, there was increased women
                        participation. This ensured that the volunteer group had a mix of both genders.
                        Citizen engagement in monitoring was found more effective when technology
                                                                                                 technical
                        was used in the simplest way for data collection and analysis. Access to 
                        data on Online Monitoring Management and Accounting System (OMMAS)
                        regarding the respective road of their village made it easier to    monitor the
                        roads during construction. Use of “Meri Sadak” mobile application to upload
                        pictures easily as evidence when reporting has made the application a real-time
                        monitoring tool.




Citizen Monitoring of Rural Roads Under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), India                31
                   Redefining Procurement as an Innovative and Collaborative
                   Centre of Excellence for Best-in-Class Sourcing Solution




          “    Project VIVARTAN, implemented to transform
               transactional procurement function to strategic
               category management in HPCL, demonstrates the will
               of Management and possibilities of out-of-the-box
               solutions within the regulatory framework and oversight

                                   ”
               arrangements




        {This article is an abridged version of the submission on “Redefining Procurement as an Innovative and
        Collaborative Centre of Excellence for Best-in-Class Sourcing Solution” made by Mr. S. K. Chowdhury,
        Head – Integrated Support Function, Central Procurement Organization,   HPCL, India, for the South Asia
        Procurement Innovation Awards.}

        Summary
        Project VIVARTAN is an organizational transformation initiative of changing transactional and
        process-oriented procurement to strategic category management, implemented by Hindustan
        Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL), a US$ 30 Billion Government of India Undertaking.
        Within all constraints of following public procurement regulatory requirements, Project
        VIVARTAN has become instrumental in achieving the end objective of value creation from the
        
        supply base.
        Through a structured bottom-up cost estimation method; creating 150,000 unique structured
        and standardized items’ codes; category-based annual procurement planning and sourcing
        strategy; and using an end-to-end, state-of-the-art E-platform handled by certified employees
        




Redefining Procurement as an Innovative and Collaborative                                                    33
Centre of Excellence for Best-in-Class Sourcing Solution
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                             on higher levels of procurement learning, Project VIVARTAN resulted in 10%
                             cost savings, 40% time savings and 70% increase in vendor participation in
                             the very first year.

                             Background
                             Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) is a Government of
                                   Enterprise, with its annual procurement spend at 1.5 Billion US$.
                             India 
                             Procurement by HPCL used to operate as more of a transactional, process-
                             oriented function at different Strategic Business Units (SBUs), with limited
                             focus on strategic, category concept. In the aftermath of globalization and
                             eroding bottom lines, Project VIVARTAN, a transformation initiative, was
                             launched to redefine HPCL Procurement as an innovative and collaborative
                             center of excellence. It was implemented under a cross-functional Project
                             team headed at Executive Director level, with members from SBUs, Refineries,
                             Zones, Regions, Plants, Terminals, Legal, and Finance, with support from
                             Consultants, M/s AT Kearney (ATK).
                             Project VIVARTAN was undertaken in 2 phases (i) As Is Study: The study of
                             past procurement data, interviews, meetings, discussions, and workshops
                             on existing procurement landscape and improvement areas, against global
                             benchmarking. Based on the study’s assessment, a design road map was laid
                             down starting with a visioning exercise, where CPO Vision / Mission statement
                             and Logo for Project “VIVARTAN” were finalized. Sourcing spectrum was
                             strategically divided into several category buckets with a clear transition
                             
                             road map. (ii) Phase II: With requisite manpower positioned, the pilot
                             categories identified were taken up for implementation with handholding
                             of consultants. Category-centric sourcing and contracting approach was
                             adopted with    introduction of the Category Management Concept. The
                             Strategy for each  category was finalized after an in-depth market research
                             and study of global best practices.

                             Challenges Addressed
                             Following are the major challenges addressed:
                             	 1.	 Challenges of consolidating demand due to distributed spending
                                   without specification standardization and item codification.
                             	 2.	 Capability Building – Procurement was not a cadre comprising trained
                                   and certified professionals with adequate domain knowledge fit for
                                   strategic sourcing.
                             	 3.	 Apprehension within SBUs of losing control over the function.
                             	 4.	 Cumbersome processes     followed without SoPs posed issues for
                                   switching over to a complete E-platform.



Redefining Procurement as an Innovative and Collaborative                                              34
Centre of Excellence for Best-in-Class Sourcing Solution
                        	 5.	 Limitations of being part of Public Procurement regulations (GFRs),
                              wherein open tendering has limited flexibility and there is restricted level
                              of collaboration with vendors.
                                                            adhering to policy needs for preferential
                        	 6.	 Socio-economic obligations of 
                                                      competition.
                              procurement that limits 

                        Innovations in the Solution
                        Innovation has been the hallmark of this project and was instrumental in
                        achieving the end objective of value creation from the supply base. It involved:
                        Category Strategy: Basis the Past spend pattern, Suppliers profile, Market
                        
                        analysis and Global trends witnessed within the best-in-class companies, HPCL
                        spend is categorized into different buckets, allowing Category Managers to draw
                        the right category strategy.
                        Innovative short-time / long-time strategies were introduced, such as Change
                        in Share of Business, Global Tenders, Developing Alternative Specification
                        /M aterial, Life Cycle Costing, and Costing-Based Net Value Realization.
                        Cost Estimation Cell as Centre of Excellence and Price Banding: Introduced as an
                        innovative tool to break the Vendor Cartel under select categories, CPO could
                        use the Bottom-up Costing tool very effectively for getting a competitive price
                        from bidders at markets, which have historically seen high quotes as results of
                        cartel.
                        Reverse Auction: The online tender platform was strengthened with additional
                        features, such as Reverse auction, Online collection and refund of Tender fee
                        / Deposits / Retention money etc., to make it an end-to-end online solution.
                        With higher business volumes at stake as a result of consolidation, reverse
                        auction saw a stiff competition among bidders, resulting in very competitive
                        rates being finalized and providing huge saving to the corporation.
                        Specification Standardization and Uniform Item Codification: Uniform item
                        codification project was executed, wherein more than 1 million past 
                                                                                           procurement
                        data were scrutinized, cleansed, and standardized to obtain 150,000 Unique
                        specifications with Items codes in Master data format. This was done with the
                        help of domain experts as external consultants.
                        Vendor Data Base Rationalization: HPCL Vendor Database had around 200,000
                        Vendor Codes, most of them duplicates created in a decentralized environment
                        by different business units. The Vendor Management team of CPO initiated
                        the activity of cleansing the Vendor base to come out with 96,000 Unique
                        Vendor Codes to facilitate consolidated order placement, vendor performance
                        evaluation and tracking.
                        




Redefining Procurement as an Innovative and Collaborative                                              35
Centre of Excellence for Best-in-Class Sourcing Solution
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                             Capability Building: Building suitable capability among the workforce is one
                             of the prerequisites for any organization to be successful. The Certification
                             course conducted by United Nations Development Program at CIPS Level
                             II and Level III Certification in Public Procurement for all CPO personnel
                             was the step taken to create a pool of certified professionals in the field of
                             procurement.

                             Impact Generated
                             The shift from transactional model to strategic category management led to
                                 following impacts:
                             the 
                             	 1.	 Establishment of a Cost Estimation cell introduced price banding for
                                   
                                   categories with structured bottom-up cost estimation method for
                                   arriving at Costing and Price Banding. Apart from breaking the threat
                                   of Vendor Cartel, a saving up to 10% over benchmark was witnessed in
                                   initial tenders itself.
                             	 2.	 Uniform Item Codification project led to standardization of specifications
                                   as a prerequisite for demand consolidation across the Corporation.
                                   Unique  150,000 items’ codes were created in a structured, standardized
                                   format by the item codification team. This enabled Accurate Annual
                                   Procurement planning,   eliminated ambiguities and queries at bidding
                                   stage, provided accurate inputs for analytics, and supported business
                                   intelligence.
                             	 3.	 Category-based sourcing strategy, based on past procurement data,
                                   annual procurement plan, and detailed supplier market assessment,
                                   led to a tangible saving of approximately 10% over past spends, with
                                   the larger volume attracting Global Vendor Participation. 70% increase
                                   in vendor response was observed in the very first year.
                             	 4.	 End-to-end, state-of-the-art E-platform contributed to reduction of
                                   the cycle time by 35-40%, while promoting the green initiative of the
                                   Corporation.
                             	 5.	 Rationalization of Vendor Database and Unique Vendor Code: This
                                   made tracking of project progress easier and also simplified the process
                                   of Vendor Performance evaluation.

                             Scalability and Sustainability
                             Project VIVARTAN is used for all procurements in HPCL. Its implementation
                             shows that these innovative approaches, if replicated in the Public or Private
                             sector, can bring in tremendous value in terms of increased quality, reduced
                             purchase cycle time, increased saving, and discipline in procurement
                             processes.  Standardization and codification of items led to ease of



Redefining Procurement as an Innovative and Collaborative                                                 36
Centre of Excellence for Best-in-Class Sourcing Solution
                        consolidation in demand across the company and helped lower the inventory
                        holding cost. The E-platform, which is transparent and secure with rich features,
                        such as Reverse Auction, E-collection / Refund of EMD / Tender fee etc., will also
                        boost the green initiative.
                        Developing a robust category strategy, based on in-depth supplier market
                        assessment for high spend items, is the direction in which the public sector
                        
                        needs to move. Initiatives like Project VIVARTAN are implemented within the
                        same regulatory framework and vigil or oversight institutions that are often
                                                                                                  savings,
                        pointed to as determinants of red tape and inefficiency. Evidence of cost 
                        efficiencies achieved in time, as well as increased bidder participation, proves
                        the financial and organizational value addition of the project.




                        Lessons Learned
                        Following are the lessons learned as a result of successful implementation of
                        Project VIVARTAN:
                        	 1.	 Establishing an appropriate benchmark by investing time and leveraging
                              global best practices for developing a robust procurement category strategy
                              at the planning stage is essential. Category Profiling and Supplier Market
                              Assessments are the two most important ingredients for development of
                              
                              Category Strategy.
                              
                        	 2.	 Collaborating with Vendors: The Pre-Tender Meets started at HPCL CPO
                              were instrumental in getting crucial inputs, which helped in firming up
                              Specifications, Terms and Conditions, apart from developing the right
                                                    improved Vendor Response and better Value for
                              category strategy for 
                              Money.
                        	 3.	 The E-platform with features, such as reverse auction, E-collection and
                              refund of Tender Fee / Deposits, E-chartering etc. complemented the
                                      efficiency in total.
                              process 


Redefining Procurement as an Innovative and Collaborative                                              37
Centre of Excellence for Best-in-Class Sourcing Solution
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                               4. It is important to launch a Certification Program to develop a
                                  procurement cadre of certified professionals, with complete knowledge
                                  about best practices in public procurement at global level. This effort
                                  must be at the professional level with strategic procurement coverage.
                               5. Strong Management Focus and Support is an important factor for the
                                  success of any project of this magnitude. Management commitment
                                  towards the project was reflected in formation of CPO project team
                                  headed by Executive     Director, engaging renowned consultants,
                                  and establishing a Steering  Committee of higher management for
                                  periodically assessing project progress and providing quick policy
                                  decisions. These played a vital role in completion of the project as per
                                  schedule.




Redefining Procurement as an Innovative and Collaborative                                              38
Centre of Excellence for Best-in-Class Sourcing Solution
                  Establishment of Technology-Based Health Procurement
                  and Supply Chain Management System, and Capacity
                  Development in Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation
                  




         “    The TNMSC initiative in health sector procurement
              and supply chain management led to consolidation
              of hitherto dispersed activities of demand estimation,
                                   procurement of drugs, vaccines, and
              localized indenting, 
              medical equipment with standardized specifications, and

                                                                                     ”
              improved distribution, stock, and expiry management




       {This article is an abridged version of the submission on “Procurement Reforms and Capacity
       Development Activities at Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation Limited” made by Ms. Selvi
       
       Apoorva, Managing Director, TNMSC, Tamil Nadu, India, for the South Asia Procurement Innovation
       Awards.}

       Summary
       Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation Limited (TNMSC), a Tamil Nadu Government
       undertaking in India, is successfully implementing healthcare-related schemes throughout
       
       the State having a population of 77.88 million. The Corporation has put in place a transparent
       procurement process to make available for free Generic Drugs in Government health facilities,
       
       greatly reducing the Out-of-Pocket Expenditure of people of the State on drugs. TNMSC is also
       actively managing the Supply Chain of drugs in the State and ensures continuous availability
       of drugs at all Government health facilities. Further, it is effectively facilitating Public-Private
       Partnership in the Healthcare services in coordination with multiple stakeholders.
       




Establishment of Technology-Based Health Procurement and Supply Chain Management System, and Capacity   39
Development in Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                           Background
                           TNMSC was established in 1994-95 to procure drugs, medical equipment
                           and other healthcare-related products, and distribute them to public health
                           facilities throughout the State. Through an innovative ICT-based automation
                           
                           of demand forecasting, procurement, distribution, warehousing, and stock
                           management, the Corporation facilitates a Rational Drug Distribution system,
                           adhering to applicable laws of the land and other regulatory requirements
                           pertaining to drugs and medicines.
                           From its inception, in the last two decades, TNMSC has rendered valuable
                           services for effective implementation of all Healthcare-Related Schemes in
                           the State, and to achieve the Goals and Targets of the Health Department.
                           The Corporation has also established a continually improving Quality
                           
                           Management system and is certified with ISO recognition (ISO 9001:2008).
                           Based on the success of the model, TNMSC has rendered Consultancy
                           services to various State Governments in India, like Rajasthan, Andhra
                           
                           Pradesh, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, and Kerala. It
                           has also delivered training courses on Drug Logistics and Warehousing for
                           personnel from Karnataka, Assam, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, and Nepal.

                           Challenges Addressed
                           Following were the challenges faced in Drugs Procurement in the State of
                           Tamil Nadu prior to establishment of TNMSC Limited:
                           	    •	   Acute shortage of drugs and medicines at Government facilities.
                           	    •	   More than 1,000 drugs were procured, some of them even branded.
                                     There was no concept of essential drugs.
                           	    •	   Drugs procured in bulk packing – unhygienic storage and 		
                                     distribution.
                           	    •	   Post-delivery quality assurance was non-existent and pre-shipment
                                     inspection was perfunctory.
                           	    •	   Poor quantification led to excess procurement and wastage.
                           	    •	   Delays in procurement process also led to shortage.
                           The above challenges led to lack of faith in Government health services,
                           resulting in a decline of public participation in the healthcare delivery system.
                           

                           Innovations in the Solution
                           The TNMSC initiative led to consolidation of hitherto dispersed activities of
                           demand estimation, localized indenting, procurement of the same items with
                           standardized specifications, and improved distribution, stock, and expiry



Establishment of Technology-Based Health Procurement and Supply Chain Management System and Capacity     40
Development in Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation
                       management. Innovation was brought in at every point and the significant ones
                       included:
                       
                       	    •	   Rationalization of Drug Procurement for the Government Health 		
                                 facilities, eliminating shortage and excess.
                       	    •	   Introducing packaging standards with measures to prevent pilferage.
                       	    •	   Totally transparent process throughout the procurement cycle with a 		
                                 simple and clear standard bidding document.
                       	    •	   Elimination of quantification with tenders based on past consumption,
                                 and purchase orders based on actual monthly consumption – a genuine
                                 pull system.
                       	    •	   Effective implementation of Information and Communication
                                 Technologies (ICT) in the Drugs Supply Chain Management system. The
                                 system generates online information on inventory at district warehouses,
                                 enabling the management to prevent stockouts and excesses.
                       	    •	   An innovative passbook system, something like a debit card to health
                                 facilities, to enable lifting of the required goods from district warehouses.
                                 This has simplified the supply chain up to the facilities.
                       	    •	   Scientifically developed Quality Assurance procedures to ensure the
                                 Quality of Drugs.

                       Impact Generated
                       The technology-driven model followed by TNMSC has had a lasting impact
                       on health services delivery not only in the State, but across the country. Its
                       innovative approach has become the norm for all progressive States and at the
                       national level for health sector procurement and supply chain management.
                       Some of the significant and visible impacts are:
                       	    •	   Based on a detailed survey in 2015 by the National Sample Survey
                                 Organization, the Out-of-Pocket expenditure on drugs was lowest
                                 in Tamil Nadu among the major states, Rs. 145 per capita as against
                                 Rs. 2,284 for the country.
                       	    •	   The Corporation’s transparent procurement process has become a
                                 model for other States in India. This has also been much appreciated by
                                 international organizations, such as the World Bank and WHO.
                       	    •	   Upgrading skills of service providers in Drug distribution services, Human
                                 resource development, Efficient distribution through decentralization at
                                 district-level drug warehouses, Simplified indenting system (Including
                                 Online Indent), Usage of ICT system for monitoring of warehouse
                                 inventories, and Training and sensitization of all stakeholders towards
                                 effective implementation of the Free Drugs Policy of Tamil Nadu are
                                 
                                 some of the reasons for its success.

Establishment of Technology-Based Health Procurement and Supply Chain Management System, and Capacity      41
Development in Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                           Scalability and Sustainability
                           TNMSC is a pioneering organization functioning for more than two decades,
                           with a well-noted innovation in transparent Public Procurement System and
                           other Diagnostic services at Healthcare facilities. The model of TNMSC has
                           already been replicated in other states of India, such as Kerala, Rajasthan,
                           
                           Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Bihar,
                           
                           Madhya Pradesh, and Odisha. The Central Government too has set up a
                           similar agency for procurement of essential drugs. TNMSC is steadily visited
                                      Governments, including from abroad, for Training and Institutional
                           by various 
                           Building purposes on various occasions from its inception, which shows the
                           keen interest in replication of the TNMSC Model.




                           Lessons Learned
                           The Corporation has learned to manage the supply chain effectively even
                           when there was failure of all modes of transportation due to natural
                           calamities and various strikes. Tamil Nadu faced unpredicted rainfall during
                           the North East Monsoon in the month of November and December 2015,
                           and most parts of the North Tamil Nadu were inundated. To eradicate
                           infectious diseases due to bacterial and viral proliferation, TNMSC procured
                           and supplied chemicals, such as Bleaching Powder for use in the wet soil to
                                                     Chlorine tablets to control the spread of diseases
                           control bacterial growth, 
                           by contaminated water, Lysol to clean the floors and control bacteria, and
                           Sodium Hypochlorite solution to    control the spread of bacterial diseases
                           due to stagnated water. These   chemicals were procured by TNMSC on war
                                                       requirements of Corporations of Tamil Nadu and
                           footing basis for immediate 
                           Municipalities and Panchayat Unions to control infectious diseases.




Establishment of Technology-Based Health Procurement and Supply Chain Management System and Capacity   42
Development in Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation
                       In addition, the Health and Family Welfare department of Tamil Nadu      organized
                       mobile dispensaries in flood-affected areas. It carried out door-to-door
                       diagnostic services, provided medical assistance to flood-affected patients, and
                                                                                  antibiotics, intravenous
                       catered to the need of medicines, such as diagnostic kits, 
                       fluids, analgesics etc., required for mobile medical camps. These were arranged
                       by TNMSC on war footing basis from suppliers and nearby warehouses. The
                       Corporation warehouses were working on round-the-clock basis for catering to
                       the need of hospitals and patients.  Thereby, contagious and infectious diseases
                       were totally controlled by the Health Department effectively and in a time-
                       bound manner. TNMSC also played a vital role in mobilizing quality drugs in time
                       and assisting mobile medical camps. TNMSC is thus capable of adapting to the
                       dynamic changes in Public Procurement.




Establishment of Technology-Based Health Procurement and Supply Chain Management System, and Capacity   43
Development in Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation
                  Community-Based Procurement in AACP, Assam, India – Power of
                  Grassroots Procurement Leading Assam to a New Green Revolution




         “    The Assam Agriculture Competitiveness Project (AACP) has
              pioneered a highly innovative Community Procurement system,
              
              with a unique procurement process that not only enhances
              community’s role in procurement decision-making, but also
                                                          beneficiary farmers
              brings in economies of scale, which enables 
              to buy pump-sets at rates cheaper than market rates, without

                                               ”
              compromising on quality




                                                                                                    A Way for
       {This article is an abridged version of the submission on “Power of Grassroots Procurement – 
       Tapping the Vast Agricultural Potential of Assam for a New Green Revolution” made by   Mr. Siddharth
                                                                                      Procurement Innovation
       Singh, State Project Director, ARIAS Society, Assam, India, for the South Asia 
       Awards.}

       Summary
       While implementing a project for enhancing agricultural yield and market competitiveness
       of small rural farmers, the State of Assam in India faced a situation of repeated failure of
       pump-sets procured through International Competitive Bidding (ICB). Due to unfamiliar
       brands, farmers were slow to acquire the pump-sets. The sets that were installed experienced
       
       breakdowns and received little after-sales service from the large outside suppliers, who were
       the only ones to qualify in the ICB process. Halfway through the project, the situation turned
       into a major concern, which affected the progress of the project, with even suggestions that
       it be closed.




Community-Based Procurement in AACP, Assam, India – Power of                                              45
Grassroots Procurement Leading Assam to a New Green Revolution
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                           The Project addressed the challenge through an innovative paradigm shift
                           approach called “Community Procurement”. The shift allowed developing
                           a Rate Bank of about 13 technically acceptable models of pump-sets widely
                                                                            after-sales service facilities
                           available in local areas of Assam, with adequate 
                           for farmer groups to choose from. This has  revolutionized the supply and
                           intake – the Project achieved a mammoth 105,000 STWs in just 7 years, as
                           against 5,000 STWs in the initial 3 years.

                           Background
                           Assam a small state in the North Eastern part of India, where agriculture and
                           allied sectors are the principal occupation, directly or indirectly supporting
                           more than 75% of the population. Assam’s farming families are   predominantly
                           small and marginal (85%), with an average landholding of only 0.63 hectare.
                           Though Assam has an abundance of rainfall in the monsoon season and
                           its land is fertile, farmers are unable to maximize their income from farm-
                           fields because they lack access to water during the long, dry winter months.
                           Without access to water in winter season, farmers were unable to increase
                           yields, enhance cropping intensity, or diversify away from growing rice to
                           other crops. This is primarily due to lack of capital with the farmers to invest
                           in Shallow Tube Wells (STWs) to tap into the significantly high and abundant
                           groundwater. Irrigation was the key to enable farmers to maximize income
                           from their farm fields by increasing cropping intensity.
                           In 2005, State Government of Assam took up the World Bank-aided Assam
                           Agricultural Competitiveness Project (AACP), which was managed and
                           
                           coordinated by the Assam Rural Infrastructure and Agricultural Services
                           Society (ARIAS Society), an Autonomous body under the Government.
                           
                           Irrigation through STWs was the core intervention of the AACP, amongst
                           
                           others. The Project sought to provide groups of 3-5 small-scale farmers
                           with a 30% grant (later enhanced to 50%) to purchase a shared irrigation
                           pump set. At first, the project focused on centralized procurement of these
                           pumps through International Competitive Bidding (ICB) process. This,
                           however, proved to be difficult. The Project tried four times to carry out ICB
                           processes (worth about US$5 million each) to procure tranches of 10,000
                           pumps   centrally, but none of them were successful. Few large manufacturers
                           
                           submitted bids, resulting in unpopular pump manufacturers winning the
                           bids. Due to unfamiliar brands, farmers were slow to acquire the pump-
                           sets. The sets that were installed experienced breakdowns and received
                                  after-sales service from the outside suppliers, resulting in complaints
                           little 
                           from farmers. Farmers also enquired why the Project should solely decide
                           which brand / model of the pump-set they must acquire when they too are
                           required to pay half of the cost of pump-sets.
                           




Community-Based Procurement in AACP, Assam, India – Power of                                            46
Grassroots Procurement Leading Assam to a New Green Revolution
                       Challenges Addressed
                       The challenges faced by the Project were multifaceted. The uptake of STWs
                       was very low, affecting implementation of the Project and the            developmental
                       objectives set by it. On another side, the situation posed serious challenges
                       about the procurement process for ensuring confidence within the              grassroot-
                       level farmer groups, who were the end beneficiaries, in getting products with
                       which they are familiar and have adequate after-sales service support etc.
                       Need for designing a procurement strategy that is inclusive of most of the
                       suppliers, and one that does not create a barrier because of the high quantum
                       of procurement, was also a challenge. This is because conventional approaches
                       suggested aggregation of demand to drive value for money from economies of
                       scale. The challenge also    included defining value for money, as making available
                       STWs tested and proven in      localities, where variations in electricity supply, water
                       availability etc. affect the  performance of the pump-sets and requires adequate
                       after sale-service f acilities from the suppliers.

                       Impact Generated
                       The Community Procurement process transformed an apparent failure into a
                       
                       significant success. Importantly, it was instrumental in increasing productivity
                       and diversification of agriculture in Assam. The impacts included:
                       	    •	   Increased uptake of pumps: The project provided cost-effective STWs
                                 to 100,000 farmer groups each, comprising 306,167 farm families
                                 (88% were small and marginal). The empowerment of communities
                                 accelerated the implementation pace of irrigation.
                       	    •	   Acceptability to community: As the process empowered community
                                 groups, it was widely accepted. The process allowed manufacturers
                                 with varying capacities and sizes to apply. Instead of a single supplier
                                 selected 	 through ICB, the first process resulted in 15 qualified
                                 suppliers, with over 25 models for farmers to choose from.
                       	    •	   Lower costs: The unit cost of pump-sets was reduced by up to 7% below
                                 the market price. As suppliers were local, it did not require distribution
                                 of pump-sets across the state. Local dealers reduced prices due to
                                 margin of scale, as they got repeat supply orders from the neighbors of
                                 satisfied farmers.
                       	    •	   Better after-sales service: As the dealers belonged to towns nearer to
                                 farmer groups, farmers were able to get prompt after-sales service.
                                 Dealers provided service proactively at farmer’s doorstep as a part of
                                 their marketing strategy.
                       	    •	   Significant improvements in productivity and cropping intensity: The
                                 impact assessment report of the project stated that – Productivity of
                                 Bodo Paddy, where STWs are used, has risen to 267% over baseline.


Community-Based Procurement in AACP, Assam, India – Power of                                                 47
Grassroots Procurement Leading Assam to a New Green Revolution
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                                     Further, Cropping Intensity increased to 200% from 130% at
                                     baseline. Marketed Surplus of Bodo Paddy, Mustard and Vegetables
                                                   5%, 279% and 255% respectively from baseline.
                                     increased by 4




                           Innovations in the Solution
                           	    •	   The most significant innovative step in the Community Procurement
                                     model was the ‘Rate-Bank’ developed by the Project through a
                                     
                                     transparent competitive process. The ‘Rate-Bank’ facilitated local
                                     community-level procurement by farmer groups by listing the
                                     
                                     names of manufacturers with their local dealers, and brands/models
                                     of pump-sets available with corresponding prices. The competitive
                                     selection process guaranteed cost-effectiveness and quality. The
                                     Rate-Bank was given wide publicity. Information dissemination
                                     campaigns at village level were     organized through NGOs and
                                                                         Workshops with manufacturers,
                                     application forms were distributed. 
                                     project engineers, NGOs and social      coordinators were held to
                                     enlighten the community about the new         procurement model.
                                     An independent third-party audit firm was engaged for Financial
                                     Audit to conduct 2% random check of the pump-sets        installed.
                                     Another independent consultant was engaged to verify 10% of every
                                     4,000 pumps procured.
                           	    •	   To ensure that pump-sets of acceptable standards were procured,
                                     
                                     technical standards were defined by the Project. Pump-set
                                     manufacturers were invited to submit offers through a widely-
                                     published open  competitive process, called ‘FOE’ i.e. ‘Floating of
                                     Enquiry’. The FOE sought manufacturers’ willingness to sell pump-
                                     sets of laid-down technical specifications to the farmers’ groups
                                     directly at predetermined prices, and provide after-sales service.




Community-Based Procurement in AACP, Assam, India – Power of                                          48
Grassroots Procurement Leading Assam to a New Green Revolution
                                 After evaluation, the Rate-Bank of qualified manufacturers, their
                                 brands, models, prices and names and addresses of local dealers were
                                 given wide publicity.

                       Scalability and Sustainability
                       Each individual pump-set acquired by the farmer groups through Community
                       Procurement process is helping unleash an agricultural revolution in Assam
                       and has become a testament to the strategy’s success. Considering its huge
                       popularity, the Project leveraged the Community Procurement process for
                       
                       other community initiatives of the Project, like mechanization (Tractors and
                       Power Tillers), Low Lift Pumps, etc. Building on the success of this model, the
                       Government of Assam’s Agriculture Department has already mainstreamed this
                       Community Procurement process for procurement of all farm equipment and
                       machinery. Government of India (GoI) too has recognized this model as one
                       of the ‘good practices’. It has also circulated its details to all the States within
                       India for adoption, as appropriate. The process is replicable and sustainable for
                       all developmental schemes. Community Procurement is a replicable          demand-
                       driven process for farmers – by farmers and is transparent,        economical and
                       efficient. The State Government, considering its replicability, has included
                       Community Procurement in the draft Assam Public Procurement Bill, which is
                       likely to be approved within this financial year.

                       Lessons Learned
                       Shifting from the conventionally used procurement method of International
                       Competition to Community-Based Procurement has offered many lessons
                       on planning, designing, implementation and monitoring of the process and
                       
                       outcome. These include:
                       	    •	   Adaption of regulations, where needed, is essential to bring efficiency:
                                 New procedures can sometimes stall due to regulations designed for
                                 aprevious system. For example, delays arose during implementation
                                 owing to limited number of officials allowed to certify the depth of STWs
                                 used in conjunction with the pump-sets. This obstacle was eliminated by
                                 opening up the certification of boreholes to a wider number of officials.
                                 As a result, farmers no longer had to wait, as village-level project officials
                                 and NGOs’ staff were empowered to certify the depth of boreholes for
                                 wells.
                       	    •	   Change management is essential for all innovative processes: Community
                                 Procurement model, being new to everyone, faced issues, including
                                 resistance to change among field-level functionaries and NGOs, and led
                                 
                                 to shortages in supply of pump-sets. Some local dealers ran out of stock
                                 
                                 resulting in delivery delays. With experience, supply of pump-sets has
                                 got stabilized, as dealers have become aware of the farmers’ choices.



Community-Based Procurement in AACP, Assam, India – Power of                                                49
Grassroots Procurement Leading Assam to a New Green Revolution
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                                •    Decentralized payment is essential to expedite process flow:
                                     After initial payment delays due to a centralized payment system,
                                     payments to local dealers had to be decentralized to district level
                                     to streamline the payment process, so that suppliers do not have to
                                     wait for payment to restock.




Community-Based Procurement in AACP, Assam, India – Power of                                         50
Grassroots Procurement Leading Assam to a New Green Revolution
                   Implementation of National e-GP System in Nepal




          “   Nepal now has a full-fledged e-GP system covering all aspects
              of procurement, from planning to contract management,
              including the Public Procurement Management Information
              
              System (PPMIS). Public entities have already started phasing
              out their own individual e-submission systems and are coming

                                                  ”
              into national e-GP System




        {This article is an abridged version of the submission on “National E-GP System Implementation in
        Nepal” made by Mr. Ramesh Kumar Sharma, Secretary, Public Procurement Monitoring Office,
        Kathmandu, Nepal, for the South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards.}
        

        Summary
        e-Government Procurement (e-GP) initiation in Nepal was started by a comprehensive study
        “Electronic Government in Nepal” carried out in December 2003. Several building blocks for
        implementation of e-GP in Nepal were already in place. Internet connectivity was available
        
        in almost all government administrative premises up to the local level. There were also a
        
        significant number of Rural Community Centers, Cyber Cafes, and Business Centers with ICT
        facilities across the country. An e-GP Readiness Assessment conducted in 2007 established
        
        that the level of readiness for e-GP in Nepal was reasonable. The only major problem was
        lack of an appropriate lead agency to drive and sponsor the electronic procurement reform.




Implementation of National e-GP System in Nepal                                                       51
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                            Background
                            Government of Nepal formed the Public Procurement Monitoring Office
                            (PPMO) as the   Regulatory Authority for Public Procurement to develop
                            and operate the national      e-Government Procurement (e-GP) system
                            in the country. PPMO is strongly fulfilling its mandate of governing the
                            Public Procurement sector in Nepal, including   introduction of a unitary
                            National e-GP System. Every public entity should     mandatorily use the
                            national e-GP system for its procurement above {NPR 6 million (USD 60,000
                            (1 NPR = 0.0093 USD)). Thus, all public entities receiving funds from the
                            Government of Nepal are in the scope of the e-GP system.
                            In 2010, PPMO prepared the Nepal Public Procurement Strategic Framework
                            (NPPSF) Phase I (2010-2013). Its Phase II (2013-2016) adopted a strategic
                            policy for implementation of national electronic-Government Procurement
                            (e-GP) system, instead of using individual e-submission systems. In the
                            journey of PPMO to streamline public procurement proceedings and
                            modernize the procurement activities through electronic means, Asian
                            Development Bank (ADB) and World Bank (WB) too provided their support
                            to PPMO. World Bank and Asian   Development Bank have already assessed
                            the system and have committed to use the national e-GP system for their
                            funded projects.

                            Challenges Addressed
                            Lack of transparency in government procurement has been a systemic
                            problem in Nepal. In addition, inefficiency due to manual and paper-driven
                            procurement processes has resulted in poor service and limited participation
                            of bidders. The 2003 study under Electronic Government in Nepal found that
                            establishing an e-GP System could help improve transparency, efficiency, and
                            value for money in government procurement. Stakeholders (government
                            agencies and suppliers) also showed their support to the e-GP concept.

                            Innovations in the Solution
                            A strong commitment at the highest political level, reflected through an
                            
                            amendment to Procurement reforms and a demand-driven process, with
                            extensive consultations involving all stakeholders at the time of developing
                            
                            the e-Procurement solution, make e-GP innovative in Nepal’s economic and
                            political context. In 2011, through the third amendment to the PPR (Public
                            Procurement Reform), PPMO was mandated to operate a single national
                            e-GP portal. The amendment also clearly stated that public entities should
                            carry out their  procurement transactions through the single e-GP Portal
                            established by PPMO. Thus, developing and implementing the e-GP system
                            became national agenda.



Implementation of National e-GP System in Nepal                                                      52
                        PPMO conducted a study to envisage the functionality of national e-GP system
                        and make it compatible with international e-GP best practices. As per the study’s
                        recommendation, a national e-GP system was developed in two phases – Phase I
                        and Phase II. e-GP Phase II is the upgraded version of e-GP Phase I. e-GP Phase I
                        covers up to only bid opening and e-GP Phase II covers all the functions after bid
                        opening i.e. bid evaluation, contract awarding, contract management, dispute
                        
                        management, and payment. At the moment, Government of Nepal and its
                        various entities are using Phase I and Phase II parallelly.

                        Impact Generated
                        Since the market demand of e-GP was already high, and national-level effort
                        on e-GP implementation was much delayed, different government organizations
                        had started developing and implementing some form of their own e-GP
                        functionalities. At that time, Nepal did not also have any e-GP Policy in place for
                        implementation of aunitary e-GP system for the Government.
                        Now, PPMO is ready with the latest system from January 2017 for all public
                        entities across the country, including all local-level agencies. This system is the
                        full-fledged e-GP system covering all aspects of procurement, from planning
                        to contract  management, including the Public Procurement Management
                        Information System (PPMIS). All Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) of
                        procurement of works, goods, and consulting services issued by PPMO and Single
                        Stage Two Envelope system are integrated in the application. Public entities have
                        already started phasing out their own individual e-submission systems and are
                        coming into national e-GP System.

                        Scalability and Sustainability
                        e-GP Phase II caters to all the functionalities of public procurement. The system
                        is developed based on scalable architecture and international best practices, so
                        that it can be integrated with other ICT systems. There is no need to install,
                        manage, and operate the system in each public entity; they just have to register
                        into the system and use it as per their need.

                        Lessons Learned
                        The separate development of e-Submission System within individual
                        departments / public entities has the following shortcomings:
                        	    •	   Duplication and waste of national resources for development and
                                  operation of multiple systems.
                        	    •	   Difficult to control and check the compliance with legal framework.
                        	    •	   Fragments the opportunities to bidders.
                        	    •	   Government’s public procurement information is scattered.


Implementation of National e-GP System in Nepal                                                         53
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                            These shortcomings, in turn, impact the development of an efficient and
                            effective high quality management framework for public sector procurement.




Implementation of National e-GP System in Nepal                                                    54
                 PPAF Community-Driven Development (CDD)
                 Procurement Model, Pakistan




         “   Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund (PPAF) strategized
             procurement function in a way that empowered community
             
             
             organizations right from selection of assets to be procured
             till their handing over to the beneficiaries, thereby enhancing

                                           ”
             their means of livelihoods




       {This article is an abridged version of the submission on “PPAF CDD Procurement Model” made by
       Mr. Abdul Rehman, General Manager (Procurement), Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund (PPAF), for the
       South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards.}

       Summary
       In response to rising poverty, Government of Pakistan, with World Bank support, established
       an Apex institution, the Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund (PPAF), to serve as a specialized
       funding institution that guides poverty reduction through civil society organizations. It
       operates as an  independent entity to identify and develop civil society organizations, and
       funds them for specific interventions, leading to socio-economic development.
       At present, with 134 Partner Organizations, PPAF is working with Community Organizations
       present in 100,000 villages and 130 districts of Pakistan. With 70% of the funding spent on
       procurement, the engagement of Community Institutions (CIs) in procurement process has
       
       enhanced the livelihood of people.
       




PPAF Community-Driven Development (CDD)                                                               55
Procurement Model, Pakistan
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                          Background
                          The interventions of PPAF are by and large in far-flung areas, where basic
                          necessities of life are scarcely available. Initially, the Procurement Unit of PPAF
                          did not have resources to design and deliver customized training         programs
                          on Financial Management, Record Keeping, and Community               Procurement
                          and Asset Management to over the then 1,200 Community            Institutions (CIs).
                          Responding to the situation, PPAF prepared “CDD           Procurement Guidelines”
                          in the local language Urdu, and presented all       relevant procurement formats
                          by way of animated films and pictorial          booklets, so that they could be
                          understood easily.
                          Around 70-80% of funding by PPAF is centered on procurement of assets
                          to enhance livelihood options, schools and the community’s physical
                          
                          infrastructure schemes. Over time, there has emerged a shared 
                                                                                       understanding
                          of accepting community-level procurement as a strategic    underpinning to
                          development.

                          Challenges Addressed
                          The Community Institutions (CIs) that the PPAF involved initially lacked
                          expertise of managing financial and procurement activities, and thus needed
                          
                          capacity building to make them self-sufficient. CIs were hence brought
                          under the supervision of Partner Organizations (POs), with PPAF as the apex
                          body. Together with the other relevant members from PPAF and Task teams,
                          processes were developed that met the objectives of  participation, efficiency
                                                                       services, and transparency. Such
                          and cost-effectiveness, quality of goods and 
                          departure from a standoffish procurement support to a participative one
                          at community level paid dividends. Help also came by way of Community
                          Resource Persons (CRPs) to build local   capacities. Over 4,000 CRPs (both
                          male and female) were trained to further train members of Community
                          Institutions.
                          In case of Community Procurement, goods are generally manufactured at
                          local level. Resorting to competitive procurement methods proved     counter-
                          productive to principles of procurement. The PPAF thus developed a
                          Community Procurement Manual in local language, with animated films and
                          pictorial booklets for easy understanding of the CIs and local   communities.
                          The manual provides solutions to overcome difficulties while carrying out
                          different types of local procurement. It also provides different formats
                          pertaining to procurement and suggests how community can        procure goods
                          in case of non-availability of verifiable quotations, goods, and vendors.
                          Innovations in the Solution
                          Animated movies have been prepared on Community-Driven Development
                          (CDD), covering the core concept of CDD, formation of CRPs, how to develop
                          Union  Council Development Program (UCDP), Financial management,

PPAF Community-Driven Development (CDD)                                                                     56
Procurement Model, Pakistan
                      Procurement   process, Record keeping, and Capacity building. The animations
                                     procurement process, informing how to initiate the procurement
                      pertain to the 
                      process; how to prepare the procurement plan, and why it is important to
                      prepare the plan before initiation of any procurement process. It highlights how
                      to establish procurement committees and what should be their composition.
                      Similar pictorial booklets have also been prepared and disseminated among
                      community members, which have become hands-on source of learning at any
                      
                      time and any place. To fortify the outcome, a similar mobile application will soon
                         developed and launched for community members.
                      be 

                      Impact Generated
                      The Procurement Unit (PU) of PPAF intended to mainstream communities into the
                      process, so as to reduce their dependency on social intermediaries. Turning this
                      into a reality required that communities had a sound and sustainable  financial,
                      procurement and administrative systems. PPAF strategized  procurement function
                      in a way that empowered community organizations,       i.e LSOs (Local Support
                                                                         (Community Organizations).
                      Organizations, VOs (Village Organisations) and COs 
                      These were involved right from selection of assets to be procured till their
                      handing over to the beneficiaries. Such empowerment has changed their lives
                      and, now, they have become the custodians of the process, which has also given
                      them a sense of ownership.
                      Further, the engagement of Community Institutions (CIs) in procurement
                      process has enhanced the livelihood of people. Now, the livestock procured by
                      beneficiaries themselves, with support of the procurement committee, is better
                      
                      in terms of health and breed than the ones they were handed over without
                      their involvement. Healthier animals enhance income of the household and
                      ultimately boost the economy of the area. The CIs are now working as proper
                      
                      
                      institutes and are transparent in their approach. Goods and services are being
                      procured more economically and efficiently. Women have been made part of the
                      Community Procurement process by including them in procurement committees
                      for the first time, which was almost impossible in far-flung and remote areas of
                      the country. Involvement of women in decision making has also considerably
                      enhanced the overall productivity.
                      
                      Scalability and Sustainability
                      The PPAF is the pioneer of Community-Driven Development (CDD) approach in
                      Pakistan. Earlier, there was no such concept in the country, though such models
                      have been in place in neighboring countries, India and Bangladesh, where they
                      are operating successfully. Pakistan’s implementation of Community-Driven
                      Development model is highly replicable as marginal communities throughout
                      
                      the world have almost similar problems that the communities are facing in
                      
                      Pakistan. They are illiterate, non-technical and reside in far-flung areas. Lack of
                      capacity is their major problem. Their requirements are also the same as those
                      in Pakistan i.e. education, food, hygiene, physical infrastructure schemes etc.

PPAF Community-Driven Development (CDD)                                                               57
Procurement Model, Pakistan
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                          The innovative idea of training Community Resource Persons (CRPs) to
                          further train communities would help a lot to prepare them to get ready for
                          the driving seat. The manual, animation, and pictorial booklet would be the
                          best approach for other organizations to implement Pakistan’s CDD model
                          successfully.

                          Lessons Learned
                          The building of local capacities by training young people as Community
                          Resource Persons (CRPs) has been a successful strategy to engage youth
                          
                          and create a network of development activists at the community level.
                          PPAF has developed an innovative approach for the ultra-poor, which has
                          successfully helped increase income and expand the livelihood opportunities
                          of the poor in a more effective and efficient manner through provision of
                          productive assets and income-enhancing vocational and technical training
                          opportunities.
                          An impact study on LEED (Livelihood Employment and Enterprise
                          Development) beneficiaries in Kharan, a remote district in Balochistan,
                          
                          reports high degree of satisfaction with assets and training, and pulling out
                          of around 54 percent of households out of the ultra-poor and vulnerable
                          categories. Eighty percent of beneficiaries expressed a high degree of
                          satisfaction with the asset transferred to them and reported utilizing it for
                          income generation and positive effect on their household income.




PPAF Community-Driven Development (CDD)                                                             58
Procurement Model, Pakistan
                    Procurement for Regional Development – Public Policy
                    Initiative in Sri Lanka
                    




          “    The preferential procurement initiative of Sri Lankan
               Government, through its policy directive for reserving
               
               
               Procurement of Works up to Rs. 50 Million (USD 330,000) to
               eligible Regional Contractors, is an effective illustration of
               
               using public procurement for development objectives of the

                                  ”
               Government
               




        {This article is an abridged version of the submission on “Regional Development through Public Policy”
        made by Mr. Priyanga Algama, Director General, Department of Public Finance, Sri Lanka, for the South
        Asia Procurement Innovation Awards.}

        Summary
        The Government of Sri Lanka has brought in a Regional Development Policy to ensure growth
        and check regional disparities in the country. As part of it, it has taken a policy decision to limit
        the invitation of bids for small scale construction contracts, with a value up to Rs. 50 million
        {USD 331,917 (1 USD = 150.64 LKR)}, to contractors of the respective regions. The objective
        is to help increase employment opportunities in regions, reduce income inequalities, and
        minimize delays in construction. Local resourses within the region are utilized at competitive
        cost, while maximizing the value for money in constructions in the respective region. Further,
        it enhances economic well-being and living standards in all regions, from cities to rural areas,
        develops resilient societies, and improves their contribution to national development.




Procurement for Regional Development – Public Policy Initiative in Sri Lanka                               59
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                              Background
                              Regional development is a broad term widely used in countries to reduce
                              disparities by supporting economic activities, such as employment and
                              
                              wealth generation in the regions. In the past, in Sri Lanka, the Regional
                              Development Policy tended to achieve these objectives by means of large-
                                    infrastructure developments and attracting inward investments, where
                              scale 
                              investors and contractors were from other regions or countries. Although
                              
                              there were a sufficient number of regional contractors capable of undertaking
                              various construction and renovation projects, there were reports that such
                              contracts were being awarded to large-scale, national-level contractors
                              coming from outside the respective regions. This was felt to be leading to
                              regional disparities.
                              
                              Use of procurement as a policy tool in acheiveing developmental objectives
                              of the Governments is gaining momentum across the world, as seen from
                              reservation for small and medium scale industries and other preferential
                              
                              
                              procurement means. This innovative effort from Sri Lanka addresses issues
                              of regional imbalances in development using procurement.

                              Challenges Addressed
                              The absence of adequate comprehensive development policies and
                              programs for sub-national regions in the periphery of the country has led
                                     following major issues Sri Lanka (i) Growing polarization between the
                              to the 
                              Colombo Metropolitan Region; (ii) Lagging and slow growth of some regions,
                              
                              and (iii) Spatially imbalanced growth patterns. These challenges were
                              addressed through this initiative.
                              
                              Past policies have failed to reduce regional disparities significantly. They
                              have not helped individually lagging regions to catch up with development
                              
                              objectives, despite allocation of significant public funding. These have
                              resulted in underused economic potential, poor quality infrastructure, and
                              
                              weak social cohesion. Moreover, the territorial strength and opportunities
                              remained unused.
                              

                              Innovations in the Solution
                              The new mechanism to limit invitation of bids for construction contracts
                              of small scale, with a value up to Rs. 50 million (USD 331,917) to regional
                              contractors, immensely helps promote the development of regions. The
                              
                              policy encourages regional contractors to ensure regional development,
                              with focus on the following objectives: Sustain competitive advantage in the
                              
                              regions, Create livable regional economies, Promote efficient and innovative
                              / transparent governance, Increase employment opportunities at the
                              provincial / regional levels, Minimize delays in constructions and utilize local
                              resources at competitive cost within the regions, Professionalize the regional


Procurement for Regional Development – Public Policy Initiative in Sri Lanka                              60
                          procurement process, Provide fair, equal, and maximum opportunity to
                                   interested parties in the region to participate in procurement through
                          eligible 
                          competition, and Maximize economy and quality in procurement, resulting in
                          value for money.

                          Impact Generated
                          The Government of Sri Lanka has since established Registration Grades to ensure
                          that regional contractors are able to participate in constructions implemented
                          under domestic funds. This, in turn, has helped development of regions and
                          benefitted the people therein. The following are the Registration Grades:
                          
                          Total Cost Estimate of the Procurement CIDA Grade Value below or equal to
                          Rs. 2 million (USD 13,276) C9. Value below or equal to Rs. 5 million (USD 33,191)
                          and above Rs. 2 million (USD 13,276) C8. Value below or equal to Rs. 10 million
                          (USD 66,383) and above Rs. 5 million (USD 33,191) C7. Value below or equal
                             Rs. 25 million (USD 165,958) and above Rs. 10 million (USD 66,383) C6 and
                          to 
                          C5. Value below or equal Rs. 50 million (USD 331,917) and above Rs. 25 million
                          (USD 165,958) C5 and C4. In procurements coming under the value up to
                          Rs. 50 million (USD 331,917), bidding process will be conducted through National
                          Competitive Bidding and limited to bidders who have registered within the
                          administrative boundary of the relevant province of Sri Lanka. The administrative
                          
                          boundary of the word “Regional” is defined as the respective provincial territory,
                          represented by nine provinces of Sri Lanka.

                          Scalability and Sustainability
                          Financial disciplines and Government Procurement procedures have a significant
                          impact on economic and social development in any country. The use of public
                          procurement to achieve social outcomes is widespread. Public procurement
                          
                          in Sri Lanka is a mapping exercise describing the current use of government
                          contracting as a tool of social regulation. Efficient, effective, and competitive
                                 procurement is a touchstone for a well-functioning market as well as an
                          public 
                          important opportunity for gaining reputation for the public sector, as public
                          procurement could be used for achieving social well-being and sustainable
                          development.
                          Regional development strategies are inherently complex because of the need
                          to involve and coordinate provinces and their various agencies, and a multitude
                          of stakeholders. However, they constitute a cost-effective approach to help
                          regions achieve development. Public authorities in all countries design and
                          administer various forms of financial support to incentivize organizations to
                                development targets, such as growth and employment. Rather than giving
                          reach 
                          incentives, the strategy of the Government of Sri Lanka enhances promotion
                          
                             regional contractors by facilitating their access to markets. This case is easily
                          of 
                          replicable to public agencies in any country, which has regional disparity among
                          
                          contractors participating in contracts. Therefore, the policy directive of Sri Lankan

Procurement for Regional Development – Public Policy Initiative in Sri Lanka                                61
South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards 2016


                              Government on “Procurement of Works up to Rs. 50 Million (USD 331,917)
                              from Regional Contractors under Domestic Funds” is an effective means to
                              address regional constraints.




                              Lessons Learned
                              Though the focus of the Government of Sri Lanka is to ensure participation
                              of regional contractors in regional procurements up to Rs. 50 million
                              (USD 331,917), it was not able to achieve the same successfully in the first
                              
                              instance, as it had not clearly defined the eligible Grade with the total
                                   estimate. Therefore, action had to be taken to rectify this situation
                              cost 
                              and, accordingly, instructions were issued to all Ministries, Departments,
                              Provincial Councils, District Secretariats, Local Government Authorities,
                              Government    Corporations, Statutory Boards, and Government-Owned
                              Companies to execute the policy directive. At present, regional contractors,
                              who had been rejected when competing with large-scale contractors
                                                            opportunity to participate in regional contracts
                              previously, have received the 
                                                   (USD 331,917).
                              up to Rs. 50 million 
                              The strategy developed and the results achieved through this change
                              
                              demonstrate the possibility of progressing toward the fulfillment of regional
                              development. The expansion of opportunity for regional contractors
                              to participate in regional procurement activities, coupled with public
                              investment on regions, can help reduce the serious economic inequalities
                              amongst regions.




Procurement for Regional Development – Public Policy Initiative in Sri Lanka                            62
