           SOCIAL SECTOR




          CULTURE




PDNA GUIDELINES VOLUME B
ii | CULTURE
CONTENTS
n INTRODUCTION                                                    1
n THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS                                          5
n PRE-DISASTER BASELINE INFORMATION AND SECTOR OVERVIEW           7
n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS                                  10
n CALCULATING THE ECONOMIC VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF THE DISASTER   15
n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT                                   17
n CROSS-SECTORAL CONSIDERATIONS                                   20
n THE SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY                                    22
n REFERENCES                                                      29
n ANNEXES                                                         31
  INTRODUCTION
  “Cultural matters are integral parts of the lives we lead. If development can be seen as
  enhancement of our living standards, then efforts geared to development can hardly
  ignore the world of culture.”                         Amartya Sen

  It is fundamental for all sectors for which a Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) is planned or is carried out
  to consider the cultural context in which the disaster occurred and where recovery and reconstruction will take
  place. The resilience of social systems to disasters is profoundly influenced by cultural aspects since cultures frame
  people’s relationship to others in their society and the world around them, including the natural environment,
  and condition their behaviours.

  Integrating culture into post-disaster recovery programmes, therefore, fundamentally contributes to their effec-
  tiveness and sustainability while also enhancing ownership by target beneficiaries. In this respect, culture can be
  understood as an ‘enabler’ and a cross-cutting consideration to be mainstreamed within all sectoral assessments,
  similarly to aspects such as gender equality, governance or disaster risk reduction. (See Annex 10.3, which gives
  a hypothetical but illustrative case study on this type of issue.)

  At the same time, the specific impact of the effects of disasters on the culture sector (see chapter 3 for a defini-
  tion of its components) should also be assessed as a self-standing component of economic and human develop-
  ment; hence the need for a specific sectoral assessment and for this guidance.

  We are all familiar with the intrinsic value of culture as a repository of symbols and identity, and aware of the
  profound psychological impact that the loss of cultural assets (e.g. places of worship, rituals and traditions) may
  have on human beings, which may seriously affect their ability to cope with and recover from difficult situations.
  Many stakeholders, however, are also becoming aware of the powerful contribution culture can make to the
  economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development. Culture, indeed, has a tremendous
  role to play in creating green jobs, reducing poverty, making cities more sustainable, providing safe access to
  water and food, preserving the resources of oceans and forests, and even strengthening the resilience of com-
  munities in the face of disasters. United Nations Organization for Education, Science and Culture (UNESCO),
  among others, has explored the nexus between culture and development, and produced a number of relevant
  reference documents.1

  The contribution of culture to strengthening the resilience of communities is of particular relevance for an assess-
  ment of the impact of a disaster on the culture sector, which may take many forms. The preservation of local


  1	
       See http://en.unesco.org/themes/culture-sustainable-development

1 | CULTURE
  heritage and landmark structures, the respect for cultural diversity and the endurance of cultural beliefs, values,
  practices and knowledge, and their transmission across generations are critical in building a strong and cohesive
  society before a disaster, as well as in restoring hope and rebuilding a sense of community after a disaster has
  occurred, in the recovery and reconstruction processes. A community with a strong cultural capital built on the
  continuity of knowledge and symbols will be better able to recover from a disaster, drawing on its collective
  memory, shared values, traditional skills and robust social connectedness. The culture sector, moreover, is by its
  very nature, often able to provide a major contribution to local employment and to sustainable and inclusive
  economic development, particularly in post-disaster situations.

  Similarly, culture – through its multiple tangible and intangible manifestations, such as built heritage, rural
  landscapes and traditional knowledge – is an important resource in reducing underlying risk factors and vul-
  nerabilities associated to the physical environment. For example, experience has shown that most traditional
  buildings and historic landscapes, when well maintained, perform much better than poorly built modern
  structures (poor quality and defects in materials, improper bonding, etc.) and provide effective ‘buffers’ in
  the event of major hazards. When integrated into modern disaster risk reduction (DRR) approaches, indeed,
  traditional knowledge systems have proven to be efficient and cost-effective tools to mitigate environmental
  risks and reduce vulnerability.2

  The inherent link between culture and resilience is due to the fact that cultures are always rooted in a time and
  a place. Culture defines how people relate to nature and their physical environment, to the earth and to the cos-
  mos, and express their attitudes to other forms of life, both animal and plant. At a fundamental level, biological
  diversity and cultural diversity are closely interdependent. They have developed over time through mutual adap-
  tation between humans and the environment, interacting with one another in complex ways in a kind of co-evo-
  lutionary process. This suggests that any effort to reduce disaster risks to populations and their environment will
  necessarily also have to take into consideration, and act upon, the culture of the concerned communities.

  AIM AND TARGET OF THIS GUIDANCE
  This guidance should be used as a complement to the Volume A Guidelines of the PDNA methodology. It is
  aimed to assist in carrying out a PDNA of culture sector in order to conduct an integrated assessment of the im-
  pacts of disaster effects on the sector, and to define the main lines of a recovery strategy that would incorporate
  DRR considerations. In the process, this guidance should enable the PDNA Culture Team to identify increased
  risks to culture that may arise from the effects of the disaster or from reconstruction of other sectors, as well as
  the opportunities associated with the sector for supporting the recovery process in general.

  The guidance assume that the Team will have good knowledge of the range of cultural properties and expres-
  sions (tangible and intangible) present in the area affected by the disaster, of the relationship between these
  assets and general livelihoods, as well as of the strong linkages between sustainable development and cultural
  diversity. The PDNA for culture sector aims to be a strategic rather than an exhaustive assessment, to be con-
  ducted in a timely fashion and in the short timeframe dictated by the overall PDNA process, closely coordinated
  with other sector analyses.

  Finally, it should be considered that implementation of PDNA for the culture sector is still in its infancy. When
  more PDNAs Culture will have been carried out, it is envisaged that this guidance will be significantly enriched
  through the experience accumulated. At the same time, it is expected that future versions of this guidance will
  benefit from a more consolidated and internationally accepted conceptual framework that defines the contri-


  2	
       See Heritage and Resilience, at: http://whc.unesco.org/en/events/1048/

2 | CULTURE
  bution of culture to human development, as well as from further knowledge, case studies and practical tools to
  express this in post-disaster situations.

  CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES IN CARRYING OUT POST-DISASTER INTERVENTIONS IN
  THE CULTURE SECTOR
  Carrying out a PDNA for the Culture Sector is likely challenging, culture being a broad concept encompassing a
  very wide range of elements, from a community’s identify-enforcing rituals, which contribute to social cohesion,
  to national iconic heritage sites representing deep-rooted cultural reference points.

  As clarified in Volume A of the PDNA Guidelines, the approach used in the PDNA integrates both the economic
  dimension based on the Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA) methodology, and human development con-
  cerns. As far as the culture sector is concerned, while damages and losses to tangible heritage as a result of a
  disaster can be often quantified, and recovery needs and plans framed in a short time, this is not always the case
  for some iconic cultural assets charged with symbolic meaning and deemed ‘irreplaceable’. It is also difficult to
  make a quantitative assessment of a disaster’s effects on intangible heritage and creativity.

  Thus, the challenge in carrying out a PDNA for culture often lies in finding ways of recovering from the disaster,
  even when the reconstruction of a lost asset is not possible. Recovering, in cultural terms, is not necessarily a
  question of reconstructing physical assets, but rather of re-establishing broken connections among people and
  between people and their environment. This can be achieved through a deep understanding of the dynamic fea-
  tures and processes that characterize the relationship between the affected populations and their cultural assets,
  and how the disaster has impacted on them, which would enable the identification of the necessary recovery
  measures (and of their cost). In this regard, it should be also kept in mind that culture is a dynamic and highly
  permeable process, sustained by bottom-up forces, represented by communities, groups and, in some cases,
  individuals, playing an important role in shaping it and ensuring its safeguarding, maintenance and re-creation.3

  Another challenge in assessing the impact of a disaster on culture is related to the fact that this is often nurtured
  by non-formal activities (e.g. often representing a person’s second job), which may not feature in official statis-
  tics. In some cases, moreover, it could be difficult to distinguish clearly between the roles of the public and the
  private sectors. In many countries, for example, creative industries have a great potential as drivers of economic
  and social development. In developing countries, most are household-based or small and medium-sized enter-
  prises (SMEs), often owned and operated by women. Similarly, one must be mindful of the community-based
  organizations (CBOs) and SMEs that operate in the cultural tourism sector, both in terms of services related to
  tourism facilities, or in cultural and natural resources management and maintenance.

  An additional challenge lies in expressing – in human development terms – the added value of culture in
  post-disaster recovery, since this is not yet recognized within standard parameters and frameworks such as
  the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) or the various Human Development indexes. As stated above,
  the intrinsic contribution of culture to sustainable development and resilience is important, supported by an
  increasingly large body of literature and concrete experiences. The PDNA for culture should thus reflect this
  both in terms of the impact of a disaster and of the potential of culture as a sector that could drive the recov-
  ery process by re-establishing societal reference points.



  3	
       See the UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (2003), where, in particular, Arts. 11, 12 and 15 state the fundamental
       and proactive role of communities and repositories of data in general to document and safeguard such heritage, as well as UNESCO Convention on the
       UNESCO Convention for the Protection and Promotion of the Diver sity of Cultural Expressions (2005), in which Art. 11 acknowledges the fundamental role
       of civil society in protecting and promoting the diversity of cultural expressions.

3 | CULTURE
  At the same time, the PDNA Culture offers important opportunities to improve the foundations upon which oth-
  er post-disaster recovery efforts are built, and to make those efforts more sustainable and effective. The linkages
  between culture and other dimensions of human development are manifold.

  Cultural resources have been translated into important sources of employment and revenue generation for indi-
  viduals and governments, either as part of the formal or informal economy in sectors such as trade, tourism and
  creative industries. Culture is also a sector in which marginalized members of society can easily engage, either
  for their own spiritual needs or for a source of income. In terms of social development, safeguarding heritage
  in times of disaster provides the affected community with a sense of continuity and shared identity; it mitigates
  the psychosocial impact of disaster, helping overcome trauma and providing a sense of normalcy, stability, inclu-
  siveness and hope for the future.

  Given its prominent place in the community, the cultural heritage is also a key consideration for promoting
  ?dialogue and preventing tensions and conflicts that might arise (e.g. using familiar cultural paradigms facili-
  tates comprehension, learning and communication in a given community). Communities, practitioners, artists,
  artisans and craftworkers could substantially contribute to the reconstruction process, bridging together tra-
  ditional and innovative production aspects, and the quality and continuity of traditions.

  The assessors responsible for the PDNA Culture, therefore, should be able to identify and emphasize all these
  opportunities and, working in close consultation with other sectors, harness their potential to support the
  recovery and reconstruction process.

  Since culture playing a fundamental role in the social fabric of communities, its manipulation and exploitation
  may also lead to abuses whereby the alleged respect for traditions may be presented as an excuse for discrimi-
  natory practices, legitimizing, for instance, gender inequality or marginalization of a particular sub-group (UNDP
  Oslo Governance Centre/UNIFEM, 2009). As stated in the UNESCO 2001 Universal Declaration on Cultural Di-
  versity: ”no one may invoke cultural diversity to infringe upon human rights guaranteed by international law, nor
  limit their scope”. The universal nature of human rights is clearly established as international law in the United
  Nations Charter “for all without distinction”. The approach of UNESCO, through all of its cultural Conventions,
  is firmly grounded on this principle. The emphasis is on acknowledgment, understanding and tolerance of other
  cultures on the basis of a binding global ethic founded on universal values and mutual respect across cultural
  boundaries.

  Conversely, human rights include many very important cultural rights, which should be given equal attention,
  such as the right to participate in cultural life and enjoy one’s culture, etc. However, they are not unlimited. In
  accordance with international law, the right to culture is limited at the point at which it infringes on another
  human right. The PDNA Culture Sector Assessment Team should, therefore, ensure that implementation
  procedures are in place to involve women and men of all ages as well as sub-groups of the population in de-
  cision-making, as well as to promote right-based practices and increased social equality.

  EXPECTED RESULTS AND COMPONENTS OF THE PDNA CULTURE
  The PDNA Culture Report should aim at identifying the affected people, the effects of a disaster that relate to
  the culture sector and their impacts on the affected people, the urgent safeguarding measures required as well
  as the strategy for long-term recovery, which would integrate disaster risk reduction (DRR) considerations. Defin-
  ing the recovery strategy statement on the basis of the desired long-term outcome for culture, the PDNA Culture
  should aim not only to lay the basis for the restoration of the pre-disaster situation, but also seek to establish the
  foundation for consolidating the culture sector and rebuild more sustainably (BBB) by addressing the weaknesses
  or gaps identified in the sector while carrying out the assessment.
4 | CULTURE
  The PDNA shall issue a 20-30 page report including an executive summary of three to five pages. In addition
  to an executive summary and an introduction, the PDNA for culture, just as for all other sectoral assessments,
  should include the essential components listed in Table 1.


  Table 1: PDNA Cultural Sector Features and Components
   PDNA Cultural sector features         Components
   1. Pre-disaster Baseline              Main features of the culture sector in the country with specific reference to the affected
                                         people and geographic areas (using the lists identified for the pre-disaster baseline, see
                                         chapter 3 on baseline information).
   2. Effects of the disaster            Effects of the disaster on cultural assets and infrastructure; on service delivery, produc-
                                         tion and access; on governance and decision making processes; as well as on risks and
                                         vulnerabilities. Particular attention shall be paid to affected population and cultural aspects
                                         relevant to their lives, strengths and potential elements that can contribute to a sustainable
                                         recovery, as well as to limiting risks of exclusion or discrimination.
   3. Economic value of the effects of   Costs related to the damage and losses incurred as a result of the disaster.
      the disaster
   4. Impacts of the disaster            Economic and human-development impacts of the disaster, with specific reference to
                                         cross-sectoral considerations.
   5. Sector recovery strategy           Statement of recovery needs and provide a vision for the full recovery process. It will also
                                         include a sector recovery plan, with related estimated costs, monitoring framework and
                                         proposed implementation arrangements.

  Annex 10.4 contains some examples of questions that help guide each of the aforementioned sections of the
  Culture Report.



  THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS
  ESTABLISHING RECOVERY COORDINATION MECHANISMS
  Carrying out a strategic assessment starts by identifying the coordination mechanisms that shall be in place, the
  human resources available to respond to the disaster and the logistic resources available and those required to
  support the proposed plan.

  When it has been decided to carry out a PDNA, a national focal point (FP) for the overall process shall be identi-
  fied by the government in one of the relevant ministries or national authority, to form a steering committee (SC)
  and oversee the assessment and the recovery framework, with the participatory role of women and men of all
  ages from the affected communities and shall ultimately validate and monitor the recovery strategy and plan.
  The SC will further supervise the monitoring of the entire appraisal. When present, inter-ministerial coordination
  committees should be used for the SC.

  If it is decided that culture should be one of the sector subjects of the PDNA, UNESCO will support the leading
  Ministry FP and the established SC in creating the appropriate structure for the assessment process. Ideally, the
  government should identify a specific FP for the PDNA for culture within the appropriate institution to act as a
  counterpart for UNESCO and other players.

  Because of the multifaceted aspects of culture (traditions, crafts skills and knowledge, monuments, natural re-
  sources, etc.) and the possible diversification of the managing structure in a country, it is fundamental to identify


5 | CULTURE
  the relevant ministries and the leading authority for the PDNA. (In various countries, there is not a specific min-
  istry of culture, but its functions are covered by different ministries, for instance, the ministry of antiquities and
  heritage or the ministry of tourism, crafts and social economy.) In this context, it is important to recall that culture
  is sometimes considered a sub-sector of the larger group of the social sector, together with health, housing and
  education, the other two main sectors being the productive and the infrastructure ones.

  A coordination mechanism for the PDNA for culture should be then established, and clear roles devised for the
  national FP, national experts, intergovernmental organizations and other international partners. In this frame-
  work, as far as possible, in addition to the central government, it is advisable that the local authorities (e.g. mu-
  nicipalities) and concerned ministerial departments from affected and vulnerable areas be represented, in order
  to ensure that the plans to be implemented correspond to on-site reality.

  In supporting the government, and as appropriate, UNESCO will mobilize its extensive network of partner institu-
  tions with specific competence in the subject, including the International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICO-
  MOS), the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), the International Centre for the Study and
  the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property (ICCROM), the International Council for Museums (ICOM),
  the International Council for Archives (ICA) and the International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA). The
  International Blue Shield and various on-governmental organizations (NGOs) that are active in the culture sector.

  LINKS TO HUMANITARIAN AND DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORKS AND OTHER
  DEVELOPMENT STAKEHOLDERS
  Further liaising should be ensured with humanitarian response, disaster risk management (DRM) and develop-
  ment stakeholders. The designated national FP for the PDNA for culture will work together with FPs appointed
  within other sectors in order to ensure that culture is taken into due consideration and that relevant cultural
  issues are properly addressed in humanitarian interventions as well as in the Recovery Strategy and Plans. If
  a National Disaster Risk Platform is in place, a liaison person should be identified to ensure that the culture
  sector response is consistent with the work of the DRM group and that cultural concerns are integrated into
  national plans.

  Due to the generally weak understanding of and low priority given to culture in emergency plans, deci-
  sion-makers, key development stakeholders and political partners must be involved from the beginning, with
  a view to: (i) facilitating access and initial steps for PDNA, in both rapid survey and detailed analysis; (ii) prepar-
  ing the basis for the sustainability of the reconstruction process, appropriately addressing the reconstruction
  process and integrating the considerations for cultural heritage into the general framework of development
  and planning; and (iii) strengthening or setting up the country disaster risk reduction(DRR) and early warning
  mechanisms for the culture sector, and integrating it into the overall national DRR Plan.

  IDENTIFYING HUMAN RESOURCES AND STAFFING REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
  PDNA CULTURE TEAM
  While there are optimal plans, the selection of the more appropriate option is context-oriented and in particular
  takes into account the human and logistic resources that can be quickly mobilized. It is fundamental to identify
  clear qualifications needed and criteria for selecting appropriate experts.

  The PDNA for culture sector will require a team of up to four or five specialists, including one Team Leader
  and supported by one or two backstopping and secondary data collection agents. Expertise within the team
  should include, as a minimum: an architect/conservator or structural engineer, an archaeologist, a collection/


6 | CULTURE
  libraries/archives expert and a cultural anthropologist, as well as an economist with knowledge of the culture
  sector. Ideally, all of these professionals should have some experience in disaster situations and familiarity with
  the local cultural context. It is advisable that the team include both female and male members to facilitate and
  ensure interaction with various groups of women and men of the affected population.

  The team should coordinate with specialists involved in the PDNA of the Housing Sector to ensure that there is
  no duplication of estimates for structures containing cultural institutions (when built heritage is not listed per se
  on national or international inventories). Further liaising should be ensured with the gender specialist in order to
  better frame the interviews and to estimate the differential impact of the disaster by gender. At times, the assess-
  ment may be coordinated with experts from the Education Sector in order to link culture to formal and non-for-
  mal education, vocational training and other relevant matters, as well as interactions with the environment and
  employment specialist (e.g. entrepreneurship and business skills for arts and crafts SMEs and vocational training).
  This intersectoral coordination should take place along the whole PDNA process.

  The PDNA Culture Team, in consultation with the national FP, should also identify, including all relevant contact
  information, resource persons on the ground, based on their safety and operational capacity, to support the en-
  tire process: rapid survey, assessment, response formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
  of interventions and the Recovery Framework (RF). Resource persons may be: (i) technical and professional staff,
  connected with cultural institutions, and site managers; (ii) contact persons for any cultural associations of prac-
  titioners, craftworker cooperatives, community-based organizations (CBOs), or community or religious leaders.

  LOGISTICS RESOURCES AND POSSIBLE SUPPORTIVE SCENARIOS
  Logistics arrangements concern transport for the PDNA team to reach affected and vulnerable areas during the
  assessment, in addition to basic arrangements for temporary office space to support the field assessment and
  the data collection, as well as to launch monitoring in the very first stages of formulating the PDNA and Recovery
  Framework (RF). Office space for the PDNA for culture should ideally be located together with the other PDNA
  sectoral teams, to facilitate integration and coordination. There should be a clear management definition of the
  role and responsibilities of each stakeholder and operator.



  PRE-DISASTER BASELINE INFORMATION AND
  SECTOR OVERVIEW
  Pre-disaster conditions are fundamental in assessing the extent and impact of catastrophes and constitute the
  baselines of what is considered ‘normal’, for example, whether structural changes in a historic building are due
  to the normal decay process or to the disaster. Thus, it is fundamental to understand the main features and
  mechanisms of the sector prior to the disaster, particularly to compare the changes (gap) between pre- and
  post-disaster conditions.

  OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE SECTOR
  Although culture takes many forms, with deep-seated interdependence between the intangible cultural heritage
  and the tangible cultural and natural heritage,4 for the immediate purposes of these guidelines, the following

  4	
       Terminology and definitions are those adopted in UNESCO conventions. In particular, for the definition of tangible heritage’s domains
       see especially Art. 1 of UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of

7 | CULTURE
  five main forms have been identified that the PDNA shall assess:

  1.	 Built heritage and cultural/natural sites: This includes buildings/structures recognised as having cul-
      tural significance, ranging from a coherent grouping of structures (e.g. historic districts, rural and urban
      settlements) to a single building or site (places of worship, archaeological sites, monuments, modern and
      contemporary masterpieces) to infrastructure (bridge, port facilities) imbued with recognized cultural values
      (by local, national or international mechanisms of designation). It also include natural protected areas of par-
      ticular aesthetic and biodiversity significance, both within urban settings and in the hinterlands, regional and
      national parks, etc
  2.	 Moveable properties and collections: This includes works of art, archaeological and ethnological arte-
      facts, archival records and manuscripts, etc.

  3.	 Intangible cultural heritage: This includes the practices, representations, expressions, knowledge, skills
      recognized as meaningful by communities and practitioners. The intangible heritage includes also traditional
      knowledge systems and practices focusing on knowledge of nature and the universe, and customary sys-
      tems of resource allocation, dispute resolution and practical utilization of natural resources.

  4.	 Repositories of heritage: This includes museums, libraries and archives, cultural institutions, vocational
      training structures, zoological/botanical gardens with their auxiliary installations (specialized laboratories,
      storerooms, etc.).

  5.	 Cultural and creative industry: This includes infrastructure, resources and processes for the production,
      distribution and sale of creative cultural goods such as music, crafts, audio-visual products, cinema, books,
      etc.

  For each of these forms, it is critical for the PDNA Culture Team to identify the affected persons. Annex 10.1 to
  this guidance provides, for each of the five forms, a list of the typical related assets and infrastructure, and of the
  associated human resource components.

  Because culture is fundamentally in the mind of people, moreover, one should also consider that certain individ-
  uals may be, themselves, a cultural asset and a repository of heritage, which may be affected by a disaster either
  physically or in their ability to perform their social function. In some countries, indeed, persons having acquired
  during their life exceptional degrees of cultural knowledge are designated as ‘national treasures’ (for example, in
  Japan) and are supported by the public authorities for the contribution they make to culture in general.




    Ownership of Cultural Property (1970) and Arts. 1-2 of the UNESCO Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and
    Natural Heritage (1972). For the definition of intangible cultural heritage, See Art. 2 of the UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding
    of Intangible Cultural Heritage (2003), here reported for clarity: “1. The ‘intangible cultural heritage’ means the practices, represen-
    tations, expressions, knowledge, skills – as well as the instruments, objects, artefacts and cultural spaces associated therewith – that
    communities, groups and, in some cases, individuals recognize as part of their cultural heritage. This intangible cultural heritage,
    transmitted from generation to generation, is constantly recreated by communities and groups in response to their environment,
    their interaction with nature and their history, and provides them with a sense of identity and continuity, thus promoting respect
    for cultural diversity and human creativity. For the purposes of this Convention, consideration will be given solely to such intangible
    cultural heritage as is compatible with existing international human rights instruments, as well as with the requirements of mutual
    respect among communities, groups and individuals, and of sustainable development. 2. The ‘intangible cultural heritage’, as defined
    in paragraph 1 above, is manifested inter alia in the following domains: (a) oral traditions and expressions, including language as a
    vehicle of the intangible cultural heritage; (b) performing arts; (c) social practices, rituals and festive events; (d) knowledge and prac-
    tices concerning nature and the universe; (e) traditional craftsmanship.” For the definitions of cultural expressions, cultural industries
    and related concepts, see Art. 4 of the UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions
    (2005).


8 | CULTURE
  When compiling information on the culture sector, it is good practice to also include data related to areas sur-
  rounding the region affected by the disaster, since this may provide useful inputs in the design and implemen-
  tation of a recovery strategy.

  A PDNA for culture sector should include a general overview of the culture sector within the affected areas,
  framed within a historic and geographic perspective. In addition to this overview, the PDNA should provide
  baseline information on the following four dimensions:

              •	 infrastructure and physical assets;

              •	 service delivery of cultural goods and access to cultural resources;

              •	 governance and decision making processes;

              •	 risks and vulnerabilities that affected the culture sector before the disaster.

  INFRASTRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL ASSETS
  By infrastructure and physical assets of the culture sector, reference is made primarily to tangible heritage, both
  immoveable (all of those listed under item 1 above) and moveable (see above, points 2 and 3), but also to the
  places that host intangible heritage practices, such as theatres or any urban or rural cultural space, indoor or
  outdoor, where rituals, performances and other traditional events take place. Infrastructure and physical assets
  also include buildings that host cultural institutions (see item 4 above), but also those where culture is governed,
  such as ministries or local branches of the cultural administration, as well as structures where cultural goods are
  produced and accessed, with their equipment and associated facilities. In some cases, as mentioned above, indi-
  vidual persons may be also considered a physical cultural asset.

  The type of information to be collected would include the number and main features of physical, cultural, /
  natural assets and institutions within the areas affected by the disaster, with their contents, specialized or gen-
  eral equipment, different types of infrastructure, typical furniture, broken down by urban and rural areas (and
  administrative district), and by public and private ownership.

  SERVICE DELIVERY, PRODUCTION OF GOODS AND ACCESS
  By service delivery, production of goods and access in the culture sector, reference is made to the very large
  range of activities whereby, before the disaster, the people affected were able to benefit from culture in all its
  manifestations. This includes the ability to: visit a heritage site or a museum; enter a sacred place such as a reli-
  gious building and practise traditional rituals; the possibility to express one’s intangible heritage in all its forms,
  including, for example, using one’s mother tongue; enjoy a cultural event; to transmit and access information of
  a cultural nature, for example, through educational activities; produce, distribute and obtain cultural goods (e.g.
  to purchase audio-visual materials or books); and in general, take an active part in the creation and appreciation
  of culture.

  The type of information to be collected in relation to service delivery, production of goods and access would nor-
  mally include the number of people having access to cultural resources and their nature; the quality, availability
  and prevailing costs prior to the disaster of specialized materials and equipment required, for instance, in conser-
  vation, restoration and maintenance of cultural institutions and built heritage; the number of people expressing
  intangible heritage (practitioners, artists, holders of traditional knowledge) and the number and nature of these
  expressions, including festivals, ritual events etc.; the type and number of cultural goods produced, notably in the


9 | CULTURE
  creative and cultural industries, including the tourism sector, and by whom (number and characteristics of staff
  enrolled in the sector) as well as number and nature of the associated enterprises (public and private), markets
  and local, national and/or international fairs.

  As much as possible, this baseline information should be disaggregated by administrative districts, age groups,
  ethnicity and gender. Particular care should be paid to avoid duplication with other sectors conducting a PDNA,
  notably with those involved in trade, tourism and housing, among others.

  GOVERNANCE AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
  Governance and decision-making processes in the context of culture refers to the systems that were in place
  before the disaster to develop and apply policies, regulations and programmes for the sector and to manage the
  related assets and infrastructure. These systems include the legal and policy framework in place that regulates
  the sector; the strategies and programmes in place; the institutional framework that was in place before the
  disaster, including agencies responsible for the management, conservation and transmission of cultural heritage,
  museums, cultural institutions, etc. with their government ministries and departments; NGOs and cultural asso-
  ciations; and the human resources that were involved in these processes before the disaster (decision-makers,
  managers, specialized professional and technical staff, security and cleaning staff).

  The type of information required in this regard would include: existing laws, policies, guidelines and protocols for
  the safeguarding and promotion of cultural heritage and cultural and creative industries; the number and nature
  of the institutions involved in the governance of the sector, with their organizational charts, budgets, equipment
  and other facilities; and basic statistics on the productivity of these institutions, in terms of number and nature
  of actions taken over a given period (prior to the disaster).

  RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES
  Risks and vulnerabilities refer to the level of exposure to known hazards and to the inherent vulnerabilities (and
  resilience) of the Culture Sector to these hazards prior to the disaster. This includes information on: whether an
  overall disaster risk reduction strategy was in place for the sector (or any of its sub-sectors); the risk mitigation
  measures that were in place to reduce the impacts of possible disasters across the sector; the state of conserva-
  tion of cultural assets and infrastructure and the known level of risks to which they were exposed; the risks that
  affected the delivery of services, the production of goods and access to cultural resources; and finally, the risk of
  disruption to which were exposed the governance processes for the sector.

  Typical information to be collected would include, inter alia: DRM strategies and plans elaborated within the
  culture sector; risk maps, for example, of cultural heritage sites; risk assessments conducted prior to the disas-
  ter for cultural institutions (museums, archives, etc.); back-up copies of essential documentation; availability
  of stocks of essential equipment and materials for emergency interventions; and the ability of individual units
  within the government to function independently in the event of a disruption of communication infrastruc-
  ture. .

  GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
  QUALITY AND SOURCES OF BASELINE DATA
  In many countries, baseline data for the culture sector are available to varying degrees or in different formats
  (comprehensive digitalized database and/or portal, websites), although it often overlooks significant aspects,
  such as intangible cultural expressions and the creative industries. The quality of the data, furthermore, can


10 | CULTURE
  sometimes be questionable due to the lack of standardized indicators and statistics. Finally, the baseline informa-
  tion may have been stored in vulnerable conditions and may not be available after a disaster.

  Ideally, baseline information should be established before the assessment, with corresponding indicators, to
  serve for future sound monitoring and evaluation work. It is recommended ensuring that data collection and
  recording are coordinated with the existing relevant central database and inventories of the ministries, local
  municipalities and institutions concerned. This requires aligning with and adopting the same indicators; if con-
  sidered appropriate, new indicators should be added. The new data collected should also then be integrated
  in the central database/national inventory/culture sector portal, with a view to strengthening post-disaster
  response planning.

  Generally, data can be obtained from different sources:

           •	 at government level;
           •	 in-country associations of cultural practitioners, society of authors, cooperatives of craftworkers
              and cultural producers;
           •	 aid banks and foundations; in-country cultural, academic institutions, research departments on
              cultural heritage;
           •	 internationally available data from cultural, research and academic institutions.
  In addition, to better understand the local context and its challenges, it may be useful to analyse previous pro-
  grammes to ensure consideration of success and failure factors or, whenever initiatives/projects are rejected by a
  given community, to identify the core reasons.



  ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS
  Once baseline data have been collected, or often even before, the PDNA Culture Sector Team will start compiling
  information on the effects of the disaster, i.e. its direct consequences. This will be achieved through secondary
  data collection, i.e. data that have been collected by others and already available; and primary data collection
  through field visits and/or interviews.

  This section of the PDNA will begin with a general description of the disaster (the nature and magnitude), the
  areas and population affected, which is likely to be common with other sectors. It could be placed at the be-
  ginning of the overall PDNA Report. Nevertheless, it may be useful to recall within the PDNA for culture sector
  the main characteristics of the disaster from the specific perspective of the sector. The PDNA Culture Team will
  then carry out a comprehensive data analysis and validation to determine the specific effects of the disaster on
  the four dimensions described in Section 3. These effects will be then compared to baseline data to establish
  the ‘gap’ caused by the disaster.

  EFFECT ON INFRASTRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL ASSETS
  The effects of a disaster on physical assets and infrastructure will be assessed primarily in terms of damage,
  with a view to translate this later into an economic valuation of the impact of the disaster (see Sections 5 and 6
  below). The damage resulting from a disaster to physical cultural assets and infrastructure (the ‘stocks’ of the cul-
  ture sector) will often include their partial or total destruction. This may result both from the direct and secondary
  effects of a disaster. For example, a violent earthquake can partially destroy a museum (primary effect), whose
  collections are then lost as a result of looting (secondary effect) while law enforcement is disrupted.
11 | CULTURE
  Here, it is important to clarify that all effects on physical assets and infrastructure, which have already oc-
  curred and are related, in one way or another, to the disaster, should be considered by the PDNA Culture
  Team at the time of their assessment, and costed accordingly. If, at the time of conducting a PDNA for
  culture sector, a possible secondary effect from a disaster on physical assets and infrastructure has not yet
  taken place, then this should obviously be considered. The effects on infrastructure and assets should also
  consider new risk resulting from the primary effects of a disaster (see below).. Examples of damage to cul-
  tural assets and infrastructure may include:

           •	 partial or complete collapse of buildings, sites and of infrastructure;
           •	 collections and movable properties can be partially or completely destroyed;
           •	 nature parks, particularly small ones, can be destroyed;
           •	 damage to physical assets pertaining to the administrative functions of the sector;
           •	 the destruction of communication, water, sewage, electricity, fuel supply lines and pipes;
           •	 the death of some individuals.
  The physical assets and infrastructures to be assessed as a priority should be those which carry the greatest
  cultural value and/or support essential basic services, especially in the extreme circumstances of the emergency.
  In assessing the damage to physical assets and infrastructure, the PDNA team may consider different levels of
  gravity according to a given scale (e.g. from slight to severe) from structures that can be easily rehabilitated, to
  those requiring a more in-depth structural analysis of their conditions, all the way to those beyond repair which
  cannot be reoccupied. Average costs can be assumed for the less important cultural assets, whereas detailed
  information on the actual cost for reconstruction/repair of priority cultural resources should be ideally collected.
  When, for practical reasons, it is not possible to obtain complete data on all areas affected by a disaster, the as-
  sessment could be conducted on a sample area, to be previously agreed with other members of the assessment
  team, providing also justifications on the criteria adopted in its selection.

  It should be noted that when the effects of a disaster are significant, there will very likely be a particular damage
  intrinsic in the partial or total loss of an original structure of particular spiritual and cultural value, which will never
  be possible to fully recover through reconstruction, and therefore to assess in economic terms. Even though the
  economic value of the disaster effects cannot be estimated into direct costs as presented in Section 5 below, the
  effects of the disaster, in such circumstances, could be assessed in terms of impaired access (see below) or more
  broadly in terms of human development impact (see Section 6 below). The determination of the corresponding
  recovery needs (and their costs) will depend on the strategy adopted, which will have to take into consideration
  their feasibility in the local cultural and socio-economic context (see Section 8).

  SERVICE DELIVERY AND ACCESS TO GOODS AND SERVICES
  The PDNA Culture Team should also assess the effects of a disaster on the continuity of service delivery, goods
  production and access to cultural resources, which may lead to additional financial costs. Considering this type
  of effects is essential to capture the full economic and human development impact of a disaster. Some examples
  are given below:

           •	 closure of heritage sites, places of worship, museums, theatres and cultural institutions;
           •	 loss of ecosystem goods and services provided by natural heritage, cultural landscapes and historic
              urban centres;
           •	 limited access to heritage sites, places of worship, museums, theatres and cultural institutions;

12 | CULTURE
              •	 loss of historic documents, archival records or electronic databases;
              •	 the disruption of household and community-based services;
              •	 interruption of intangible heritage practices and transmission of traditional knowledge, including
                 the possibility of using one’s mother tongue;
              •	 reduced or no access to cultural spaces/places and materials necessary for the practice of intangible
                 cultural expressions;
              •	 the disruption of the production of cultural goods;
              •	 the interruption of basic infrastructural services (communication, electricity, water, etc.);
              •	 limited access to conservation products and specialized equipment required for the preservation of
                 endangered assets.
  The type and structure of the data related to the effects of a disaster on the continuity of service delivery,
  goods production and access to cultural resources should mirror as much as possible the data collected for
  the baseline (see Section 3 above) so as to enable a comparison.

  When assessing the effects of a disaster on the continuity of service delivery, goods production and access to
  culture, it is very important to apply a gender perspective, consider age groups, and break down data according-
  ly, as much as possible, given the often informal nature of the sector.

  Most of these effects can be translated in terms of economic losses, that is, of additional expenses incurred by
  the public and private sector, as well as individuals, to ensure the continuity of services, production and access
  until a full recovery from the disaster is achieved (see Section 5 below). With respect to damages to physical as-
  sets and infrastructure, however, losses to cultural services, production and access cannot always be easily trans-
  lated in financial terms. In such cases, a qualitative description of the socio-cultural value of the loss should be
  provided.5 Once again, the determination of the recovery needs (and their costs) to address the losses incurred
  by the affected population will depend on the strategy adopted, which will have to take into consideration their
  feasibility in the local cultural and socio-economic context (see Section 8).

  GOVERNANCE AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
  A major disaster will usually have considerable effects on governance and decision-making processes. The PDNA
  Culture Team should assess these effects on the governance of the sector, at national and local levels, including
  on administrative functions and capacities. As mentioned in Section 3 above, governance and decision-making
  processes in the context of culture refer to the systems in place to develop and apply policies, enforce regula-
  tions and implement public programmes for the sector and manage the related assets and infrastructure. After
  a disaster, it will include the ability of the public authorities to respond to the emergency and plan for a long-
  term recovery, if relevant comparing the reality post-disaster with the provisions of the plans in place before the
  disaster took place.

  The damage suffered as a result of the disaster by buildings, structures and major equipment (including com-
  munication infrastructure) that is essential for the proper functioning of administrative authorities, at the central
  and local levels, will have been already assessed under the component on “effects on physical assets and infra-
  structure” (see section 4.1). As far as effects on processes are concerned, the focus should be on the level of


  5	
       For example: “This festival, though not of significant economic impact, has been held annually for the past 233 years, and represents the most
       important community rallying point for the entire region. Ensuring the holding of this festival, despite the ravages caused by the disaster, would
       send a strong message to the entire community/affected region – that the disaster and its impacts will be overcome.”

13 | CULTURE
  the post-disaster capacities of the public authorities and of civil society, both in general and specifically to lead
  and implement the recovery in the culture sector. These capacities should be assessed at two levels: in terms of
  coordination and strategy development, on one hand, and in terms of technical professional knowledge, on the
  other hand. Aspects to be considered may include the following:

           •	 loss of human resources, minor equipment, financial resources and supplies;
           •	 loss of documentation and baseline data, both in paper and electronic forms;
           •	 disruption of administrative functions;
           •	 disruption of key decision making, policy and strategy formulation and coordination mechanisms;
           •	 disruption of community social structures, power relations (including gender roles),the presence
              of latent conflicts (often along ethnic and cultural divides), etc. associated with cultural assets and
              practices.
  Among the institutions and organizations that should be considered, primary attention should be paid to the
  following:

           •	 the ministry of culture, other relevant ministries or national agencies with a mandate over heritage
              and cultural industries;
           •	 fire brigade, civil defence agencies, cultural heritage police;
           •	 national and local community associations, NGOs involved in culture;
           •	 religious institutions;
           •	 educational, vocational training and research institutions.


  INCREASED RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES
  Because of its inherent characteristics, culture is a sector that is often exposed to new and higher risks follow-
  ing a disaster. This is due to a number of factors, including: the misperception or perception whereby culture
  would not be a priority, in general, but even more so in times of emergency; the informal nature of many of
  its productive processes, which once disrupted are difficult to re-establish; the often fragile state of many of
  its assets, such as historic buildings that are rarely maintained as they should; and in general, since culture is a
  sector intrinsically associated with the socio-economic fabric of society, when society is affected by a disaster,
  so is culture. Sometimes, the greatest impact on culture is not the direct result of a disaster, but of the chang-
  es that this has brought, over the medium and long term, to the social and economic context (e.g. driven by
  a general aspiration to modernity, regardless of the opportunities offered by the local cultural context). In
  many cases, the reconstruction itself has been conceived and implemented without consideration for culture
  and heritage, leading to the loss of substantial cultural resources, which had survived the primary effect of a
  disaster. Aspects to be considered when assessing the effects of a disaster on risks and vulnerabilities in the
  culture sector include the following:

           •	 exposure to the direct or indirect consequences of potential new hazards;
           •	 increased vulnerability of cultural assets from inadequate protection or other reconstruction opera-
              tions;
           •	 increased vulnerability of cultural expressions due to temporary or more permanent disruption;
           •	 increased vulnerability of cultural production due to the displacement of producers or to the dis-
              ruption of the markets;

14 | CULTURE
             •	 new risks to heritage sites as a result of vandalism, looting, conflicts and the introduction of cultur-
                ally inappropriate (external) practices;
             •	 loss of authenticity or falsification of tangible heritage and movable cultural properties;
             •	 emergency response and recovery measures that are carried out with no regard to the heritage value
                of damaged areas;
             •	 encroachment and pressure on cultural heritage resources from illegal or uncontrolled development.



  CALCULATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS
  OF THE DISASTER
  Once the effects of a disaster have been determined, the PDNA Culture Team should assess the corresponding
  economic value, insofar as possible. This will be achieved through the Damage and Loss (DaLA) methodology
  developed by the World Bank, building on the experience developed by the United Nations Economic Commis-
  sion for Latin America and the Caribbean (UN-ECLAC) in the 1970s.6 In this framework, damage and losses are
  defined as follows:

             •	 Damage: total or partial destruction of physical assets existing in the affected area;
             •	 Losses: the changes in flows of goods and services — diminished revenues and/or additional
                costs, expressed in current values— caused by the disaster that may extend throughout the reha-
                bilitation and reconstruction periods.
  Although it will not be always possible to recover from all damage sustained or to compensate the losses from
  for every disruption in services, production or access, the aim of the PDNA for culture is to identify as much as
  possible the economic value of these effects. This will then be aggregated and contribute to the macro-eco-
  nomic and human development impact of the disaster, for the part pertaining to the Culture Sector. Human
  development impact (see Section 6 below) will also reflect aspects that are impossible to translate in monetary
  value. In calculating the economic value of damage and losses, the monetary value of damage will be expressed
  in terms of replacement costs according to prices prevailing just before the event, while the monetary value of
  losses will be expressed in terms of reduced revenues and additional costs incurred as a result of the disaster, in
  current values.

  Since the extent of the losses will be determined based on an estimate of the time required until full recovery
  has been achieved and of the capacities of the sector to implement the necessary measures, the calculation of
  their economic value will be based on a realistic assumption of a post-disaster scenario, including timeframe,
  the possibility of adopting certain temporary solutions, etc. These assumptions will be reflected in the sector
  recovery strategy (see Section 8).

  ESTIMATING THE ECONOMIC VALUE OF DAMAGE
  The economic valuation of damage to public cultural assets is particularly complex, because cultural goods, in the
  largest sense, have usually important non-use (non-market) values (e.g. spiritual, symbolic, existence, option and
  bequest) as well as to the characteristics of private cultural assets (e.g. historic residential buildings or valuable
  artistic objects in private hands) to possess at the same time a certain degree of public interest. It is very difficult


  6	
       See the 2010 DaLa Guidance Notes (in particular Guidance N. 2) issued by the World Bank: https://www.gfdrr.org/DaLA_Guid-
       ance_Notes

15 | CULTURE
  to translate these non-use values and peculiar characteristics into monetary terms. Moreover, the replacement
  of certain cultural assets (such as an archaeological site or a historic building with precious decorations), when
  technically feasible, may not be possible without a considerable loss of authenticity.

  In the fact of the difficulty of restoring the pre-disaster situation, the recovery measures that will be identified
  and implemented in the culture sector will often focus on alternative, creative solutions, aimed at compensating
  for the benefits from cultural assets lost by the affected population. They will have to be developed in the frame-
  work of an overall recovery strategy defined through a participatory approach and sensitive to local socio-cultur-
  al and economic context. For this reason, estimating the economic value of the effects of a disaster, based only
  on an understanding of these effects, will necessarily be an exercise, based on assumptions, which will have to
  be reviewed and validated at the stage of defining the final recovery strategy.

  For the specific purpose of calculating the economic value of the effects of a disaster on the culture sector, it is
  proposed to refer to the methodology laid out in the study carried out by Kaspars Vecvagars, entitled: “Valuing
  damage and losses in cultural assets after a disaster: concept paper and research options”.7 The approach that
  this study considers the most effective in post-disaster situations is based on the ‘benefit transfer method’, which
  assesses the value of a good or service based on the value of an appropriate substitute. This is preferred among
  other methods because it is more rapid and requires fewer resources; however, some valuation of the benefits
  derived from the cultural assets must be available. Annex 10.6 provides a list of primary and secondary bene-
  fits that may derive from cultural assets, which may be useful to consider in calculating their replacement cost.
  The study by Vecvagars acknowledges that finding an appropriate substitute to a cultural asset damaged as a
  result of a disaster may be very difficult. For this reason, the study explores a variation of the benefit transfer
  method, which the author calls the ‘advanced’ or ‘enhanced replacement cost method’:

         Based on the standard replacement cost method where the cost of replacing the good or service is used as a
         proxy for the good’s/service’s value. However, under this method the costs and, hence, the value would not be
         calculated based on the creation of a replica or reconstruction of the original, but rather based on the creation
         of a new, possibly different and/or enhanced cultural asset.8

  This method requires more time than the standard benefit transfer method (due to the process for determining
  the ‘enhanced’ cultural asset, which may involve consultations, design competitions, etc.) and may therefore be
  used when time is less of an issue.

  When repair and reconstruction of damaged cultural assets is possible and desirable, the related cost should be cal-
  culated, based on actual market prices of labour, materials and management. These costs should be broken down by
  public and private sector in order to determine where the weight of the reconstruction effort might fall. When historic
  structures are concerned, these costs will have to consider the special requirements of such a complex undertaking,
  which cannot be compared to the simple replacement of a normal modern building. In some countries, there are
  compilations of unit costs for standard intervention in the area of heritage conservation, which can be used as a ref-
  erence. The feasibility and cost for the restoration of movable objects such as paintings, archaeological relics, textiles
  etc. requires expert advice and can be very expensive. Annex 10.5 summarizes how damage may be calculated for
  different types of cultural assets, suggesting the most appropriate valuation method.




  7	
       This study was carried out in 2006 as a consultancy for the ECLAC, under the World Bank/ECLAC Project “Economic social and envi-
       ronmental impact of disasters: valuation as a tool for the reduction of disaster risk in developing countries”. It is accessible online at:
       http://www.eclac.cl/publicaciones/xml/8/26728/L731.pdf. One of the limitations of this study is that it defines culture as tangible and
       intangible heritage, with no consideration for cultural and creative industries.
  8	
       Ibid. p 8.

16 | CULTURE
  ESTIMATING THE ECONOMIC VALUE OF THE CHANGE IN FLOWS OF ECONOMIC
  RESOURCES (LOSSES)
  In addition to damage, it is important to assess the effects to physical assets and infrastructure in terms of
  change in economic flows (losses), that is, diminished revenues and additional costs incurred as a consequence
  of the disaster, until full recovery and reconstruction is completed. Change in economic flows may be associated
  to all kinds of effects of a disaster, from the destruction of physical assets to increased risks. The typical change
  in economic flows (losses) that may be observed in the culture sector include the following:

           •	 the loss of revenues associated with the temporary closure or non-availability of the culture assets,
              and the loss of revenues associated with annual or recurring cultural events;
           •	 the costs associated with implementing temporary emergency measures to prevent further dam-
              age to the culture assets;
           •	 the loss of revenues associated to the disruption in the production of goods in the cultural and creative
              industries;
           •	 the costs associated with temporary measures to ensure the continuity of essential cultural services
              and access to basic cultural resources;
           •	 the costs associated with mitigating new risks and increased vulnerabilities that have resulted from
              the disaster.
  Section 4 above provides examples of effects that typically may generate losses. Annex10.5 summarizes
  how losses may be calculated, for different types of cultural processes, suggesting the most appropriate
  valuation method.

  TOTAL EFFECTS
  Once the costs associated to damage and losses have been calculated based on data collected through various
  kinds of analysis (primary and secondary data, field visits, interviews, etc.), they should be aggregated; the total
  damage should not be added to the total losses, but kept separate. The PDNA Culture Team should pay partic-
  ular attention to avoid double accounting with other sectors, by sharing and comparing data with other sector
  teams. As much as possible, totals of damage and losses should be broken down by public and private sectors.


  ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT
  MACRO-ECONOMIC IMPACT
  The calculation of the economic value of the effects of the disaster on culture will inform the determination of
  the country’s main macro-economic aggregates. This is usually assessed in terms of impact of the disaster on the
  country’s GDP, the balance of payment (BOP) and the fiscal sector.

  These impacts can also be analysed over a reduced geographical scale (municipality, district/province, region),
  providing that pre-disaster statistics on the contribution of culture to GDP, BOP and the fiscal sector are available.
  It should be kept in mind that much of the economic activity associated to culture takes place in the informal
  sector and therefore may not have been accounted in official national statistics. The macro-economic impact of
  a disaster derived from its effects on culture, therefore, is likely to be higher than that resulting from available
  data, and the gap will be particularly relevant for women and poorer sections of the population.

  At the macro-economic level, the overall impact on the culture sector corresponds to the decrease in percentage
  of the sector’s contribution to national GDP and potential losses of cultural good exports, main components of
  macro-economic impacts are presented in Table 2.

17 | CULTURE
  Table 2: Assessment of Macro-economic Impact
       Macro-economic Components                                                     Calculation of the Economic Value of the
                                                                                     Effects
       Losses in revenues incurred by the private and public sectors caused by       Analysis of GDP impact
       the destruction of culture assets

       Costs of temporary works for protecting cultural assets and costs of dem-     Analysis of GDP impact
       olition and debris removal
       Foreign exchange losses due to temporary absence of foreign visitors to       Analysis of the balance of payments (BOP) impact
       culture sites
       Imported components of the culture assets reconstruction or repairs           Analysis of impact on the BOP
        (including materials, equipment and machinery and expertise) that are
       not produced in country and must be imported from abroad
       Reinsurance proceeds that may come from abroad to cover the cost of           Analysis of disaster impact on the BOP
       any destroyed culture assets that were insured

       Higher expenditures and lower revenues that will affect the government´s      Analysis on the fiscal position
       budget due to the losses caused by the disaster
       Any possible loss of employment caused by the destruction of culture          Analysis of overall employment and personal income
       assets – excluding those that belong to formal sectors of economic            impact
       activity such as tourism, commerce, etc.– that will affect workers of cul-
       tural activities

  THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT IMPACT
  The impact of a disaster on human development at personal and household levels, which is caused by its effects
  on the culture sector, will depend on the nature of the disaster.
  No reference to culture or heritage was made in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) or in the current
  variations of the Human Development Index (HDI). Nevertheless, a number of indicators have been proposed to
  define the contribution of culture to human development, some of which are intrinsic to culture, i.e. they reflect
  benefits that typically culture may provide better than any other sector, such as aesthetic enjoyment, learning
  and sense of belonging. Others highlight the specific added value of culture to other more general dimensions
  of human development, such as social and economic development, and the protection of the environment.
  UNESCO and other institutions are working to address the gaps in the MDGs with a view to integrating consid-
  eration of culture in the post-2015 Development Agenda. In this context, it was suggested, as a working hypoth-
  esis,9 that the contribution of culture to human development might be divided into five main areas:

  POVERTY EDUCATION
  Culture is a driver for inclusive economic development. Cultural heritage, cultural and creative industries, sustain-
  able cultural tourism, culture-led urban revitalization and cultural infrastructure can serve as strategic tools for
  income generation and job creation, and for fostering new market opportunities. Cultural and creative industries
  represent one of the most rapidly expanding sectors in the global economy, with an annual increase of between
  5 and 20 percent. Moreover, culture is an enabler of inclusive social development. Access to traditional knowl-
  edge, support and solidarity from the social group or access to credit, for example, are means to increase social
  inclusion and thereby to reduce relative poverty.

  QUALITY EDUCATION AND LIFE-LONG LEARNING
  The ways people learn and transmit knowledge vary according to their different geographical, historical and
  linguistic backgrounds. Therefore, education strategies that are most responsive to local cultures, contexts and

  9	
        Consult the website of UNESCO at http://en.unesco.org/themes/culture-sustainable-development for updates on this process.

18 | CULTURE
  needs are most likely to be effective in fostering more cohesive societies. In addition, culturally adapted educa-
  tional programmes support and improve quality education.

  THE ENVIRONMENT
  Access to essential environmental goods and services for the livelihood of communities should be secured
  through the stronger protection and more sustainable use of biological and cultural diversity, as well as by safe-
  guarding relevant traditional knowledge and skills. Indeed, there is a significant interrelationship between culture
  and environmental sustainability due to the intrinsic link between cultural diversity and biodiversity, its ability to
  influence more responsible consumption and its contribution to sustainable management practices as a result of
  local and traditional knowledge. Moreover, the appropriate conservation of the historic environment, including
  cultural landscapes, and the safeguarding of relevant traditional knowledge, values and practices, in synergy with
  other scientific knowledge, enhance the resilience of communities to disasters and climate change.

  SUSTAINABLE CITIES AND URBANIZATION
  A vibrant cultural life and the quality of urban historic environments are key for achieving sustainable cities.
  Culture-aware policies in cities promote respect for diversity, the transmission and continuity of values, and in-
  clusiveness by enhancing the representation and participation of individuals and communities in public life and
  improving the conditions of the most disadvantaged groups. Cultural infrastructure, such as museums and other
  cultural facilities, can be used as civic spaces for dialogue and social inclusion, helping to reduce violence and
  foster cohesion.

  INCLUSION AND RECONCILIATION
  In the context of globalization, and in the face of the identity challenges and tensions it can create, respect for
  cultural diversity and intercultural dialogue can forge more inclusive, stable, peaceful and resilient societies as
  they foster an environment conducive to tolerance and mutual understanding. Guaranteeing cultural rights,
  access to cultural goods and services, free participation in cultural life, and freedom of artistic expression are crit-
  ical to forging inclusive and equitable societies. Fostering cultural participation contributes to promoting active
  citizenship. In particular, culture-related projects contribute to the empowerment of women and youth.

  Under each of these five main areas, work is under way to develop specific indicators that would express the
  contribution of culture. Some of them, such as number of jobs created (or lost, as a result of a disaster) by the
  Culture Sector, would simply reflect the contribution of culture to existing HDI indicators; others, however, will
  be new indicators that pertain specifically to culture based on a new understanding of its importance for human
  development, which could be used to provide a more comprehensive account of the possible impact of a disaster
  on human development. Although this is work in progress and a finalized framework is not yet available, the
  following indicators might be considered:

           •	 loss of the historic urban and rural environment, in % (compared to pre-disaster)

           •	 variation in attendance at cultural institutions;

           •	 reduction in access to cultural resources;

           •	 reduction in the number delivered educational programmes and/or training in arts and culture;

           •	 variation in the number of children studying arts and/or cultural subjects in school;

           •	 variation in the number of children engaged in extra-mural artistic activities;

19 | CULTURE
           •	 variation in the number of graduates from arts training institutions;

           •	 reduction in the access to traditionally recognized biological resources;

           •	 variation in the number of citizens who are actively involved in cultural practices;

           •	 proportion of women working in the Culture Sector;

           •	 reduction in household income, in %, compared to pre-disaster, due to disruption of economic
              activities associated
              to culture;

           •	 recognition of appropriate cultural rights and consistency with human rights;

           •	 levels of public funding for culture (gap between pre- and post-disaster);

           •	 integration of traditional knowledge and practices into environmental and urban development schemes;

           •	 integration of a culture-sensitive approach into DRR and climate change mitigation and adaptation
              policies and plans;

           •	 loss of energy – in equivalent CO2 emissions – embedded in damaged historic fabric.

  The choice of the appropriate indicator will depend, on a case-by-case basis, on the specific nature of the disas-
  ter and on the local context. Considering the constraints under which a PDNA is taking place, notably in terms of
  time to collect data, it is advisable to concentrate on indicators that express the level of access by the population
  to cultural assets and activities (across all of their manifestations) and the loss in jobs and revenues, at household
  levels, related to disruption in activities related to culture.

  Since it may not be possible to capture community and societal impacts from secondary data (either because
  culture is not considered in statistics or because of its informal nature), attention should be paid to damage and
  losses at the community level, during the field assessment, through liaising with community leaders (interviews,
  forums, etc.). See Annex 10.4 questions under household/community impact, and Annex 10.5 for suggested
  methodologies for calculating them. Attention should be paid to recording damage and losses directly affecting
  women’s income-generation activities in the field of culture, including the informal sector. This entails collecting
  sex- and age-disaggregated data (SADD) and undertaking inclusive consultations in order to identify particular
  needs and priorities of women, girls, boys and men of all ages, as well as of sub-groups of the population.



  CROSS-SECTORIAL LINKAGES INCLUDING
  CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES
  Given the ramifications of the effects of cultural heritage and socio-cultural expressions in all sectors of society,
  understanding cultural behaviours and practices and mainstreaming them into recovery plans contribute to
  achieving more effective programmes of response. The results of the culture sector assessment should comple-
  ment and inform other sectors, for instance, as indicated in table 3.




20 | CULTURE
  Table 3: Summary of the Culture Sector’s Contribution to Other Sectors/Themes
   Sector        Themes               Examples of Culture’s Contribution to the Sector/Theme
   Shelter       Housing, temporary   Designs of housing and temporary camps should integrate specific features embedded
                 camps                in the affected community’s cultural/religious behaviour in order to better accommodate
                                      traditional lifestyles such as location of shelter, community gathering points, gender issues
                                      vs. services access and timing (e.g. latrines), spaces for sport opportunities for youth, etc.
                                      Ensure that traditional communication and decision-making systems are maintained, thus
                                      reducing a sense of displacement; (disaster resilience) traditional construction materials and
                                      techniques should be integrated in design and construction requirements.
                 Land management      Issues related to customary laws/local cultural behaviour: taboos may hinder access/use/oc-
                                      cupation modalities of specific plots of land (e.g. due to their sacred features, the growing
                                      of species considered impure for specific tribes) as well as land inheritance rights (women
                                      not allowed to own land, etc.); reactivation of ancient moats and channels, etc. can foster
                                      better land management.
   Livelihoods   Livelihoods,         When performing the baseline and analysis of the damage and loss, the needs in the cul-
                 social protection    ture sector are important to be considered when compiling statistics related to:
                 and nutrition        livelihoods, employment and social protection: e.g. discriminatory practices due to cultural
                                      beliefs (e.g. ethnicity; early marriages, female genital mutilation, corporal punishment due
                                      to cultural practices);
                                      nutrition: reluctance of a community to consume specific foods due to cultural and religious
                                      beliefs, etc.
   Food secu-                         Issues related to customs, cultural traditions and socio-cultural factors conditions giving
   rity                               access to, and control over food to members of household/community and the population
                                      at large (e.g. religion-based food restrictions/preferences in the community for women and
                                      men and cooking practices).
   Education     Education for all    Examples are issues related to languages, cultural contents to support quality education,
                                      both formal and non-formal education; the performing arts are used to enhance learning,
                                      etc.
   Health                             Examples include socio-cultural traditions and taboos that may aggravate transmission of
                                      diseases, pandemics, etc. and limit access to health services;
                                      better communication and effective, participation and role of community members (e.g.
                                      matrilineal or patrilineal communities) in sectoral specific programmes (education, health,
                                      etc.).
   HIV and                            Socio-cultural behaviour that may hamper HIV and AIDS prevention (e.g. widow-cleansing
   AIDS                               practices, etc.);
                                      Promotion of a culturally appropriate approach to HIV and AIDS (e.g. using traditional tales,
                                      music and performing arts as vehicle for transmitting the campaign message)
   Gender                             The mapping of the contribution of women and men of all ages to the culture sector, the
                                      needs and priorities of women and men of the affected populations as well as any harmful
                                      cultural practices and norms that should be counteracted in order to support and consoli-
                                      date sustainable and equity-based post-disaster recovery efforts.




21 | CULTURE
  THE SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY
  SECTOR RECOVERY VISION
  In moving from an understanding of the effects and impacts of a disaster to the development of a comprehen-
  sive recovery strategy, it is essential to start by defining the overall vision for this recovery, that is, the desired
  situation at the end of the recovery process with respect to the culture sector, and to establish the key principles
  that should guide it. This vision, in turn, should be based on a deep analysis of the context, of what is possible
  to achieve in the given conditions, and of the constraints and opportunities that will drive the post-disaster tran-
  sition, which is referred to as a ‘post-disaster scenario’ as mentioned in Section 5 above.

  In devising the vision and sector outcomes, it will be also essential to align the recovery strategies with the coun-
  try’s development plans (and explain how this has been achieved) and to build on local mechanisms, which is
  also fundamental to strengthen ownership and sustainability. The vision shall also integrate a BBB component,
  i.e. considerations for strengthening the resilience and disaster risk preparedness of the sector through the re-
  covery and reconstruction.

  The following section describes the steps required to develop a Sector Recovery Strategy. Experience shows that
  the planning process will be made of several cyclical iterations, rather than a progressive sequence of individual
  steps. Considerations made on implementation arrangements, costs, assumptions and constraints (see Section
  8.4 and 8.5 below), might lead to a reconsideration of priorities and indeed of the overall strategy.

  STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS
  Despite the constraints in terms of time, resources and logistics in which a PDNA takes place, it is essential that
  the formulation of the recovery strategy includes the meaningful consultation of the concerned stakeholders.
  This would be a requirement for any sector, but for culture, it will be even more imperative, considering that,
  ultimately, it is only the affected population that will be able to decide on the cultural value of assets, services
  and goods. and to determine what is to be reconstructed and what can be left behind.

  Translating effects of a disaster and their estimated economic value into recovery needs and plans is not au-
  tomatic. In the process, a complex negotiation process will have to take place, taking into account the local
  socio-economic context. In fact, disasters often provide opportunities to reassess the priorities of a community,
  and the pros and cons of different options will be thorough debated. The advocates of ‘as it was, where it was’
  will confront those in favour of a new beginning, and dividing lines may emerge across social status, gender,
  ethnicity and age groups.

  The PDNA Culture Team should – as much as possible – facilitate this consultation with the help of their national
  and local direct counterparts, and integrate their results in the recovery strategy. Because of the characteristics
  of the sector, closely associated with identities and locales, the consultations should be as inclusive as possible,
  giving special attention to ethnic minorities, women and youth, whose specific perspective of what is culturally
  significant might be overlooked by a top-down approach.




22 | CULTURE
  RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY NEEDS, INCLUDING BUILDING BACK BETTER
  IDENTIFYING AND ADDRESSING NEEDS
  Recovery needs should derive from the effects of the disaster in terms of: reconstructing or repairing the dam-
  aged assets and infrastructure; restoring service and the production of goods; resuming access to cultural re-
  sources; re-establishing the functionality of governance and decision-making processes; and mitigating the new
  risks and vulnerabilities emerged as a result of the disaster.

  A general principle to be considered when defining recovery needs is to avoid any possible further damage and
  harm to cultural assets and heritage through appropriately balancing the concerns of speed versus quality in the
  reconstruction process. As mentioned above, identified needs should also address opportunities to contribute
  to the long-term development goals set by the country, including in policy-setting and institutional frameworks;
  however, there will clearly remain a distinction between recovery and development plans.

  Finally, recovery needs should include a concern for building back better (BBB), which would clearly be beneficial
  in general for the sector and more cost-effective if executed in the context of the planned recovery and recon-
  struction process. BBB-related needs should be identified with a view to strengthen the resilience of all of the
  four aspects considered under the PDNA. Insofar as possible, BBB recovery needs (and their cost) should be listed
  separately from recovery needs aimed at restoring the pre-disaster level. This is because BBB considerations are
  often regarded as desirables, as opposed to the essential reconstruction, and decision-makers wish to be able to
  appreciate the additional costs involved.

  Typical needs concerning the repair and reconstruction of physical assets and infrastructure may include the following:

           •	 implementing first aid measures and urgent safeguarding interventions for the most critically dam-
              aged buildings, artefacts and collections;
           •	 repairing or reconstructing damaged monuments, built heritage, museums, and other physical
              assets and infrastructure affected by the disaster, incorporating disaster reduction solutions;
           •	 ensuring security systems for museums, libraries and archives, storage facilities, standing monu-
              ments, major sites;
           •	 providing a platform for requesting the return of stolen and illicitly exported property to the coun-
              try if such acquisition and/or export has already taken place.
  Recovery needs related to the restoration of services, production and access may include the following:

           •	 restoring fundamental services provided by culture and ensuring access to cultural institutions,
              vocational training structures, libraries, archives, museums, as well as to cultural and natural sites;
           •	 restoring intangible cultural practices by providing the appropriate space and materials, address-
              ing psycho-social aspects to help weaker groups within society, fostering respect for cultural and
              human rights, and intercultural understanding;
           •	 restoring basic revenues of affected population involved in cultural industries and other activities
              associated to culture by offering financial support or devising temporary alternative market and/or
              working opportunities;
           •	 delivering tailored training programmes for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and CBOs
              (F/M) to foster their entrepreneurship and business skills as well as to upgrade the quality of their
              cultural products;
           •	 creating a legal environment conducive to cultural industries through multi-sectoral policies development.


23 | CULTURE
  The re-establishment and strengthening of governance and decision-making processes may include the
  following recovery needs:

           •	 restoring the administrative functionality of governmental institutions, at central and local levels;
           •	 providing extra staff and resources to disrupted public authorities, possibly reassigning them from
              surrounding districts;
           •	 recovering the lost databases, records and essential working equipment;
           •	 re-establishing disrupted mechanisms or creating new one, if they did not exist pre-disaster, for
              consultation, coordination and decision-making.
  The restoration of governance and decision-making processes often lend themselves to introducing substantial im-
  provements (BBB) to strengthen the formulation of policy and their implementation. These may include the following:

           •	 rethinking the mandate and vision of the affected cultural institutions and achieving a more ratio-
              nal and efficient structure;
           •	 improving an inventory and documentation of culture reflecting a contemporary understand-
              ing of the sector or establishing one where it does not exist (e.g. with intangible heritage and
              creative industries);
           •	 aligning national legislation and guidelines with international standards and best practices;
           •	 disseminating guidelines and other relevant materials to all stakeholders to ensure correct practic-
              es of recovery, rescue techniques and procedures, setting or reviewing local or national building
              codes, specifically concerning traditional and historical built heritage and its particularities in con-
              servation requirements, and introducing sustainable and ecologically appropriate materials, which
              would reduce energy consumption and preserve the environment;
           •	 reinforcing capacities within cultural institutions that are conducive to the promotion of appropri-
              ate management, restoration or reconstruction. This should include: training in performing urgent
              tasks; visual inspection; rapid identification of structural cracks that may quickly worsen; documen-
              tation of cultural heritage; rescue and collection of fragmented properties; use of treatment boxes;
              conservation freezing and drying of cultural objects, especially books, etc.; and the development
              of specific training for architecture, engineering and planning professionals to enable them to act
              appropriately in response and recovery activities involving culture;
           •	 strengthened inclusiveness within decision-making processes, promoting in particular the equal
              participation of women and men from local communities and broad public awareness.
  With respect to the mitigation of new risks and increased vulnerabilities, in addition to the needs already
  reflected in BBB measures in the other three components of the PDNA, there are recovery needs may include
  the following:

           •	 strengthening disaster risk reduction at heritage sites, museums, cultural repositories, by develop-
              ing the appropriate disaster risk management plans;
           •	 creating protocols for the systematic integration of culture (across all of its manifestations) within
              national and local disaster risk reduction strategies, plans and procedures;
           •	 integrating traditional knowledge and modern science and technology in DRR strategies and plans
              at all levels, including by exploring the relevance of traditional building materials and techniques as
              well as of traditional social systems and practices, when proven that they augment resilience;
           •	 creating awareness-raising and educational programmes, at all levels, to promote the role of culture;



24 | CULTURE
           •	 reviewing the legal and regulatory framework, policies and norms, to improve structural resilience
              of culturally significant buildings and sites and cultural repositories (for example through tailored
              made safety building codes that take into account the specific characteristics of historic structures);
           •	 reinforcing the capacities of the concerned staff of public authorities, as well as of the local author-
              ities and civil society, as appropriate (both women and men), to strengthen the resilience of cultural
              assets, activities and processes against the risk of disasters and emergency situations in general.
              this may involve the development of training initiatives, resources and materials, drawing from the
              numerous existing models and tools developed over the years by UNESCO, ICCROM, ICOM, IFLA.

  NEW EMERGING OPPORTUNITIES
  It may be difficult to immediately capture complex dynamics related to culture during the PDNA and to clearly
  evaluate how, in the aftermath of disaster, new perspectives and factors driving the transition will affect shared
  cultural values and the significance of some places and assets.

  Opportunities may arise in this process, which can be reflected in recovery needs and integrated in the final
  Recovery Strategy. For instance, cultural assets and values that were not considered particularly significant by a
  community before the disaster, or only by a minority group, may become suddenly a pivotal bonding factor in
  post-disaster situations, providing a sense of shared identity for a larger group within the affected population.
  This may occur because of shared living conditions and disaster experiences, new forms of aggregation and
  exposure of a community’s socio-cultural practices and beliefs to other new communities, encouraging cultural
  exchange and creation of shared values among groups, etc.

  Furthermore, the scarcity of traditional raw materials may in turn enhance creativity, stimulating opportunities to
  explore new forms of artistic production and cultural performances, introduce alternative (locally available) and
  innovative materials, produce new cultural goods and assets, and promote a more sustainable use of natural
  resources (e.g. energy-saving systems).

  Multi-level socio-anthropological surveys, through key informant, purposive interviews and questionnaires as
  well as Internet networks and visual inspections, can assist in acquiring evidence of previously undocumented
  practices or practices, which, although previously attested, have changed in meaning together with the shift in
  post-disaster and emergency circumstances. This information, when incorporated into the recovery framework,
  is also useful in evaluating and monitoring the outcomes, needs and activities of the recovery framework.

  THE SECTOR RECOVERY PLAN
  Once all recovery needs have been identified, the next steps involve their costing, prioritization and sequencing
  over time.

  PRIORITIZING AND SEQUENCING RECOVERY NEEDS
  Following the rational of the vision developed for the recovery, which takes into account constraints and oppor-
  tunities, the recovery needs should be prioritized and sequenced over time (in the short, medium and long term).
  As stated above, interventions that are related to restoring the pre-disaster situation should be distinguished,
  as much as possible, from BBB interventions. The following considerations should be taken into account for the
  prioritization of needs:

           •	 Be informed by and aligned with the consultative process under way and with the national
              development objectives. It is important that the integration of BBB concerns in recovery does not
              take on the national development agenda, and be not driven by international experts or devel-
              opment partners.

25 | CULTURE
           •	 Address/prioritize key risks and vulnerabilities that contributed to the extent of the effects/impact
              on communities, systems and infrastructure, and that can be avoided.
           •	 Where possible, the BBB should also have a positive contribution on the recovery from the cur-
              rent disaster.
           •	 Consultations and communications with the other sectors are essential in order to avoid contradic-
              tory recommendations, gaps or overlaps.
  Priorities (five to ten at the most) should be assigned to interventions that contribute directly to agreed human
  development objectives which are considered pre-requisites/indispensable for the human development and is
  feasible in the context.

  COSTING		
  Costs for reconstruction and recovery are estimated based on the projected needs to the four dimensions of the
  PDNA. BBB needs are also estimated for the four dimensions in proportion to basic recovery costs, to existing
  national budgets, and absorption capacity.

  Costs for the repair and restoration of heritage buildings, sites and moveable cultural properties vary enormously
  depending on the context, the nature of the assets, the available capacities and cost of human resources on the
  ground, etc. It is impossible to provide average costs in the context of this guidance. The cost for integrating BBB
  depends also on the nature of the intervention and the characteristics of the asset (technology of construction
  and state of conservation). At present, there is a lack of data on average costs for retrofitting historic buildings
  against various kinds of hazards. The following considerations should be taken into account in costing for BBB:

           •	 The costs for BBB should be proportionate to the costs of recovery and reconstruction needs (typi-
              cally a relatively small percentage), as well as to the type of hazards.
           •	 The costs for BBB should be realistic compared to the financial envelope pledged by the govern-
              ment and international development partners, taking into account that most funds will be needed
              for physical reconstruction and compensation of losses.
           •	 The costs for BBB should be realistic toward the absorption capacity of the country and what is
              feasible to achieve over a three-year period.
  Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) should be also built into the cost of the proposed interventions. Cost for the
  M&E system can be calculated below 5 percent, proportionate to the interventions for the culture sector and size
  of the affected population serviced through the interventions.

  In general, the amounts estimated under the damage and Loss assessment should correspond to the cost for
  the recovery plan, exception made for BBB concerns. Excessive gaps between the damage and losses assessed
  and proposed recovery costs should be avoided, because donors and governments would not be inclined to
  support interventions that are not clearly tied to the effects of the disaster. In estimating the cost of the proposed
  recovery interventions, it is important to make all assumptions explicit, as well as to provide any formulas and
  references used for unit costs for each budget line item, and attach this as an annex to the sector report.

  THE SECTOR RECOVERY PLAN
  In line with the PDNA guidance on the recovery strategy (in Volume A), the sector recovery plan should be for-
  mulated following the results-based model, and therefore include: (i) priority needs; (ii) interventions required;
  (iii) expected outputs; (iv) recovery costs; and (v) intended outcomes. Table 4 provides an example of recovery
  strategy for the Culture Sector.



26 | CULTURE
  Table 4: Indicative Example of a Results-based Recovery Strategy in the Sector
   Priority             Interventions                       Expected Outputs                     Recovery   Intended
   Recovery                                                                                      Costs
   Needs                                                                                                    Outcomes
   Restore endan-       1) Guidelines and protocols for     Guidelines and regulations in                   # of threatened prop-
   gered monuments      appropriate restoration             place and enforced                              erties protected and
   and built heritage                                                                                       available for compatible
                                                                                                            use
                        2) Mapping and survey (autho-       A map produced of endangered
                        rized specialized staff) condi-     areas/contexts for priority inter-              # of contexts in which
                        tions of endangered/ threat-        vention                                         the collapse and rapid
                        ened buildings                                                                      decay have been pre-
                                                                                                            vented
                        3) Training of technical staff in   # of historic buildings surveyed,
                        first-aid skills                    assessed and checked
                                                                                                            # of collections secured
                                                                                                            or moved in a tempo-
                        4) First-aid measures, consol-      # of trained staff
                                                                                                            rary, secure location
                        idation and restoration inter-
                        ventions for the most critically                                                    Increased enrolment of
                        damaged buildings                                                                   qualified professional
                                                                                                            staff
                        5) Prioritize and plan subse-       # of priority consolidation inter-
                        quent interventions                 ventions carried out
                                                            Plans established


  IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
  PARTNERSHIPS, COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT
  This section of the sector recovery strategy should describe key partnerships, coordination, management and
  inter-agency management arrangements for the recovery process of the culture sector with the cluster, govern-
  ment, civil society and the private sector.

  CROSS-SECTORAL THEMES
  This section should describe how cross-cutting issues will be addressed during implementation, such as disaster
  risk reduction, governance and the environment, as well as cross-cutting issues such as gender, human rights,
  HIV/AIDS and any others deemed necessary (see Section 7).

  It will also describe inter-sectoral considerations, such as education (formal and informal, vocation training, high
  education), employment schemes linked to culture, camp management, housing, environment, tourism and
  other livelihood programmes.

  LINKS TO DEVELOPMENT
  The PDNA team should ensure that the PDNA incorporates a recovery exit strategy with indicators, linking with
  and supporting the country’s sectoral development goals and priorities, aligning where possible the recovery
  process to the broader strategic development objectives for the sector. Examples are given in Box 1.




27 | CULTURE
    Box 1: Example of strategic areas to prepare the recovery exit:
     a. Integrate PDNA with other emergency response planning, especially the Post-Conflict Stra-
       tegic Response, and joint post-crisis and development planning instruments.

               •	 Indicator 1: Coherence and correspondence among different emergency tools

               •	 Indicator 2: Quality and number of joint programming effectively implemented

               •	 Indicator 3: Incorporated with concurrent joint appraisal at the country level for post-crisis tran-
                  sition/development framework, i.e Country Strategies and  United Nations Development Action
                  Framework  (UNDAF)

     b. Link the PDNA Culture results to the sector national strategic planning, policies and strate-
        gies, both at the recovery and development level, including poverty reduction strategies.

               •	 Indicator 1: Commitment and coordination between national stakeholders.

               •	 Indicator 2: How far is the PDNA mainstreamed in country planning at the national, regional
                  and local level.

               •	 Indicator 3: Alignment with national objectives for meeting the Millennium Development Goals
                  (MDGs), in particular MDGs 1 and 3.

     c. Effective investment made in institutional and technical capacity-building in the Culture Sector.

               •	 Indicator 1: Effective investments made in the country’s comprehensive database for culture
                  (with baselines and statistics), management and continuous update.

               •	 Indicator 2: Alignment with international operative requirements.

               •	 Indicator 3: Linkages with existing international technical networking and bridging with the
                  regular training programme

               •	 Indicator 4: Number of effective partnerships with civil society.


  MONITORING AND EVALUATION
  Include in this section the plan for monitoring and evaluation in the sector, by considering the following:

           •	 what is to be monitored and evaluated, and which indicators are more appropriate to measure
              progress;
           •	 the activities needed to monitor and evaluate (and their cost);
           •	 who is responsible for monitoring and evaluation activities;
           •	 when monitoring and evaluation activities are planned (timing);
           •	 how monitoring and evaluation are carried out (methods);
           •	 what resources are required and where they are committed.

  KEY ASSUMPTIONS AND CONSTRAINTS
  This section of the PDNA shall identify key assumptions made to successfully complete the recovery of the Cul-
  ture Sector, and the major constraints likely to be encountered during the recovery process indicating how they
  might be overcome.

28 | CULTURE
  REFERENCES
  Boen, T., and R. JigyaAsu. 2005. Cultural Considerations for Post-Disaster Recovery: Challenges for Post-Tsunami. Asian disaster management news
  (Vol. 11/2), pp. 10-11. Available at: www.adpc.net/Infores/newsletter/2005/4-6/02.pdf.
  Dorge,V., and S.L. Jones. 1999. Building an Emergency Plan. A Guide for Museums and Other Cultural Institutions. The Getty Conservation Institute,
  Los Angeles. Available at: http://www.getty.edu/conservation/publications_resources/pdf_publications/pdf/emergency_plan.pdf.
  EHRMR’ 99. 2000. Proceedings of the International Conference on Earthquake Hazard and Risk in the Mediterranean Region. H. Gokcekus (ed.). Educa-
  tional Foundation of Near East University, Lefkosa.
  ECLAC. 2003. Handbook for estimating the Socio-Economic and Environmental Effects of Disasters. Economic Commission for Latin America and the
  Caribbean. Available at: http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/4/12774/lcmexg5i_volume_ia.pdf.
  IFLA (International Federation of Library Associations). 1996. General Guidelines for the Safeguarding of the documentary heritage. S. Foster, Jan Lyall,
  Duncan Marshall and Roslyn Russel (eds.). UNESCO, Paris.
  IFLA. 2003. A Blue Shield for the Protection of our Endangered Cultural Heritage. C. Koch (ed.). Proceedings of the Open Session co-organized by PAC
  Core Activity and the Section on National Libraries, International Preservation Issues (IPI) n. 4. Available at: http://archive.ifla.org/VI/4/news/ipi4-e.pdf.
  ICCROM. 2012. Protecting Cultural Heritage in Times of Conflict. Contributions from the participants of the International course on First Aid to Cultural
  Heritage in Times of Conflict. S. Lambert, C. Rockwell (eds.). Rome. Available at: http://www.iccrom.org/ifrcdn/pdf/ICCROM_18_ProtectingHeritage-
  Conflict_en.pdf
  ICOM. 2004. Cultural Heritage Disaster Preparedness and Response. C. Menegazzi (ed.) International Symposium Proceedings, Museum Emergency
  Programme. Available at: http://archives.icom.museum/disaster_preparedness_book/index.html.
  IFLA Principles for the Care and Handling of Library Material. E.P. Adcock, M.-T. Varlamoff and V. Kremp (eds.). International Preservation Issues (IPI) n.
  1. Available at: http://archive.ifla.org/VI/4/news/pchlm.pdf.
  IFLA. 2005. Rare Books and Manuscripts Section: Operationalization of the UNESCO Memory of the World Register criteria, Den Haag.
  King, J., G. Wijesuriya and J. Copithorne. 2006. Integrating traditional knowledge systems and concern for cultural and natural heritage into risk man-
  agement strategies. Proceedings from the special session organized by ICCROM and the World Heritage Centre for the International Disaster Reduction
  Conference (IDRC) Davos, Available at: http://whc.unesco.org/uploads/events/documents/event-538-1.pdf.
  IFLA. 2006a. Disaster Preparedness and Planning. J. Mcilwaine (ed.) IPI n. 6, the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA)
  Core Activity on Preservation and Conservation (PAC), Paris. Available at: http://archive.ifla.org/VI/4/news/ipi6-en.pdf.

  IFLA. 2006b. Proceedings of the International Symposium The 3-D’s of Preservation Disasters, Displays, Digitization. C. Koch (ed.) IPI n. 7, the Interna-
  tional Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) Core Activity on Preservation and Conservation (PAC), Paris. Available at: http://archive.
  ifla.org/VI/4/news/ipi7-en.pdf.
  Kamara, J. 2005. Indigenous Knowledge in Natural Disaster Reduction in Africa. The Environment Times. Available at: http://www.grida.no/publica-
  tions/et/ep3/page/2608.aspx.
  Pichard, P. 1984. Emergency Measures and Damage Assessment After an Earthquake. Studies and Documents on the Cultural Heritage; 6. UNESCO,
  Paris.
  Roosa, M. 2002. Care, Handling, and Storage of Photographs, Library of Congress, Revised and updated by Andrew Robb, International Preservation
  Issues (IPI) n. 5, 19 pp. Available at: http://archive.ifla.org/VI/4/news/ipi5-e.pdf.
  Stovel, H. 1998. Management Guidelines for Risk Preparedness for World Cultural Heritage. UNESCO-ICOMOS-ICCROM, Rome. Available at: http://
  www.iccrom.org/ifrcdn/pdf/ICCROM_17_RiskPreparedness_en.pdf.
  Swift, F. 2001. Museum Management, Part 5: Planning for Emergencies. Museum Practice 18 (Vol. 6/3), The Museums Association, London, pp. 41-43.
  UNESCO. 1997. Kobe -Tokyo Declaration on Risk preparedness for Cultural Heritage, Kobe/Tokyo International Symposium on Risk Preparedness for
  Cultural Properties. Paris.
  UNESCO. 2007. Issues Related to the State of Conservation of World Heritage Properties: Strategy for Reducing Risks from Disasters at World Heritage
  Properties, Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage. World Heritage Committee, Thirty-first Session, Christ-
  church, New Zealand. Available at: http://whc.unesco.org/archive/2007/whc07-31com-72e.pdf)
  UNESCO, ICCROM, and Agency for Cultural Affairs of Japan. 2005. Kobe Report draft, Report of Session 3.3, Thematic Cluster 3. Cultural Heritage
  Risk Management. World Conference on Disaster Reduction, Hyogo, Available at: http://www.unisdr.org/wcdr/thematic-sessions/thematic-reports/
  report-session-3-3.pdf
  UNDP Oslo Governance Centre/UNIFEM. 2009. A User’s Guide to Measuring Gender-Sensitive Basic Service Delivery. Available at http://www.unifem.
  org/materials/item_detaile34f.html.
  World Bank. 2010. Safer Homes, Stronger Communities – Handbook for Reconstructing after Natural Disasters: Chapter 11: Cultural Heritage Conserva-
  tion. Available at: ihttps://www.gfdrr.org/sites/gfdrr.org/files/SaferHomesStrongerCommunites.pdf


29 | CULTURE
  UNESCO, ICCROM, ICOMOS and IUCN 2010. Managing Disaster Risks for World Heritage. UNESCO, Paris Available at: http://whc.unesco.org/en/activ-
  ities/630.
  van der Howeven, H., and J. van Albada. 1996. Lost Memory – Libraries and Archives Destroyed in the Twentieth Century. IFLA and ICA. UNESCO,
  Paris.
  Vecvagars, K. 2006. Valuating Damage and Losses in Cultural Assets after a Disaster: Concept Paper and Research Options. Estudios y perspectivas
  (56), CEPAL, Mexico. Available at: http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/8/26728/L731.pdf.

  UNESCO PORTAL RESOURCES:
  http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/themes/emergency-situations/
  UNESCO, Intersectoral Platform on Small Island Developing States “Natural and Environmental Disasters: UNESCO’s Role and Contribution”
  (http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=31605&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html)
  UNESCO: Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage. Adopted by the General Conference at its seventeenth
  session. Paris, 16 November 1972 (http://whc.unesco.org/en/convention/)
  UNESCO: Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention. Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection of the
  World Cultural and Natural Heritage
  (http://whc.unesco.org/archive/opguide13-en.pdf)
  UNESCO: Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, 1970
  (http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=13039&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html)
  UNESCO: Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage, Paris, 2001
  (http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=13520&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html)
  UNESCO: Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage , Paris, 2003
  (http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=17716&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html)
  UNESCO: Operational Directives for the Implementation of the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage
  (http://www.unesco.org/culture/ich/doc/src/ICH-Operational_Directives-4.GA-EN.doc)
  UNESCO: Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, Paris, 2005
  (http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001429/142919e.pdf)
  UNESCO: Cultural Heritage Protection Handbook Series, UNESCO Paris (ENG/FR/RUS/SP/AR, + several local languages): n. 1 (Security at museums,
  2006), n. 2 (Care and handling of manuscripts, 2006), n. 3 (Documentation of artefacts’ collections, 2009), n. 4 (Disaster risk management for muse-
  ums, 2009), n. 5 (Handling of collection in storage, 2010)
  (http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/themes/museums/movable-heritage-outreach-programme/)
  Museums: Teamwork for Integrated Emergency Management (TIEM) Programme http://portal.unesco.org/culture/en/ev.php-URL_ID=40048&URL_
  DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html)
  UNESCO/ICOM Museum Management Manual and Trainer’s Manual, with an Evaluation Questionnaire, ENG/FR/SP/RUS/CH/ARB
  (http://portal.unesco.org/culture/en/ev.php-URL_ID=35511&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html)
  UNESCO/ICCROM Tools For Preventive Conservation in Museums: (http://portal.unesco.org/culture/en/ev.php-URL_ID=40039&URL_DO=DO_TOP-
  IC&URL_SECTION=201.html)
  Other internet resources:
  MDG-F Culture and Development: A Closer Look
  (http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/achieving-the-millennium-development-goals/mdg-f-culture-and-development/mdg-f-culture-and-devel1op-
  ment-a-closer-look/)

  MUSEUMS EMERGENCY PROGRAMME
  (http://icom.museum/what-we-do/programmes/museums-emergency-programme.html)
  MEP-Museum Emergency Preparedness: for Web Sites Emergency Preparedness and Response (http://archives.icom.museum/disaster_preparedness_
  book/resources/websites.pdf)
  IFLA Core Activity on Preservation and Conservation (PAC)
  (http://www.ifla.org/pac)




30 | CULTURE
  ANNEXES
  RECOMMENDED PRACTICAL METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH AND TOOLS:
  ASSESSMENT STAGES
  Timing the assessment is essential to prevent the further deterioration of damaged tangible and living heritage.
  The assessment should start with a rapid survey to help gauge the extent and nature of the disaster impact on
  culture, followed by a more in-depth exercise to define recovery needs in greater detail.

  RAPID SURVEY
  A rapid survey should be carried out within four weeks of the disaster and last no more than one week. It should
  be carried out by three to four staff members and involve meeting the authorities concerned (local, district,
  national) in order to identify FPs in the field (contact persons) and the main resources available that can be mo-
  bilized. These resources include: human capacity such as e.g. fire brigade and the police: infrastructure capacity
  such as buildings to secure cultural properties; means of transport to evacuate fragile properties/manuscripts
  from endangered buildings, etc.; and the specific expert profiles required for the full assessment, and possibly to
  quantify an initial evaluation of damage and losses in the Culture Sector. It should provide clear terms of refer-
  ence for carrying out the PDNA and identify the most urgent interventions.

  FULL ASSESSMENT
  This should be completed within a three-week time frame by a small team of experienced professionals. It serves
  to complete the damage and loss evaluation carried out in the rapid survey, update resources available and
  needs, formulate priorities of cultural heritage issues, provide baseline data to be used in the monitoring and
  evaluation of cultural heritage-related interventions, and provide inputs for early recovery planning. It should
  include a plan of action validated by the country’s reference ministry (e.g. ministry of culture) and other pertinent
  ministries (tourism, industry, etc.), and a quantified budget. Figures should be justifiable as far as possible. The
  assessment should look at affected areas, but should also consider areas that could be further affected, depend-
  ing on the nature of the catastrophe. This latter consideration can be helpful in developing a Risk Preparedness
  Plan and assembling, if lacking, reliable baseline information.

  PREPARING THE ASSESSMENT
  Four to five days should be dedicated to gathering and analysing background materials from diverse sources. This
  will help to save time on the ground during the assessment and to identify the most pertinent fields of culture
  that need to be assessed with priority (selected geographical and/or thematic areas). It will also help formulate
  questions to guide primary data collection and to define target profiles, the sampling size and the minimum
  number of informants required per topic or geographical area. This latter will contribute towards achieving sub-
  stantive and reliable results. Moreover the gathering and analysis of background materials will also serve to verify
  available baseline information and possibly to make an initial comparison of existing data. This exercise can be
  useful especially when resources are insufficient to cover the affected areas. Secondary data collection could be
  collected from: (i) locally available resources; (ii) local knowledge (existing databases in the country); and (iii) syn-
  ergies and coping mechanisms (data available from national and international institutions, scientific and cultural
  networks, cultural associations, media).

  COLLECTING FIELD DATA
  If it is not possible to carry out rapid pre-assessment surveys, the assessment should combine the full assessment
  with in-depth analysis of selected representative areas. Results thus generated could then be extrapolated to the
  totality of the affected region. Data related to the affected population should be disaggregated by sex and age
  to the extent possible. Annex 10.4 draws together some key sample questions that the post-disaster Culture


31 | CULTURE
  Needs Assessment Team should strive to answer, together with recommended indicators. The Assessment Team
  should rely on the gathering of primary data obtained through visual inspections (including flyover and satellite
  imagery, etc.) and key informant surveys (household surveys, first-hand knowledge) in order to validate available
  secondary data and further integrate them when needed. Random or purposive interviews could be organized
  when the affected area/population is particularly vast or inaccessible. Interviews with both female and male
  representatives of the affected communities should be undertaken in order to ensure that women’s and men’
  concerns are equitably represented and inform the gender analysis. Interviews and consultations should take
  place in a safe environment that protects the anonymity and privacy of informants.

  If primary data gathering is constrained by the inaccessibility of affected/vulnerable areas, the Assessment Team
  should rely on secondary data. Ideally, it should inspect at least three representative affected areas per culture
  field. Thematic maps for cultural resources (i.e. archaeological sites), state GIS inventories, (United Nations Opera-
  tional Satellite Applications Programme (UNOSAT) mapping tools and satellite images (Google Earth) for large ar-
  eas, onsite, aerial or satellite photographs or films could render reasonably accurate definitions of the state of the
  built heritage, natural protected areas and other cultural assets before and after the disaster occurred. Gathering
  this information should allow the culture specialist to undertake a comprehensive qualitative and quantitative
  study, and enable further monitoring of large-scale site and natural resources, especially when it proves difficult
  to provide land transport and patrols (lack of vehicles and communication systems, roads closed, etc.).In addition,
  this phase should identify areas requiring in-depth analysis and research.

  DESK REVIEW: SUMMING UP AND FORMULATING RESULTS
  Once the field assessment has been completed, data should be compared to identify affected areas and con-
  texts where immediate intervention is needed or where damage is quickly reparable, and to assess the related
  projected risks. All these elements should enable the desk review to evaluate damage and losses, and capacity
  and prioritize subsequent needs. The assessor might identify heritage not yet listed that requires attention and
  protection (tangible and intangible) on the national/local inventories or on international lists of heritage in danger
  (UNESCO, ICOMOS, etc.). These cases should be highlighted to the relevant authorities.

  Table 1 Summary of Overall Assessment Process
   Steps            Targets                                                                                      Timeframe
   Rapid survey     Elaborating the terms of reference for the PDNA (including the identification of the         3-5 days
                    specific expert profiles required for the on-site assessment)
   3-4 staff
                    Establishing local focal points (FPs) for geographical areas or themes

   Preparatory      Gathering and analysing background material available for an initial mapping                 Up to 4-5 days
   desk study       Identifying culture fields that are more pertinent to the situation, prioritizing assess-    It could be undertak-
   1-2 back-stop-   ments (selected geographical and/or thematic areas)                                          en concurrently with
   ping staff                                                                                                    the rapid survey
                    Checking available baseline data and possibly making an initial comparison of data

   Field assess-    Elaborating the initial Recovery Action Plan                                                 Up to 15 days, ac-
   ment                                                                                                          cording to the magni-
                    Gathering primary data and conducting interviews, testing and verifying secondary
                                                                                                                 tude of the disaster’s
   4-5 staff mem-   data previously collected
                                                                                                                 effects and scope
   bers             Assessing the response capacities of the ministry of culture and other pertinent minis-
                    tries and resource persons on the ground
                    Assessing the capacity of cultural institutions to actively participate in the reconstruc-
                    tion of the country
                    Assessing damage and losses in the affected and vulnerable cultural fields
                    Identifying prevailing risks and threats
                    Identifying sub-fields/themes requiring in-depth analysis and research
   Desk Review      Prioritizing needs (early recovery, recovery), defining areas of action, targets, indica-    Up to 6 days
                    tors, Early Recovery Action Plan
   Assessment
   Team             Damage and losses results, and RF initial formulation

32 | CULTURE
  GENDER AND DISAGGREGATED DATA
  The PDNA Team should ensure that throughout the entire assessment process, different voices – in terms of eth-
  nicity, gender, age, profession, state, religion – are heard, consulting different segments of the affected society
  and taking into account the non-homogeneous socio-cultural background of the affected population (religious,
  ethnic composition, stable or migrating groups, etc.). The definition of age categories of respondents and that
  of disadvantaged or marginalized groups should be consistent with those used by other sectors carrying out
  separate PDNAs, in order to allow for easy compilation, exchange and interpretation of intersectoral data.

  SUMMARY OF TYPICAL PHYSICAL ASSETS, INFRASTRUCTURE AND HUMAN RESOURCE
  COMPONENTS IN CULTURE SECTOR
  The following table is designed to help PDNA team members to develop a quick understanding of the scope of
  elements that may require attention. These include both the physical assets and infrastructure and the associated
  human resources. The latter should be identified by consulting equally with women and men of the affected
  population and the technical experts. The human resources, practitioners and users identified should be disag-
  gregated by sex and age.

  Table 2 Physical Assets, Infrastructure and Human Resource Components in Culture sector
   Governance Processes                      Assets and Infrastructure                            Personnel, Practitioners and Users
                                                                                                  Involved
   Adherence to the legal framework, Office infrastructure and refurbishing general               Ministerial bodies, at central, regional and
   policies and overall management   management and administration equipment                      local level (management staff of directorates/
   of the sector                     (e.g. computers)                                             administrative staff/general services); their
                                                                                                  families.
                                             Transportation and communication equip-
                                             ment

   Cultural Domain                         Assets and Infrastructure                   Personnel, Practitioners and Users Involved
   1. Built heritage and cultural and      Historic districts:                         Maintenance and conservation staff operating often
   natural sites, which can range                                                      from a centralized conservation centre (cultural institu-
                                           Infrastructure/refurbishing
   from a coherent group of struc-                                                     tion)
   tures (e.g. historic districts, rural   Equipment
   and urban settlements) to a sin-        Historic buildings, modern and con-         Human resources, sometimes limited/inexistent if private
   gle building or site (archaeolog-       temporary architecture:                     property and use: management staff/administrative
   ical, monuments, modern and                                                         staff/general services (cleaning and security)
   contemporary masterpieces) and          Infrastructure/refurbishing
   infrastructure (bridge, port fa-                                                    Maintenance and conservation staff operating often
                                           equipment components (security,
   cilities) imbued with recognized                                                    from a centralized conservation centre (cultural institu-
                                           fire-control, temperature control,
   cultural values (by local, national                                                 tion)/ministerial branches
                                           air-conditioning system, etc.)
   or international mechanisms). It
   also includes natural protected         Archaeological sites, historical            Human resources (at least management staff/admin-
   areas of particular aesthetic and       gardens                                     istrative staff/general services delivery staff (including
   biodiversity                                                                        cleaning), visit (guides) and security (guards) related staff
                                    Infrastructure/refurbishing
   significance, such as regional                                                      Maintenance and conservation staff (which may refer
                                    Equipment (site interpretation, pre-
   and national natural parks and                                                      only to a central entity and not be site-specific)
                                    sentation, information centres and
   their management infrastructure, facilities, visitor services)                      Communities living within and round the protected
   zoos, etc.                                                                          area, associations of ‘site friends’, volunteer networks
                                    Infrastructure, buildings
                                                                                       Specific natural resources specialized staff (i.e. moni-
                                           Equipment/refurbishing (site inter-
                                                                                       toring) (which may refer to a central entity and not be
                                           pretation, presentation, information
                                                                                       site-specific)
                                           centres and facilities, visitor services)
                                                                                       Park rangers
                                           For zoos – ongoing care of animals
                                                                                       Communities living within and round the protected
                                                                                       area, associations of park, zoo supporters, geological
                                                                                       associations, volunteer networks


   2. Moveable cultural properties         Museums and premises that host              Specialized human resources mainly operating from a
   and collections                         public and private collection.              centralized conservation/training centre


33 | CULTURE
   Cultural Domain                      Assets and Infrastructure                 Personnel, Practitioners and Users Involved
   3. Intangible cultural heritage      Cultural, religious and spiritual         Communities and practitioners
   recognized by the communities        places:                               Human resources ( religious/services, etc.)
   and practitioners, including         Infrastructure/refurbishing (sometime Associations, volunteer services and religious practi-
   traditional knowledge systems/       modest: open air space, etc.)
   practices: the aspects of cultural                                         tioners
   manifestations made vulnerable       Stadium, theatres, etc.               Logistics personnel
   by the disaster                      Related equipment, tools and              Users and cultural practitioners and producers, usually
                                        materials                                 an important component
                                        Infrastructure/refurbishment (some-
                                        times modest)
                                        Equipment (sometimes modest)
   4. Repositories of culture, such     Infrastructure/refurbishing of premis-    Management staff/administrative staff/general services
   as museums, libraries and            es and auxiliary installations (labora-   staff
   archives, cultural institutions,     tories, storerooms, deposits, etc.)       Specialized personnel for specific functions (conser-
   vocational training structures,      Consistent component of specialized       vation, documentation, marketing, promotional and
   zoological/botanical gardens         equipment for labs (conservation,         educational activities, etc.)
   with their auxiliary installations   diagnosis, documentation, photos),
   (specialized laboratories, store-                                              Teachers and apprentices
                                        including temperature control, ap-
   rooms, etc.).                        propriate lighting system, etc.           Volunteers and ‘Friends of Museums’ associations
   5.Cultural goods industry (formal    Infrastructure/refurbishing (some-        Business owners/personnel (usually households and
   and informal): production,           times modest, mainly at the               SMEs)
   distribution and sale of music,      household level), production studios,     Users, cultural practitioners and producers
   crafts, audio-visual products,       printing establishments
   books, etc.                          Equipment
                                        Distribution infrastructure/
                                        warehouses

  HYPOTHETICAL CASE STUDY ILLUSTRATING HOW POST-DISASTER INTERVENTIONS MAY
  BENEFIT FROM A SOCIO-CULTURAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT IN PLANNING PHASES
  The hypothetical case study below relates to a potential intervention in the field of culture and crafts . However,
  the considerations raised in this case study are illustrative of the many challenges and pitfalls involved in planning
  post-disaster interventions, not only in the culture sector, but also in other sectors. The purpose of this case study
  is to convey to those carrying out PDNA and those planning for post-disaster interventions, the importance of
  taking full account of the socio-cultural context in which their work is taking place. This will increase efficiencies
  and the likelihood of longer-term sustainability of their efforts.

  CATASTROPHIC FLOOD IN PATRIMONIA
  A thousand-year flood has inundated large parts of the territory of the Republic of Patrimonia. Some 60 percent
  of the region’s farmland has been underwater for six weeks, and with it, the homes of 70 percent of the Repub-
  lic’s population. Planning is underway to resettle large numbers of the flood-displaced population into temporary
  camps, with the expectation that it will take from 24 to 36 months to replace a substantial part of the housing
  stock and allow people to return to their ancestral villages. A PDNA field team is assessing possibilities for income
  generation and social recovery during the anticipated displacement period of up to three years. One of the three
  large ethnic groups that makes up Patrimonia’s population, the Broder people, is well-known for its intricate
  embroidery skills, and at the suggestion of the Minister of Industry (herself a native of the region and a member
  of the Broder ethnicity), the PDNA team is exploring whether this traditional handicraft might appropriately be
  the subject of development and recovery efforts. What questions could the PDNA team be asking?

            •	 Are the skills of embroidery in the Broder tradition, actively practised and transmitted? Are the
               skills evenly distributed among different age cohorts or practised more by women or men of a
               certain generation, and if so, which? What are the contexts within which transmission takes place



34 | CULTURE
               (mother/father to girl/boy child? Grandmother/father to girl/boy grandchild? Within kin groups?) Or
               is there institutionalized transmission in schools, workshops or other settings?

           •	 What are the other gender dimensions of Broder embroidery? Is it practised by men, women
              or both? Does one gender take responsibility for certain aspects (harvesting, spinning, dying,
              weaving, embroidering)? Does one gender take responsibility for purchasing materials and selling
              finished goods?

           •	 Are Broder embroideries bought and sold through commercial channels, bartered, gifted or con-
              veyed through non-monetary exchanges? Are there wholesalers, entrepreneurs, pieceworkers, or
              other specialized roles within the division of labour? Are these gender-stratified, age-stratified or
              ethnicity-stratified? Is everything related to producing embroideries self-sufficient within the com-
              munity or are materials and tools, etc. brought in from outside? Has embroidery production been
              disrupted and is there a need for recovery? Who controls/owns the resources needed for producing
              embroidery? Have the roles and time-use patterns of women and men changed due to the flood?

           •	 If Broder embroideries have been a source of family income, who controls the household econ-
              omy? Are embroiderers the primary wage-earners, or supplementary wage-earners? How does
              the income from embroidery compare to other sources of income (farming, fishing, industry,
              professions)? If embroidery becomes the subject of economic intensification, how would it affect
              time-patterns and resources of women, men, girls and boys of all ages?

           •	 Has there been a value-chain analysis of Broder embroidery? What is the potential for new mar-
              kets? What is the potential for new products? To what extent are the embroidery skills of the
              Broder people appropriate to intensify production?

           •	 When is Broder embroidery produced (seasonally, year-round, by day or by night, during leisure
              time or during working hours)? Where is Broder embroidery produced (at home, in the field be-
              tween agricultural tasks, in a workshop, etc.)?

           •	 In the displacement camp setting, how could embroidery provide meaningful activity for a part of
              the flood survivors, and how could it provide them a sense of fulfilment and contribute to psycho-
              logical wellness?

           •	 Within the multicultural environment of Patrimonia, do other ethnic groups produce similar needle-
              work skills? Who? Do people of other ethnic groups acquire and use Broder embroideries? Who?
              Are there traditional trade and exchange relations in which Broder embroideries are provided to
              other ethnic groups? Can people of other ethnic groups learn Broder embroidery and produce it
              without creating cultural tensions or conflict?

           •	 Are there one or more inventories of the intangible cultural heritage of Patrimonia? Is Broder em-
              broidery already included in such inventories? Are there specialized inventories of Broder heritage
              or of needle crafts throughout Patrimonia? Are there archives or museum collections (in Patrimonia
              or abroad) in which historical examples of Broder embroideries can be studied and their techniques
              and motifs documented? Any useful supports to help revitalize the transmission?

           •	 Does the domestic law of Patrimonia provide intellectual property (IP) protection for embroidery
              motifs, patterns, or techniques? Have they already been registered within the IP system? If so, will
              this create obstacles to or cause any objections to the planned intensification of production? If not,
              are IP protections needed to reduce the likelihood of misappropriation?

35 | CULTURE
           •	 If only Broder can produce their particular style of embroidery, are there other handicrafts among
              other ethnic groups that could be the subject of development or recovery interventions, so that
              social or cultural inequality is not created or aggravated?

           •	 Are there health or safety considerations (dyestuffs, working conditions)? Are there environmental
              issues with regard to access to resources (fibres, dyestuffs, etc.)? Are there sensitivities with regard
              to child labour?




36 | CULTURE
  EXAMPLES OF QUESTIONS/INDICATORS THAT CAN BE USED IN THE ASSESSMENT
  When formulating questions, prior thought should be given to how the data will be used.

  Table 3. Indicators for Assessment
           Themes                                                     Assessment Questions                            Respondent                                                        Poten-
                                                                                                                                                                                        tial In-
                                                                                                                                                                                        dicators
                                                                                                                                                                                        and
                                                                                                                                                                                        Steps
           CORE THEMES
                                                                      •	   Mission and function of the assessed       Directors/             •	   % of existing cultural institutions
                                                                           institution/context                        managers of                 affected by the disaster and their
                                                                                                                      institutions, built         relative significance in local/na-
                                                                                                                      heritage, archae-           tional/global terms
                                                                                                                      ological sites,        •	   Proportion of evident structural
   Direct Physical Damage to Institutions, Cultural Site Structures




                                                                                                                      natural parks,              and non-structural damage, loss-
                                                                                                                      gardens                     es (from visual assessment)
                                                                      •	   State of the structural and non-structur- Owner(s) of             •	   Structural damages ratio (pre- and
                                                                           al damage to infrastructure, refurbish-   private dwellings/           post-crisis)
                                                                           ment, equipment                           director or man-
                                                                                                                     agers of institu-       •	   % of equipment no longer func-
                                                                                                                     tions and built              tioning/lost
                                                                                                                     heritage                •	   Type of equipment lost/damaged.
                                                                      •	   Personnel (#, qualification, sex)          Directors/manag-
                                                                                                                      ers of institutions,
                                                                                                                      archaeological
                                                                      •	   Eventual relation between central
                                                                                                                      sites, natural
                                                                           institution and periphery affiliation in
                                                                                                                      parks, gardens
                                                                           different districts
                                                                                                                                             -Verify carrying capacity and stability
                                                                      •	   Shortcomings, deficiencies of the insti-   Directors of insti-
                                                                                                                                             of structural systems, identifying (rec-
                                                                           tution/building already present before     tutions,
                                                                                                                                             ommended tool: ICOMOS assessment
                                                                           the disaster                               archaeological
                                                                                                                                             structural capacity sheet):
                                                                                                                      sites, natural
                                                                      •	   Deficiencies/shortcomings aggravated/                             -parts that are in urgent need of sup-
                                                                                                                      parks, gardens,
                                                                           caused by the crisis                                              ports to stop their collapse (emergency
                                                                                                                      private owner(s)
                                                                      •	   National and international projects        of buildings, spe-     shoring and propping)
                                                                           interrupted by the crisis                  cialized staff         -personnel available to carry out their
                                                                      •	   Actions and projects which need to be                             tasks, additional assistance needed
                                                                           developed in response to the current
                                                                           situation
                                                                                                                                             Requirements/needs in terms of:
                                                                      •	   Priorities in the needs ranking
                                                                                                                                             -appropriate supplies
                                                                                                                                             -equipment
                                                                                                                                             -technical assistance, immediate
                                                                                                                                             training.




37 | CULTURE
  Table 4: Assessment per Field/Theme
     Theme                             Assessment Questions                                Respondent        Potential Indicators and Steps

     CORE THEMES
                                       •	   Are there policies and plans in place          Central and       •	   % of affected districts with emergency
                                            concerning the cultural heritage in            local authorities      preparedness plans in place that cover
                                            emergencies?                                                          culture
                                       •	   Were local policy-makers and the commu-
                                            nity as a whole made more aware of the
   Government capacity, coordination




                                            potential role of the cultural heritage, in-
                                            tangible heritage, and cultural and creative
                                            industries in post-disaster situations?
         and national policies




                                       •	   What types and level of support are need-      District, local   •	   Effectiveness of local and regional
                                            ed for local authorities to be able to best    authorities            government bodies and coordination
                                            respond to identified culture sector needs?
                                                                                           (F/M)



                                       •	   How can cultural heritage international     Central and       •	      Quality of the intervention and coordina-
                                            and national organizations (e.g. United     local authorities         tion among cultural heritage stakeholders
                                            Nations Economic Social Cultural Organisa- (F/M)                      and associations involved in emergency
                                            tion UNESCO), institutions and associations                           plans
                                            (e.g. International Centre for the study
                                            of the Preservation and Restoration of
                                            Cultural Property (ICCROM), International
                                            Council on Monuments and Sites (ICO-
                                            MOS), ICA, IFLA) cope?
                                       •	   What community-based efforts already           Community         •	   % of districts in the affected area
                                            under way can be built upon during the         leaders and            with active community-based efforts
                                            culture sector emergency response?             members (F/M)          undertaken
   Community involvement




                                       •	   What resources to support equal participa-     Community         •	   Types, amount of resources available
                                            tion of women and men are available and        leaders and            and # of initiatives begun by community
                                            how can additional resources be mobi-          members                members to mobilize assistance/rescue
                                            lized?                                         (F/M)/local au-        threatened cultural heritage, as well as to
                                                                                           thorities (F/M)        prevent/support the fight against looting




                                       •	   Are marginalized or disadvantaged groups       Community         •	   % of youth, women, others from key
                                            included and consulted in community            leaders and            identified marginalized or disadvantaged
                                            efforts? How are they given a voice?           members (F/M)          groups involved and actively participating
                                                                                                             •	   Use of community, social media or other
                                                                                                                  appropriate channel of communication
                                                                                                                  identified by the community to express
                                                                                                                  marginalized voices




38 | CULTURE
   Knowledge based                          •	   Is there a comprehensive database for the       Central and        •	   # of directorates and public using the
    and information                              culture sector/portal?                          local authori-          national database and portal
                                                                                                 ties/institution
                                            •	   If yes, at which level is the database/portal                      •	   # of users accessing the database/portal,
                                                                                                 directors
        sharing
                                                 accessible to users?                                                    representing different stakeholders and at
                                                                                                                         different level (central, regional, district,
                                            •	   How frequently are statistics for culture
                                                                                                                         etc.)
                                                 updated?                                                           •	   Quantitative baseline data
                                                                                                                         generated

                                            •	   Are adequate risk management plans de-        Central and lo-
                                                 vised and in place for the cultural heritage? cal authorities/
                                            •	   Are the staff and civil society persons con- site managers
                                                 cerned (e.g. occupants and users) familiar
                                                 and comfortable with emergency and risk
                                                 management plans?
                                            •	   Have the relevant officials been involved
                                                 and familiar with the set emergency plans?


                                            •	   Do other areas have a Disaster Risk                                Yes/no, describe how
                                                 Preparedness (DRP) Plan? Is it effectively
                                                 tested /functioning?
                                                                                                                    •	   # of risk management plans developed
                                                                                                                         for World Heritage Sites
   Disaster Risk Preparedness (DRP) Plans




                                            •	   In cultural institutions and sites, have                           •	    % of potential threatened sites/institu-
                                                 disaster response and/or risk prevention                                tions with DRP in place
                                                 officers been appointed from the institu-
                                                 tions’ staff?
                                            •	   Have places in which emergency conserva-
                                                 tion treatment of collections can be carried
                                                 out?


                                            •	   Have lists of contact persons, external                            •	   Availability of guidelines and other rele-
                                                 staff, services providers, etc. been drawn                              vant materials to help site managers and
                                                 up?                                                                     others design risk preparedness strategies
                                                                                                                         for the cultural heritage
                                            •	   Are these lists readily accessible? Where
                                                 are they kept?                                                     •	   # of civil society associations established
                                                                                                                         to support rescue operations for the cul-
                                            •	   For institutions, have back-up copies data
                                                                                                                         tural heritage in the event of a disaster
                                                 been secured and made available?
                                                                                                                    •	   Effectiveness of the DPR plans
                                                                                                                    •	   Yes/no
                                            •	   Is there traditional knowledge which pro-       Idem
                                                 motes disaster resilience/prevention/alerts                        •	   Names of the officers
                                                 for future disasters?                                              •	   Yes/no, list of places (if possible)
                                                                                                                    •	   Yes/no, location of list of contacts and
                                                                                                                         back-up copies




                                            •	 Is training available for staff/civil society     Central and        •	   Recognition of traditional knowledge in
                                                 organizations and does it correspond to         local authori-          DRP
                                                 prioritized needs? Who benefits from such       ties/community
                                                 training (F/M)?                                 leaders/site
                                                                                                 managers




39 | CULTURE
                                                •	   Is there a cultural police service in place?                        •	    % of officials, professional staff and civil
                                                     With which body do the police/army                                        society organization (F/M) trained on
                                                     currently cooperate in cordoning off cultur-                              crisis-related topics and risk management
                                                     al properties at risk of collapse?                                        at cultural sites/world heritage sites
                                                                                                                         •	    % of property occupants, users and the
                                                                                                                               concerned community in general involved
                                                                                                                               in planning for disaster risk reduction
                                                                                                                               plans


                                                                                                                         Please refer to tailored tools for specific fields,
                                                                                                                         for example:
                                                                                                                         -UNESCO/ICOM Museum Training Kit (Manual,
                                                                                                                         Trainer’s Manual and Needs Assessment
                                                                                                                         Sheet)
                                                                                                                         -UNESCO/ICCROM/ICOMOS/IUCN Resource
                                                                                                                         Manual, Managing Disaster Risks for World
                                                                                                                         Heritage 2010 (http://whc.unesco.org/en/activ-
                                                                                                                         ities/630)

                                                •	   How many people (officials, staff, users,    Central and           •	    Safety and coordination
                                                     etc.) were present at the time of the event? local author-
                                                                                                        ities           Government, cultural institutions, etc.
   Basic services, access and safety of staff




                                                •	   In ministerial offices/cultural institutions are                   •	    # of persons (F/M), staff, personnel injured
                                                     essential services functioning (electricity,
                                                     water)? How does it compare with the
                                                     pre-disaster situation?
                                                •	   Can staff safely reach the institutions/           Central and     •	    # of staff, personnel (F/M) injured
                                                     museums/working spaces to perform their            local author-
                                                     tasks?                                             ities           •	    Reduction in institutions’ operating hours
                                                •	   Which cultural heritage protection services        Institution     •	    Estimated attendance rate (F/M/total)
                                                     are now available? Do they sufficiently            directors and
                                                                                                                        •	    Report of personnel (F/M) who feel safe
                                                     cover all relevant fields? How does this
                                                                                                        staff (F/M)           travelling to and from working places in
                                                     compare to what existed before the crisis?                               the affected areas
                                                •	   Is acceptable access ensured to cultural
                                                     sites/ institutions, centres?
                                                •	                                               Central and
                                                     Do digital/paper inventories (still) exist for                     •	    % of existing cultural institutions able to
                                                     archives and libraries?                     local author-                continuing providing (basic) services
                                                                                                 ities/
                                                •	   Are documents/books still on shelves (orig-
                                                                                                 institution
                                                     inal location as per the inventories?)
                                                                                                 directors
                                                •	   May the above be used to ascertain
                                                     whether documents, manuscripts, etc. are
                                                     dispersed/lost?




40 | CULTURE
                            •	   Is security ensured? Since the disaster                   •	   Documentation of tangible heritage
                                 occurred, has there been any theft and
                                 plundering and what has been the target?
                                 How does this compare with the pre-disas-
                                 ter situation?
                            •	   Is there a complete inventory of the collec-              •	   % of secured properties. Targets: furnish-
                                 tions?                                                         ing & equipment, supplies (electrical plugs,
                                                                                                etc.)/hosted inventories (books, manu-
                                                                                                scripts, documents, etc.)
                            •	   Are the premises regularly inspected?                     •	   Yes/no (documentation of tangible cultural
                                                                                                heritage)

                            •	   Does the building ensure present conserva-                •	   Yes/no [relevance for disaster risk pre-
                                 tion/protection for the hosted collections                     paredness]
                                 or there is a need to move them to a       Institution
   Archives and libraries




                                 temporary safe location/storage?           director and
                                                                            staff
                            •	   Are there manuscripts/specific documents/                 •	   Protection of collections and properties
                                 books which require particular conserva-
                                 tion measures? Are these measures still
                                 ensured and were they provided before
                                 the disaster?
                            •	   Current needs
                            •	   Are archives sufficiently organized to                    •	   Conservation of manuscripts, documents
                                 ensure the safeguarding, proper protection
                                 and public accessibility of the affected
                                 population’s collective memory ?
                                                                                           •	   Needs in terms of:
                                                                                           -appropriate supplies, equipment, appropriate
                                                                                           treatments, restoration laboratories, storage
                                                                                           conditions for archives, libraries
                            •	   Are libraries sufficient in size and number    Idem       •	   [Relevance for good governance and
                                 to meet the learning needs of the affected                     democracy]
                                 populations?
                            •	   Does the building ensure present conserva- Idem/users     •	   % of library/archive space (re)opened
                                 tion/protection for the hosted collections (students,          (pre-crisis compared to in/post-crisis)
                                 or there is a need to move them to a       citizens)      •	   [Relevance for non-formal education and
                                 temporary safe location/storage?                               education for all]




41 | CULTURE
                                       •	   Is security sufficiently ensured for    Institution direc-   •	   Protection of collections and properties
                                            artefacts? Has there been theft and     tor and staff
                                            plundering? How does it compare
                                            with the pre-disaster situation?

                                       •	   Are there any inventories/databases/    Institution direc-   •	   % of secured properties. Targets: furnishing
                                            information management systems for      tor and staff             and equipment, supplies (electrical plugs, etc.)/
                                            collections in place?                                             hosted inventories
                                       •	   Are collections fully inventoried?
                                       •	   How many artefacts, which types and                          •	   Documentation of tangible cultural heritage
                                            which conservation measures need                             •	   Collections fully inventoried/partially inventoried
                                            urgently to be ensured?
                                       •	   What are the conditions of store-
                                            rooms and in what condition were
                                            they before the disaster occurred?
                                       •	   Are there conservation laboratories                          •	   Conservation of cultural property
                                            to fulfil the museum’s requirements?                         •	   Needs in terms of:
                                            And compared with the pre-disaster
   Museums and cultural institutions




                                            situation?                                                    -appropriate supplies, equipment, treatments, res-
                                                                                                         toration laboratories, storage conditions for museum
                                                                                                         collections
                                       •	   From where has specialized equip-                            •	   Proportion of museum and cultural institution
                                            ment been procured?                                               furniture lost

                                       •	   Are the premises regularly inspected?                        •	   In-country availability

                                       •	   Do museums provide outreach activ-                           •	   Yes/no [Relevance for disaster risk prepared-
                                            ities for the general public, schools                             ness]
                                            and amateurs, links with the educa-
                                                                                                         •	   Yes/no
                                            tional system and on-site hands-on
                                            courses/experiences?                                         •	   Primary and secondary school/university
                                       •	   Are the following in place: voluntary                        •	   Programmes enhanced through partnerships/
                                            mechanisms, alliances, supporting                                 linkages with the education system
                                            mechanisms                                                   •	   Learning platform supporting the notion of
                                       •	   How can these efforts contribute                                  ‘life-long learning’
                                            to mobilizing support for urgent
                                            interventions and then returning to
                                            normalcy?
                                       •	   What have been the damages and                               For museums’ needs, please refer to the UNESCO/
                                            losses? Infrastructure/equipment and                         ICOM museum management evaluation question-
                                            essential material?                                          naire
                                                                                                         (http://portal.unesco.org/culture/en/ev.php-
                                                                                                         URL_ID=35511&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SEC-
                                                                                                         TION=201.html) covering:
                                                                                                         A. General Information; B. Governance; C. Govern-
                                                                                                         ing Body; D.Staff; E. Space Allocation; F. Safety and
                                                                                                         Security; G. Collections; H. Research; I. Preservation
                                                                                                         and Conservation; J. Public Relations and Marketing;
                                                                                                         K. Exhibitions; L. Programmes/Education; M. Publi-
                                                                                                         cations; N. Training Needs




42 | CULTURE
                            •	   What can be conserved of the au-           Institution direc-   •	   Proportion of evident structural and non-struc-
                                 thenticity of the heritage and what        tor and staff             tural damages, losses (from visual assessment)
                                 requires a new project intervention                             Identify: parts which are in urgent need of supports
                                 to ensure the compatible use of such                            to stop their collapse
                                 heritage?
                            •	   Is the property threatened by theft        Institution direc-   •	   Conservation and compatibility of use
                                 and plundering? How does it com-           tor and staff        •	   % of existing historical buildings requiring im-
   Built heritage (single




                                 pare with the pre-crisis situation?                                  mediate stabilization/preservation measures
       and clustered




                            •	 Are experienced and qualified Institution                         •	   Security
          heritage)




                                                                     director and
                               professionals available to carry staff
                               out urgent necessary repair, stabili-
                                 zation and conservation?
                            •	   What are the local skills available for
                                 conservation, restoration and new
                                 project intervention?
                            •	   Are the necessary conservation
                                 materials, equipment and products
                                 available?
                            •	   Does the protected area cover the          Specialized staff    •	   Availability of restoration material, labour, archi-
                                 actual scope of the site?                                            tects, structural engineers, specialists, etc.
                            •	   Has the full potential for research and    Site director/       •	   Integrity of cultural heritage sites
                                 on-site studies been determined?           specialized staff
                            •	   Among sites not directly affected,         Site director /      •	   Research
                                 which are inaccessible due to the          specialized staff
                                 disaster’s effects?
                            •	   Which sites could be further damaged
                                 by further effects of the disaster?
                            •	   Are there comprehensive plans (con-        Site Director /      •	   Accessibility of sites
                                 servation, management, marketing)          specialized staff    •	   Prevention
                                 for listed heritage sites?
   Archaeological sites




                            •	   Are they implemented?
                            •	   What is the general role of local com-     Site Director/       •	   Proportion of sites with comprehensive plans
                                 munities (F/M) in the management/          specialized staff         implemented
                                 presentation/maintenance plans?
                            •	   Is there a first-aid system in place for   Site manager/   •	        Role of communities in management, mainte-
                                 archaeological sites?                      community lead-           nance, monitoring systems
                                                                            er and members
                                                                            (F/M)
                            •	   Are there cases of illegal digging ac-     Site director/       •	   Role of preventive conservation
                                 tivities? How does this compare with       specialized staff
                                 the pre-disaster situation?
                            •	   What can be done to stop it?
                            •	   How vulnerable are sites to natural        Site director/     •	     % of illegal excavation reduced
                                 hazards?                                   specialized staff/ •	     Rescue excavation could be taken into consider-
                                                                            community lead-           ation for worse cases
                                                                            er and members
                                                                            (F/M)




43 | CULTURE
                       •	   Does the site management plan              Site manager/
                            effectively address the site’s critical    specialized staff
   Natural resources
                            issues?
                       •	   Are communities and users (F/M)            Site manager /
                            aware of the value and sustainable         specialized staff
                            use of such resources?
                       •	   What have been the effects of the          Site director/
                            disaster on the culture sector’s staff?    specialized staff/
                                                                       community lead-
                                                                       er and members
                                                                       (F/M
                       •	   Who is available to perform urgent                              •	   % of staff (F/M) affected by the disaster: dead,
                            priority tasks? (location qualification)                             missing, injured, displaced
                       •	   Are staff wages still paid as before                            •	   Estimated attendance of staff (F/M)
                            the disaster?
                       •	   Are staff receiving incentives from
                            other sources?
                       •	   In normal conditions, is on-job                                 •	   % of available qualified staff (based on national
                            training and continuing professional                                 standards)
   Staff of cultural




                            development available for staff and
     institutions




                                                                                            •	   Ratio of female to males in institutions manage-
                            does it cover priority needs?                                        ment
                       •	   What should it cover?                                           •	   % of staff receiving salaries from the govern-
                                                                                                 ment and/or incentives or support from the
                                                                                                 community or other sources
                       •	   What are the conditions of work for
                            the other cultural heritage personnel?
                       •	   Are administrators, guards, etc. still
                            available?
                       •	   Training needs? Priorities?
                       •	   Are there national/local inventories of
                            the intangible cultural heritage? What
                            is their coverage?




44 | CULTURE
                                                                       •	   In which cultural manifestations/           Central and local •	   Documentation of Intangible Cultural Heritage
                                                                            believes/ practices/expressions/knowl-      authorities/ com-      with the participation of the concerned com-
                                                                            edge/skills does your community             munity leader          munity (F/M)
                                                                            recognize fundamental shared values,        and members
                                                                            and which should be protected? How          (F/M)
   Intangible Heritage and Traditional Knowledge (such as oral



                                                                            does it compare with the pre-disaster
    rituals and festive events, knowledge and practices concerning
       traditions and expressions, performing arts,social practices,



                                                                            situation?
          nature and the universe, traditional craftsmanship)


                                                                       •	   What losses and damages in cultural
                                                                            values do the affected communities
                                                                            feel?
                                                                       •	   What are the conditions/organization- Community
                                                                            al requirements to allow people to     leader and
                                                                            continue holding and performing the members (F/M)
                                                                            relevant intangible cultural heritage
                                                                            expressions and manifestations (i.e.
                                                                            festivals, parades, etc.)? Which mate-
                                                                            rials/supports could be used to enable
                                                                            ICH manifestations and practices to
                                                                            be carried out replacing unavailable
                                                                            traditional materials?
                                                                       •	   Do you feel that community tradition-                         •	   % of interrupted activities
                                                                            al practices/beliefs have space enough                        Identify requirements
                                                                            to be expressed?
                                                                       •	   Are cultural traditional knowledge                            •	   Recognition of knowledge, skills, social practic-
                                                                            systems accessible and integrated into                             es, rituals, etc.
                                                                            the education system and profession-
                                                                            al curricula (i.e. urban planning, build-
                                                                            ing construction, etc.)? Are there any
                                                                            customary practices to regulate access
                                                                            to the intangible cultural heritage?
                                                                       •	   Do cultural/creative industries repre-                        •	   Traditional knowledge integrated in formal
                                                                            sent your main source of income? Are                               education systems/curricula
                                                                            they a fulltime job?                                          •	   Transmission through formal and non-formal
                                                                                                                                               education




45 | CULTURE
                  •	   Under normal circumstances, at this          Household         •	   # of women and men for whom cultural and
                       time of the year, what are the most          (male-,female-,        creative industries jobs are their main source of
                       relevant ways in which households            child-headed           income
                       in this area sell their cultural goods/      households)       •	   # of women and men for whom cultural perfor-
                       cultural performances?                       SME/CBO man-           mance represents a second job/hobby
                                                                    ager
                  •	   Roughly, what proportion of house-
                       holds in the district/area are equally
                       engaged in this kind of activities?
                  •	   What would be the (projected)
                       average income from such activities?
                       What are current incomes?
                  •	   How many persons work on the
                       production of cultural goods in your
                       enterprise?
                  •	   Do you receive incentives/financial                            •	   Poverty and income rate of households
                       support, and from which private/pub-
                       lic credit institution? Is this sufficient                     •	   Cultural enterprises: small/medium enterprise
                       to boost your enterprise?
                  •	   Monetary value of the incentive?
                  •	   Disaster-related damages and loss to                           •	   % of supported, boosted enterprises (disaggre-
                       your household/community / Time                                     gated by sex of owner)
                       pattern?
   Intellectual




                                                                                      •	   Monetary value per SME
     Property




                  •	   Where do you get your stock/raw
        (IP)




                       materials, supplies from? Has there
                       been any disruption to supplies since
                       the disaster? Why?
                  •	   What are the priority needs for your                           •	   Procurement of raw material, stock, goods
                       enterprise to be able to restart oper-
                       ations?
                  •	   Are there suitable raw materials to
                       replace materials unavailable due to
                       the disasters or which could produce
                       alternative/new valuable cultural
                       products?
                  •	   Is the legal and operational frame-                            •	   Identify priority needs for cultural and creative
                       work/environment of the market                                      SMEs and CBOs:
                       conducive to cultural industries?                              -premises and workshop infrastructure, equipment,
                  •	   Which restrictions have you ob-                                incentives for setting up/reviving cultural and cre-
                       served?                                                        ative industries


                                                                                      -Opportunity identification
                  •	   Are there specific market events,                              •	   # of local cultural/traditional markets boosted
                       national, regional fairs, cultural events                           and revived (who benefits?)
                       on the agenda which have been dis-
                       rupted due to the emergency?
                  •	   How can these be rescheduled with
                       minimal disruption to performance?




46 | CULTURE
                                •	   Is there any loss of property, cultural                        •	   % of disrupted activities
                                     goods (private historic or traditional                         Quantify the losses
                                     dwellings, collections), traditional
                                     inventories (e.g. weaving tools)?
                                •	   Is there a loss of income (goods and
                                     services, i.e. cultural tourism services)?
                                •	   Have costs increased for household
                                     cultural production?
                                •	   Has there been a loss of business op-
                                     portunities (i.e. fairs, cultural events,
   Intellectual
     Property




                                     cultural tourism services)?
        (IP)




                                •	   Is there difficulties in access to mar-
                                     ket?
                                •	   Have the living conditions of the
                                     youth and women improved through
                                     the income generated by the sales of
                                     their products?
                                •	   Could cultural goods production
                                     enable a diversification of income
                                     sources for households and the com-
                                     munity as a whole?
                                •	   Has the self-confidence of cultural
                                     producers and artisans improved?
                                •	   Are there tour guides, communi-              Household/com-    •	   % of households – particularly women-headed
                                     ty tour guides? Are they formally            munity leader          households - with income from cultural goods
                                     trained?                                     and members            production and from cultural tourism (MDG1)
                                                                                  (F/M)
                                •	   For those informally trained but                               •	   % of increase in (target) community members
                                     performing well, is recognition by                                  (particularly women and youth) wage and
                                     the formal system of accreditation                                  regular income deriving from the cultural goods
   Household/community Impact




                                     envisaged/foreseeable?                                              market and cultural tourism-associated service
                                                                                                         provision
                                                                                                    •	   Opportunity to diversify sources of incomes at
                                                                                                         community and household levels



                                •	   Do you feel that there is increased          Community         •	   Formal and informal training of community
                                     social stress?                               leader and             guides (disaggregated by sex)
                                                                                  members (F/M)
                                •	   Do you sense any resurgence of ten-
                                     sion (ethnic, social, religious)? Why?
                                •	   Has there been significant impact on
                                     the living circumstances of commu-
                                     nities, disruption of community ties,
                                     high levels of displacement – etc.?



                                •	   Do you visit to historical sites, public     All respondents   •	   # and relevance of initiatives
                                     parks and zoos, and how much do                                Describe briefly reasons
   Respect for cultural
   diversity and rights




                                     you spend on such visits?
      (social impact)




47 | CULTURE
                       •	    How many related operators/services           National and      •	    Household expenditure on visits to historical/
                             other than at the community level             international           cultural/ archaeological sites, parks and zoos
                             are still operating in the culture and        operators
   Cultural Tourism

                             tourism sub sectors?
                       •	    What is the difference in income be-
                             tween the pre-disaster situation and
                             the current one?
                       •	    Do cultural practitioners and cultur-                           •	    % of operators receiving regular income deriv-
                             al goods producers feel that their                                    ing from cultural tourism
                             intellectual property rights (IPR) are
                             sufficiently protected? Why?
                                                                           Cultural prac-    •	    # of people sensitized to issues on piracy and
                                                                           titioners and           intellectual property related to handicraft
   Property (IP)
    Intellectual




                                                                           producers (F/M)         products; market linkages and opportunities
                                                                                                   fostered
                                                                                             •	    % of cultural practitioners, producers who feel
                                                                                                   insufficiently protected.
                                                                                             Provide reasons


  Table 5: Cultural Contribution to Other Sectors (Cross-Cutting Issues)
                      •	    What are the main occupations of youth          Affected popu-    •	    Access to cultural heritage
                            and children in temporary camps by sex          lation (F/M)
                            and age?
                      •	    Which cultural and creative activities
                                                                                              Identification of needs, projects
                            could be performed?
                      •	    Is there a mobile library and are there
   Youth




                            spaces available to allow groups to ex-
                            press their cultural forms?
                      •	    Which kind of equipment and facilities
                            should be provided?
                      •	    What is the time-use pattern of girls and
                            boys? Are there restrictions on the cre-
                            ative activities allowed for girls and boys?
                      •	    How can designing housing and tempo-            Affected popu-    •	    Respect for human and cultural rights
                            rary camps take into account and inte-          lation (F/M)
                            grate issues embedded in the communi-
   Shelter




                            ty’s cultural/religious behaviour?
                      •	    What kind of activities and work are
                            forbidden to men or women by local
                            customs? Is anyone in the community
                            challenging these customs?
                      •	    Customary law vs. land ownership. Who           Affected popu-    •	    Sustainable utilization of cultural/natural
   tenure




                            benefits and who is disadvantaged?              lation (F/M)            assets
    Land




                      •	    What are the customs, culture and tradi-        Affected popu-    •	    Improvement in effectiveness of access to
   Food Security




                            tions that limit access to and control over     lation (F/M)            food security
                            food to any member of the household/
                            community/ population at large?
                      •	    What are the religious-based food restric-
                            tions/preferences in the community (for
                            women and men) and cooking practices?




48 | CULTURE
                •	   What are the cultural beliefs and prac-    Affected popu-     •	   Improvement in effectiveness of health access
                     tices, for instance regarding pregnancy    lation (F/M)            to services and campaigns
                     and birthing, the disposal of dead bodies,
                     care of the sick, menstruation, sexual and
   Health


                     gender based violence (SGBV), harmful
                     cultural practices?
                •	   Are there linguistic factors which may
                     affect access of certain gender/groups/
                     communities to health care services and
                     information?
                •	   Are there cultural and symbolic barriers     Affected popu-   •	   Improvement in effectiveness for WASH
                     hindering Water, Sanitation and Hygiene      lation (F/M)          programmes
   WASH




                     campaigns?



                •	   Are local languages used in the promo-       Affected popu-   •	   Improved education objectives
   Education




                     tion quality education and education for     lation (F/M)
                     all?



                •	   Are there cultural issues and practices      Affected popu-   •	   Improvement in HIV and AIDS prevention
   prevention




                     hindering HIV and AID pandemic preven-       lation (F/M)          awareness campaigns
    HIV and




                     tion?
      AIDS




                •	   How can musicians and artists positively
                     contribute to HIV and AIDS prevention
                     campaigns?
                •	   Are there traditional justice mechanisms     Affected popu-   •	   Respect for human and cultural rights
                     in the community and are they influ-         lation (F/M)
                     enced by cultural systems that in some
   Protection




                     instances may discriminate against cer-
                     tain gender/sub-groups of persons?                            Identification of cultural factors and their needs
                •	   Has emergency assistance introduced
                     practices which you feel contrasting with
                     your cultural religious beliefs? Which and
                     why?
                •	   Are all voices heard, including those of     Affected popu-   •	   Inclusive and non-discriminatory process
                     women?                                       lation (F/M)
                •	   Is the data collected disaggregated by sex
                     and age?
                •	   Is there a differential impact on culture
   Gender




                     depending on gender?
                •	   Is there a specific contribution that wom-
                     en can make towards the recovery of the
                     culture sector?
                •	   Are there specific gender issues related
                     to the culture sector that may have an
                     impact on the recovery process?




49 | CULTURE
  METHODOLOGIES FOR ESTIMATING E AND CHANGE IN ECONOMIC FLOWS
  Table 6: Summary Matrix for Damage
   Domain                                                   Damage        How damage is calculated
   Built heritage      Single property:                     Restorable    As per Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA) methodology,
   (isolated/                                                             damages can be approximated by estimating the cost of
                                                                          rehabilitating or recovering the assets [same standard as the
   aggregated),
                                                                          pre-disaster situation]: cost for restoration works (materials
   archaeologi-
                                                                          and labour) + refurbishment and equipment (for specialized
   cal sites, etc.
                                                                          equipment unavailable in the country, maintenance, insurance
   (including sites
                                                                          and transport costs must be included)
   on the World
   Heritage List)      Best calculation method to be        Destroyed     (i) If the property does not have a market value: enhanced
                       identified on the basis of the                     replacement cost method provides credible monetary valua-
                       case’s specificity                                 tion, although it may require time (hence, it could be more
                                                                          appropriate during the thorough/detailed assessment of
                                                                          damages and needs);
                                                                          (ii) If the asset has a real estate market valuation, the proper-
                                                                          ty price should be kept as proxy valuation (DaLA).
                       Aggregated: a cluster should be Restorable         Same as single building: main difference is that economic
                       considered as a whole.                             damages should be broken down between private and public
                                                                          sector accordingly.
                       Avoid double counting with
                       housing sector)                      Destroyed     Destroyed single building heritage. When it is a market prop-
                                                                          erty, the bid price identifies the monetary value.
   Natural assets      Avoid eventual double counting Compromised         Same criteria as for built heritage and environment. An indi-
   and protected       with the environment sector                        rect estimate made after consulting users about the value that
   areas (including                                                       they ascribe to the environmental goods for which there is no
   sites on the                                                           market), can be used for both use and non-use values.
   World Heritage
                                                            Recoverable   Same as above.
   List)
   Cultural goods,                                          Partially     As trade-market products, the damages occurred can be
   traditional prod-                                        destroyed     appraised directly using the market price of the good/product:
   ucts
                                                            Destroyed     good’s price on the market (+ inflation rate and augmentation

   Moveable prop- Rare books, manuscripts, works Recoverable              Restoration cost
   erties         of art, archaeological, ethno-
                                                 Lost /                   Although they are not traded-goods, a proxy valuation can
                  logical artefacts:
                                                 Destroyed                be made: price estimated by auction houses, e.g. Christies,
                                                                          Sotheby’s (indirect WTP/WTA methods)
   Premises of         Building not endowed with rec-       Restorable    Damages can be evaluated with the methodology for new
   ministerial of-     ognized/recognizable cultural                      buildings (used in the housing sector, DaLA): value of: demol-
   fices (at central   value                                              ishing + rebuilding the unit + eventual renting/adapting on
   and local level),   Avoid double counting with the                     purpose temporary premises + transportation of contents to,
   cultural institu-   housing sector
                                                                          and back again from the new premises)
   tions, libraries
   and archives,       Building listed in national/inter-   Restorable    The evaluation method should follow the same as for the
   museums             national inventories                               category of built heritage above
                       Non-cultural asset                   Destroyed     Same as for housing sector
                       Cultural asset                                     Same as for the built heritage field




50 | CULTURE
  Table 7: Methodologies for Estimating Change in Flows
   Change in flows             Causes                       How Change in Flows are Calculated                What is
                                                                                                              Impacted
   Closure/inaccessibility     Lack of basic services       Loss of staff incomes x timeframe for the         •	   employment
   of cultural institutions/   (electricity, water, etc.)   restoration works and recovery of contents        •	   poverty
   museums, libraries and                                   (when their recovery is not instantaneous)
   archives                                                 + loss of institution income from entrance        •	   social capital (accrued
                                                            fees, scheduled exhibitions, activity and event        lack of service for the
                                                            earnings (ticket, bookshops, etc.)                     entire community imply-
                                                                                                                   ing a reduction of social
                                                                                                                   capital, identity growth)
   Closure/inaccessibility     Lack of basic services,      Loss of staff income x timeframe for the resto- •	     employment
   of natural assets, zoos     lack of visitor security     ration of infrastructure and natural capital +  •	     cultural capital
   and protected areas                                      loss of incomes from entrance fees, scheduled
                                                            activity earnings (ticket, guided visits, etc.)
   Delay/interruption of       Inaccessibility/disappear-   Loss in enterprise incomes linked to cultural     •	   poverty (price increases,
   production of cultural      ance of raw materials        goods’ production x predictable delay/inter-           inflation, depreciation of
   goods                       and tools                    ruption time                                           goods)
                                                                                                              •	   macro-economy (market
                                                                                                                   stagnation/fluctuation/
                                                                                                              •	   disruption, with conse-
                                                                                                                   quences on country’s
                                                                                                                   GDP)
   Additional deteriora-       Disruption of services by    Additional costs requested to carry out the       •	   cultural capital
   tion of cultural arte-      conservation institutes/     restoration work (including workers) x the
   facts and buildings         training centres (dam-       timeframe
                               aged by the disaster)
   Cancellation of special     Inaccessibility/ compro-     Losses can be calculated with TCM (expected       •	   poverty
   events/festivals/fairs/     mising of the location /     on the basis of previous, expected or already     •	   social capital
   art performances            cultural place               booked travel attendance) or investment costs
   Loss of cultural tourism Fewer/inaccessible              % of reduction in the total value of entrance     •	   poverty (reduction of
   income volume            assets affecting services       fees or tourist taxes applied in cultural loca-        overall tourist arrival)
                            associated with cultural        tions/sites + losses in associated performanc-
                            tourism destinations            es, hosting services, sub-sector wages, etc.
                            (e.g. guesthouses)
   Losses in incentives,       Damaged production           Value of subsidies/incentives/loans, mi-          •	   poverty
   loans                                                    cro-credit form + (eventual) interests




51 | CULTURE
  Table 7: Methodologies for Estimating Communal and Social Damage and Losses
   Impact on the         Damages and Change in economic flows                                  How they are calculated
   Culture Sector
   Human losses          •	   Professionals, management and administration, service            Victims, the injured, affected persons – no.
                              staff (functioning of the sector)                                (F/M)
                         •	   Artisans, craft-workers, artists, musicians, traditional danc-
                              ers, etc. (cultural practitioners and producers, cultural and
                              creative industries)
   Households/           •	   Loss of property, cultural goods (private historic or tradi-     Direct damages and indirect losses are calcu-
   community                  tional dwellings, collections), traditional inventories and      lated according matrix above.
                              equipment (weaving tools, etc.)                                  Women’s capital loss: no. (or % in a given
                         •	   Loss of income (goods and services: e.g. cultural tourism        community) of women who had to leave
   Assessment
                              services)                                                        their job to take care of their family/commu-
   questions under
                                                                                               nity; reduction in women’s contribution to
   households/           •	   Increased household costs
                                                                                               unemployment rate
   community             •	   Loss of business opportunities (e.g. fairs, cultural events,
   impact of Annex            cultural tourism services)
   10.4
                         •	   No/reduced opportunities to access market
                         •	   Loss of operating capital (cash/material resources) for
                              women and men, reduction of their share of productive
                              activities in the formal and informal sectors
   Intangible cultural   •	   Disappearance/disruption of oral traditions and use of           If damages can be repaired (disruption): the
   heritage                   languages as a vehicle for the intangible cultural heritage,     costs for ensuring that they continue despite
                              performing arts, traditional crafts, knowledge and practic-      the disaster can be calculated, or the costs
                              es concerning nature and universe                                for reviving a language, etc., traditional
   Assessment                                                                                  know-how at risk (in terms of documenta-
   questions under                                                                             tion, training, incentives for apprentices, over
   intangible cultural                                                                         the time required to recover such heri-
   heritage of Annex                                                                           tage). However, it might not be possible to
   10.4                                                                                        evaluate it in the short timeframe owing to
                                                                                               the lack of realistic baselines and the lack of
                                                                                               reference to immediate beneficiaries’.
                                                                                               If heritage disappears: inestimable. In a few
                                                                                               cases could be evaluated using the contin-
                                                                                               gent valuation method (CVM) (Delphi ap-
                                                                                               proach) or other context specificity methods.
   Social impact         •	   Increased stress, cultural displacement due to forced            Analysis of response options and needs of
                              migration, etc.                                                  women and men of all age:
                         •	   Psychological trauma                                             •	   identify direct and immediate responses
   Assessment ques-
                                                                                                    and long-term responses strengthening
   tions under social    •	   Resurgence of tension (ethnic, social, religious)
                                                                                                    livelihood options (complementarities
   impact of Annex
                                                                                                    between immediate and long-term
   10.4
                                                                                                    response options)
                                                                                               •	   pro and cons of various response
                                                                                                    options




52 | CULTURE
  PRIMARY AND SECONDARY BENEFITS OF CULTURAL ASSETS
  Source: ICOMOS, 2005
  PRIMARY BENEFITS:
       •	 Prices paid – for conservation goods and services including any evidence of willingness to pay for
          consumer goods and services such as admissions, cultural tourism expenditures, purchases of cul-
          tural goods and properties, grants and donations (net of tax deductions), etc.

           •	 Local visitor values – consumer surpluses, values in excess of prices paid, the estimated maximum
              willingness to pay for conservation goods and services.

           •	 Shares of consumer surpluses appropriated by suppliers – gained by higher prices over and above
              equilibrium market prices.

           •	 Economic development impact – net incomes to producers and suppliers of cultural goods and
              services after taxes.

           •	 Net indirect effect incomes to the suppliers of cultural producers and suppliers – of cultural goods
              and services, net of taxes.

           •	 Net indirect effect incomes to expenditures by employees of cultural producers and suppliers
              incomes to employees and to the suppliers of the cultural providers. Induced effect incomes – from
              expenditures in indirect effect round.

           •	 Taxes paid in all rounds.

           •	 Net job creation arising from direct, indirect and induced rounds.

  SECONDARY BENEFITS OF CONSERVATION PROJECTS:
       •	 Land value spillover effects;

           •	 Increases of land tax base;

           •	 Energy conservation;

           •	 Stimulation of private investment;

           •	 Potential decrease for protection expenditures;

           •	 Potential decrease in police expenditures;

           •	 Potential reduction in the economic costs of crime;

           •	 Potential reduction in schooling costs;

           •	 Potential reduction in sanitation expenditures;

           •	 Improves public services;

           •	 Higher business formation rates;

           •	 Lower business failure rates;

           •	 Potential increase in accessibility;


53 | CULTURE
           •	 Potential reductions in congestion;

           •	 Potential increases to open space.

  SECONDARY BENEFITS THAT COULD BE EXPECTED TO BE GREATER FOR CONSERVATION PROJECTS
  THAN FOR COMPETING REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS:
        •	 improved aesthetics of the area;

           •	 reduction in densities;

           •	 increases in arts and crafts employment;

           •	 neighbourhood cohesiveness;

           •	 stronger neighbouring associations;

           •	 economic stabilization of neighbourhoods;

           •	 potential magnet effects for further high quality development;

           •	 cluster effect of business and amenities;

           •	 community image;

           •	 more tourists (more employment but possibly at lower wages);

           •	 attraction of residents and tourists in high-earning labour market

           •	 public goods benefits;

           •	 option values;

           •	 secondary consumer surplus generation.




54 | CULTURE
