           SOCIAL SECTOR




            HEALTH




PDNA GUIDELINES VOLUME B
ii   |   HEALTH
CONTENTS
n ACRONYMS	1
n INTRODUCTION	3
n ESTABLISHING THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS	                                         4
n PRE-DISASTER BASELINE	                                                      12
n ASSESSMENT OF THE DISASTER’S EFFECT ON THE HEALTH SECTOR	                   14
n DAMAGE AND LOSS DUE TO THE DISASTER	                                        16
n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT	                                              18
n CROSS-SECTORAL LINKAGES, INCLUDING CROSSCUTTING ISSUES	                     20
n THE HEALTH SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY	                                        21
n ANNEX 1: STEPS FOR THE PDNA PROCESS FOR THE HEALTH SECTOR	                  32
n ANNEX 2: ANALYTICAL MATRIX BASED ON HEALTH SECTOR RESPONSE DOMAINS AND
BUILDING BLOCKS 	                                                             34
n ANNEX 3: WORKSHEET ON BASELINE UNIT COSTS FOR INFRASTRUCTURE AND
ASSETS TO ESTIMATE DAMAGES (EXAMPLE)	                                         42
n ANNEX 4: WORKSHEET ON BASELINE UNIT COSTS TO ESTIMATE LOSSES (EXAMPLE)	     43
n ANNEX 5: DISTRICT DATA COLLECTION FORM (EXAMPLE)	                           44
n ANNEX 6: WORKSHEET TO ESTIMATE COSTS OF DAMAGES AND LOSSES (EXAMPLE)	       45
n ANNEX 7: FORM TO CALCULATE LOSS OVER TIME IN THE HEALTH SECTOR (EXAMPLE)	   48
n ANNEX 8: SAFE HOSPITAL INTERVENTIONS (EXAMPLES)	                            49
n ANNEX 9: DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND PREPAREDNESS INTERVENTIONS (EXAMPLES)	 50
n ANNEX 10: WORKSHEET FOR A RESULTS-BASED RECOVERY PLAN (EXAMPLE)	            51
n ANNEX 11: GLOSSARY	                                                         51
n ANNEX 12: REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING	                                   52
        ACRONYMS
        AIDS       Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
        DRM        Disaster Risk Management
        DRR        Disaster Risk Reduction
        HIV        Human Immunodeficiency Virus
        MDG        Millennium Development Goals
        MOHS       Ministry of Health
        PDNA       Post Disaster Needs Assessment
        SGBV       Sexual and gender-based violence




1   |   HEALTH
        INTRODUCTION
        This document provides guidance to national and international stakeholders involved in the health sector during
        Post Disaster Needs Assessments (PDNA) processes and recovery planning. The guidance is based on applying
        an integrated approach when undertaking the PDNA process. An integrated approach involves taking the
        standard damage and loss assessment methodology and including a recovery strategy that puts special emphasis
        on the human condition.

        Updates and additional tools for PDNAs and guidance for recovery planning in the health sector can be found
        on the websites of the following organisations:

                  •	 International Recovery Platform;

                  •	 Pan American Health Organisation (PAHO);

                  •	 United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC);

                  •	 World Bank Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR); and

                  •	 World Health Organisation (WHO).

        This guidance brings together the four components needed for a comprehensive PDNA analysis, which are:

            1.	 1. health infrastructure and assets;

            2.	 delivery of health services (including access to and changes in demand for services);

            3.	 health governance processes; and

            4.	 vulnerability and health risks of the affected population.

        These elements will be used consistently when describing the pre-disaster baseline, the effects of the disaster,
        the estimation of the economic value of damage and loss, the disaster’s impact on the economy and human de-
        velopment, and what is needed for a recovery and reconstruction strategy, including elements of building back
        better (referred to as BBB) and related costing.

        Building back better refers to the concept that recovery and reconstruction should not only aim at restoring the
        health system to its pre-disaster condition, but also should address underlying vulnerabilities that may have con-
        tributed to the extent of the disaster’s effects. Building back better aims to strengthen the resilience of the health
        system and communities so that they can better manage future disasters and their risks to the health sector.


2   |    HEALTH
        ESTABLISHING THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS
        A MULTISECTORAL PROCESS
        When a country is affected by a disaster, the analysis of its effects and the formulation of the needs for recovery
        and reconstruction are done through a multisectoral process. This process helps to acknowledge the differences
        between sectors, but also their interdependency. Sectors and their accompanying sub-sectors are defined by the
        National Accounting Framework of a country. Broadly speaking, PDNAs often distinguish between three main
        groups of sectors: 1) productive, 2) social, and 3) infrastructure, and 4) cross-cutting. Health falls under the social
        sector, together with education, housing and culture. Nutrition is usually integrated under health.

        RECOVERY COORDINATION AND CONSULTATION
        The health sector PDNA process is led by the Ministry of Health (MoH). The first step is for the Minister of Health
        to designate a focal point to manage the health part of the PDNA and recovery process. The MoH recovery
        focal point will work together with the other sectoral focal points appointed by the government, which allows
        synergies with other sectors relevant to health. Depending on the national context, the recovery process may fall
        under a National Disaster Management Authority. If the MoH has a focal point responsible for health disaster
        risk management functions connected to the National Disaster Management Authority, this person may also be
        appointed as the focal point for recovery.

        The MoH recovery focal point will establish a health sector recovery coordination mechanism that allows mobil-
        isation of technical resources from relevant departments in the MoH and consultation with subnational health
        authorities. When a government requests external support for a PDNA process, the MoH recovery focal point
        will be supported by recovery experts from WHO, the World Bank and the European Union. A small Steering
        Group can be established with clear roles and responsibilities assigned to the various stakeholders. For examples
        of practical steps to take in managing the PDNA process, including timelines, see Annex 1.

        In addition to the United Nations, World Bank and European Union, it is important to involve all relevant health
        partners in the PDNA process, such as other United Nations agencies, development banks, donors, non-govern-
        mental organisations, faith and community based organisations, civil society, professional associations and the
        private sector.




3   |    HEALTH
        LINK TO HEALTH SECTOR DEVELOPMENT COORDINATION

        If a national health sector development coordination mechanism exists - such as a sector-wide approach or an in-
        ternational health partnership - the recovery Focal Point should be connected to this group and the development
        partners need to be consulted to assist in the PDNA process. This ensures optimal harmonisation and alignment
        of the recovery strategy to national health policy and strategic planning. If such a sector-wide development co-
        ordination mechanism does not yet exist, the PDNA process can be used as an opportunity to initiate one.


        LINK TO HUMANITARIAN COORDINATION

        The PDNA process needs to be linked to national and subnational coordination for humanitarian responses.
        Since the humanitarian reform of 2005, national emergency coordination mechanisms are supported through
        the Inter-Agency Standing Committee’s Cluster Approach.

        It is particularly important to ensure that the PDNA builds on humanitarian assessments, as much as possible. Infor-
        mation collected to inform humanitarian responses (for example, a Multisectoral Initial Rapid Assessment (MIRA) or a
        Health Resources Availability Mapping System (HeRAMS) is also essential to inform the PDNA and recovery strategy.

        THE ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK
        While the health sector part of the PDNA is harmonized with the other sectors, it makes use of existing, specific
        health system frameworks and assessment methods. This section describes how existing frameworks and meth-
        ods can be used to identify relevant issues that need be assessed to inform the various elements of the PDNA.


        THE HEALTH SYSTEM FRAMEWORK

        WHO, in the World Health Report 2000 and their 2007 framework for action Everybody’s Business: Strength-
        ening Health Systems to Improve Health Outcomes, defines the health sector as a system which “consists of all
        organisations, people and actions whose primary intent is to promote, restore or maintain health.” This includes
        efforts to influence determinants of health as well as more direct health-improving activities.

        According to WHO, a health system framework is made up of six building blocks, with a strong interdependence
        between the building blocks. These are:

                  •	 service delivery: packages; delivery models; infrastructure; management; safety and quality;
                     demand for care;

                  •	 health workforce: national workforce policies and investment plans; advocacy; norms, standards
                     and data;

                  •	 information: facility and population based information and surveillance systems; global
                     standards, tools;

                  •	 medical products, vaccines and technologies: norms, standards, policies; reliable procure-
                     ment; equitable access; quality;

                  •	 financing: national health financing policies; tools and data on health expenditures; costing; and

                  •	 leadership and governance: health sector policies; harmonisation and alignment; oversight and
                     regulation.
4   |    HEALTH
           THE WHO HEALTH SYSTEM NETWORK

                      System Building Blocks                                          Overall Goals/Outcomes

         Service Delivery

          Health Workforce                                       Acess        Imporved Health (Level and Equity)
                                                                coverage
          Information                                                         Responsiveness

          Medical Products, Vaccines & Technologies                           Social and Financial Risk Protection
                                                                 Quality
          Financing                                              Safety       Improved Efficiency

          Leadership/Governance


        HEALTH SECTOR ASSESSMENT AND ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK

        Health sector analyses are based on the above health system framework. The health system framework is used
        in an assessment and analysis matrix that guides the health recovery team to establish:

            1.	 a baseline; a systematic assessment of changes in the epidemiology of the burden of disease; the per-
                formance of the main health programmes; and

            2.	 the six health system building blocks.

        It takes into consideration the assets, stakeholders and processes that are typically included in the sector and
        how these may be affected by a disaster. This enables analysis of how pre-existing performance and constraints
        may affect the requirements needed to restore access to essential services, meet new health needs and identify
        priorities for Building Back Better. Using the existing health system framework as a starting point allows linking
        recovery planning with longer-term national health development plans.


        HEALTH SECTOR RESPONSE DOMAINS

        Linked to service delivery, WHO lists a number of health sector response domains. These domains are:

            1.	 general clinical services and essential trauma care;

            2.	 child health (including treatment of malnutrition);

            3.	 communicable diseases;

            4.	 sexual and reproductive health (including STI and HIV/AIDS, maternal and newborn health and sexual
                violence); and

            5.	 non-communicable diseases and mental health; and

            6.	 environmental health.


5   |    HEALTH
        The domains represent the main health programmes that should be taken into account when undertaking a
        PDNA to determine the pre-existing burden of disease related to each domain and how the disaster affected
        this. Also required is an assessment of the performance of health programmes that had been addressing the
        morbidity and how this capacity has been affected by the disaster.


        RISKS TO HEALTH AND SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH

        The health sector response domains can also be used to describe pre-existing risks that contribute to the related
        burden of disease. To determine the effect of the disaster on health risks, the analysis needs to include how these
        risks and determinants were affected by the disaster and if the disaster created new health risks.


        LINKING THE HEALTH SYSTEM FRAMEWORK WITH THE FOUR PDNA RECOVERY ELEMENTS

        The diagram below demonstrates how the components of the health system framework and the health sector
        response domains are linked to the four dimensions of a PDNA: 1) infrastructure; 2) Service Delivery; 3) gover-
        nance; and 4) risks.


          1a Service Delivery; health programmes

             •	 General clinical services & trauma care
             •	 Child Health
             •	 Communicable diseases
             •	 Sexual & reproductive health                                          Infrastructure and Assets
             •	 Non communicable diseases
             •	 Environmental health                                                  Service Delivery availability,
                                                                                      access and demand
          1b Service Delivery; Organisation and manage-
                                                                                      Governance
          ment of services, incl. health network

          2.	 Leadership governance                                                   Risks
          3.	 Health information system
          4.	 Human resources for health
          5.	 Health financing
          6.	 Medical products, vaccines & technology




6   |    HEALTH
        HEALTH SECTOR ASSESSMENT AND ANALYSIS MATRIX

        The analytical matrix (see Table 1) provides a standardised and systematic protocol for collection and analysis of
        assessment data.

        Table 1: Analytical matrix for the health sector contribution to the recovery strategy

                                                                                                    Response
                                                                     Effect of
                                                                                                 for recovery,
                                                                        the
                                                                                                    including
                                       Baseline                      disaster,                                     Key
                                                                                                     building
         Health programmes and health indicators,                       key         Humanitarian                indicators
                                                                                                  back better
                system functions       pre-crisis                      chal-          response                     for
                                                                                                 approaches,
                                      challenges                      lenges                                    monitoring
                                                                                                 for the short,
                                                                     for early
                                                                                                 medium and
                                                                     recovery
                                                                                                   long term

         1. (a) Service delivery -
                health programmes:
         •	 general clinical services and
            trauma care
         •	 child Health
         •	 communicable diseases
         •	 sexual and reproductive health
         •	 noncommunicable diseases and
            mental health
         •	 environmental health

         1. (b) Service delivery - organisation
         and management of services,
         including the health network
         2. Leadership and governance
         3. Health information system
         4. Human resources for health
         5. Health financing
         6. Medical products, vaccines
            and technology

        The matrix assists the assessment team to collect information that is aligned with key chapters of PDNA sectoral
        reports, such as the sector overview and baseline and disaster effect and recovery needs, including building back
        better approaches. The health sector team collects and provides information based on the best available data,
        evidence and/or professional judgements.

        Annex 2 provides examples of baseline data and indicators, common disaster effects, constraints and responses
        in relation to the immediate relief and early to medium recovery responses. WHO fact sheets on the health ef-
        fects of hazards are also a good resource (www.who.int/hac/techguidance/tools/WHO_strategy_hazards.pdf).




7   |    HEALTH
        ASSESSMENTS

        EXISTING DATA AND INFORMATION

        A data collection strategy and gathering information for health sector recovery should be seen as a process and
        placed within a cycle of disaster management.

        Assessments and information gathering required for recovery should build on data collected even before the
        disaster happened - data available from the normal health information management systems and other re-
        ports, such as disaster preparedness reports. This available data can be used as pre-disaster baselines and to
        inform rapid assessments in the early humanitarian phase. The data should then become part of a monitoring
        system of health system performance that can also measure the progress of the humanitarian response and
        recovery activities.

        The scope and depth of the health sector assessment is constrained by the limited time in which it needs to be
        accomplished. Whenever possible evidence should be used; but it may also involve using the expert judgements
        of the team on the validity and accuracy of estimates. In particular for the estimates of costs, both for damage
        and loss, but also for the recovery plan, underlying assumptions and unit costs used in calculations need to be
        explained in a separate assumption sheet (see Annexes 3 and 4).


        SECONDARY AND PRIMARY DATA

        The assessment teams should make use of existing secondary data whenever possible, such as data that has al-
        ready been collected through humanitarian interventions, and decide which critical additional information needs
        to be collected specifically for the PDNA.

        Primary data collection is usually limited to purposefully selected field visits, to verify assumptions based on the
        secondary data review and to seek the perspective of health authorities and communities in the affected areas.


        SOURCES FOR ASSESSMENTS

        PDNAs are based on mixed assessment methods, as there is no single source or single method that can pro-
        vide all the necessary information. The main sources for the PDNA are key informants, for example, from the
        MoH and development partners, focus group discussions with stakeholders and relevant experts, health facili-
        ty-based information systems, observations, complemented by surveys of health facility performance and pop-
        ulation-based surveys.

        When surveys are appropriate, sampling will be purposive in the initial phases towards representative sampling
        in later phases (see: Operational Guidance for Coordinated Assessments in Humanitarian Crises. Inter-Agency
        Standing Committee, Needs Assessment Task Force, 2010). Annex 5 provides an example of data to be collect-
        ed from district health authorities on the effects of the disaster that is required to estimate damage and loss.

        Care must be taken to ensure that both women and men from the affected community can participate in assess-
        ments. There needs to be a gender balance of the assessment team conducting the interviews, as well as of the
        informants and participants in focus group discussions. If appropriate, separate, private interviews can be held
        with men and women and attention should be paid to the time and venue of the assessment, etc., to ensure
        that both genders can participate equally. The needs, priorities and interests of women and men of all ages as

8   |    HEALTH
        well as sub-groups of the population should be identified through a gender and age analysis based on the rou-
        tine collection of qualitative sex and age disaggregated data and indicators, qualitative information sources and
        consultations and interviews with women and men in communities and among key stakeholders.


        RESOURCES AND DOCUMENTS TO CONSULT FOR ASSESSMENTS

        Key resources and documents for the baseline, as well as identification of pre-existing constraints, and to guide
        recovery priorities include:

                  •	 the WHO statistics information system (see: www.who.int/whosis/en/);

                  •	 national statistics and health information management system reports (including morbidity rates of
                     the common diseases in the country and in the affected area for the past five years);

                  •	 national health policy documents and annual health sector reviews;

                  •	 national disaster preparedness plans;

                  •	 available data from the MoH on location and capacity (such as numbers of beds, consultation
                     rates, etc.) of both the public and private health infrastructure network, standards for health facili-
                     ties, equipment and services, and their related unit costs;

                  •	 a description of the health management system, including its financing sources (whether free med-
                     ical attention is given and paid for by the government or whether individuals must pay themselves
                     and/or with the help of medical insurance schemes) and annual government budget appropria-
                     tions;the unit cost of the services supplied (including differences in unit costs between the private
                     and public sector), such as the cost of an outpatient consultation, daily hospital admission, etc.

                  •	 demographic health surveys and multi indicator cluster surveys;

                  •	 vulnerability and risk assessment and mapping;

                  •	 World Bank and UNDP Millennium Development Goal websites;

                  •	 humanitarian assessments and surveillance reports (MIRA, Public Health Risk Assessments, Disease
                     Early Warning Systems);

                  •	 health strategies in the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Flash Appeal and/or the humanitarian
                     strategic response plan; and

                  •	 humanitarian general and health sector situation reports (humanitarian dashboard).

        For more on common indicators, see:

                  •	 www.who.int/healthmetrics/tools/GFGuidanceOnRecommendedIndicators09.pdf

                  •	 www.who.int/hac/global_health_cluster/guide/tools/en/index.html

                  •	 www.who.int/hac/techguidance/tools/disrupted_sectors/en/index.html

        For more on humanitarian assessment methods for the health sector, refer to the WHO Health Cluster Guide:
        www.who.int/hac/network/global_health_cluster/guide/en/index.html.



9   |    HEALTH
     HEALTH SECTOR OUTPUTS FOR INCLUSION IN THE PDNA
     The health sector assessment should have two outputs that are included in the larger PDNA document. The
     first is a summary of the health sector situation, requirements and proposed recovery startegy, which is usu-
     ally no more than three to four pages. The second output is a 15-20 page more detailed report from the as-
     sessment and a more detailed strategy for recovery. These reports typically include a set of tables or annexes
     (see Annexes 6 and 7). The time horizon for the recovery strategy is determined by the government, but usu-
     ally ranges from two to five years.

     The more extensive health sector recovery strategy and plan can be used as a basis for reviewing and revising,
     as required, provincial and district health plans in the areas affected.

     Examples of post-disaster health sector assessments and recovery plans can be found on the websites of the
     World Bank (www.gfdrr.org/node/118) and the International Recovery Platform (www.recoveryplatform.org/
     resources/tools_and_guidelines).

     THE ASSESSMENT TEAM
     The health sector assessment team normally is headed by a designated leader from the MoH, and includes ex-
     perts from different professional disciplines as required for the assessment, and should be supported by experts
     from international organisations. In general, the team needs to have experts on public health and health systems,
     including medical doctors and epidemiologists, together with architects or civil engineers (that can estimate
     the value of damage to health infrastructure), and health economists that can estimate the value of production
     losses. Depending on the areas affected by the disaster, the subnational health authorities need to be involved in
     the assessment to ensure full access to information at all levels and to all locations in the affected areas, as well
     as to seek their views for the recovery strategy.

     An adequate gender balance of the assessment team needs to be ensured. One team member should be ap-
     pointed as the gender focal point and be responsible for coordinating findings with other teams and the gender
     advisor. This person should have prior experience with gender mainstreaming in the health sector. Health devel-
     opment partners will be offering assistance to support the health recovery assessment. A Steering Committee
     can be formed, inclusive of the most relevant stakeholders, to oversee the health recovery assessment process
     and ensure consultation with partners. Provisions for engagement with representatives of private health facilities
     should also be made, since in many countries the private sector share contributes significantly to the health in-
     frastructure and subsequent service delivery capacity.

     Transport for the assessment team is required to conduct site visits for direct observation and consultation with
     local health authorities and managers of affected health facilities. Transportation for the PDNA assessment
     should be supported by the development partners, so the national authorities can dedicate their transport ca-
     pacity to the emergency response.




10   |   HEALTH
     PRE-DISASTER BASELINE
     This section describes how to create a health sector overview and a pre-disaster baseline and which key issues
     should be addressed under the four PDNA components.

     To estimate the effect of a disaster on the health sector, it is necessary to know what the health sector’s charac-
     teristics were prior to the event. Average unit costs for the various components of the PDNA need to be estab-
     lished in the baselines. Most of this information should be available before the disaster happens and be part of
     the disaster risk management and preparedness process.

     In this section the most important pre-disaster challenges and constraints for service delivery are highlighted.
     Further details can be found in Annex 2, under the column ‘pre-disaster baseline and challenges’.

     CONTEXT
     The baseline starts with a context analysis. This should include:

              •	 a description of the development status of the country (for example, the country’s ranking in the
                 Human Development Index and health sections in Poverty Reduction Strategies);

              •	 the country’s progress in achieving health-related Millennium Development Goals; and the
                 political context.

     INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSETS
     The baseline describes health system-related infrastructures and assets, as listed below. The baseline should
     include data for the public, private not-for-profit and private for-profit sectors.

              •	 Description of the health network, including the locations and the levels of the health system
                 (community, primary, secondary and tertiary levels) and referral mechanisms.

              •	 Data on numbers of the various levels of the health infrastructure (for example, based on Service
                 Availability and Readiness Assessments).

              •	 Description of the physical infrastructures, including facilities for vertical health programmes, public
                 health institutes, labouratories, pharmaceutical factories and warehouses.

              •	 Logistics of the health system, such as transport of patients and pharmaceuticals.

              •	 Administrative infrastructure for the health authorities.

              •	 Infrastructure for schools and universities for training health workers is usually included under
                 tertiary education under the education sector.

     SERVICE DELIVERY, AVAILABILITY, ACCESS AND CHANGES IN DEMAND
     As part of the baseline, information related to service delivery should be described and can be broken down
     as follows:

              •	 Key health status and coverage indicators linked to the health sector response domains.


11   |   HEALTH
              •	 The socio-demographic situation and the status of the main epidemiological indicators, including
                 the morbidity incidence of diseases that are relevant to the type of disaster in question.

              •	 Availability and coverage of services can be described for the various health programmes and relat-
                 ed to health status indicators, disaggregated by age and sex when relevant.

              •	 Focus on top five mortality and morbidity patterns.

              •	 Status and progress of health-related MDG indicators.

              •	 Key indicators linked to human resources for health, health financing and medical products and
                 technology. Describe main constraints when these factors affect coverage and access to services.

              •	 Access, as defined by coverage and utilisation, as determined by affordability, financial and geo-
                 graphical barriers, cultural barriers and quality of care. (Utilisation can be described by average
                 consultation rates.)

              •	 Availability and coverage of essential packages of health services.

     GOVERNANCE
     To describe how the health system is governed, the baseline should describe the items below.

              •	 Organisation, management and regulatory functions of the health authorities for general
                 service delivery.

              •	 Funding sources and mechanisms for the health sector.

              •	 Vision and mission statements from national health strategic plans and priorities for health
                 sector reform.

              •	 Participatory governance mechanisms for health service provision and processes at all levels (nation-
                 al to community level), including existence of complaint mechanisms for patients.

              •	    (Disaster) Laws and regulations affecting the access of segments or sub-groups of the population
                   to certain health services, e.g. reproductive health services.

              •	 Coordination mechanisms for health development and humanitarian and disaster risk management.

              •	 Health sector preparedness plans.

              •	 Capacity to manage disaster response and recovery processes.

              •	 Functionality of health information management and early warning systems.

     RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES
     A pre-disaster baseline analyses the potential risks and vulnerabilities of the country’s health system. These include:

              •	 social determinants of health that could lead to increased marginalisation and discrimination in
                 access to health services, including but not limited to poverty, ethnicity, religion and gender; pre-
                 existing health risks, and types of disasters and presence of diseases with epidemic potential epi-
                 demics that have occurred in the country, including sexual- and gender-based violence (SGBV); and

              •	 marginalised and/or disadvantaged sub-groups of the population with a special risk profile.


12   |   HEALTH
     ASSESSMENT OF THE DISASTER’S EFFECT ON THE
     HEALTH SECTOR
     The section provides key considerations that will help analyse the effects on health and health sector perfor-
     mance linked to the four dimensions of PDNA, in both the public and private sectors, as well as the direct
     responses to mitigate these effects.

     In Annex 2, the column on ‘disaster effects’ provides further examples of effects of disasters on the health
     system building blocks and the health sector response domains, followed by typical humanitarian responses.

     GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE DISASTER
     The assessment begins with a general introduction describing the disaster, including the following information:

              •	 geographical scope, population affected, number of people dead and injured, the evolution till
                 date, etc.; and

              •	 priorities for the immediate humanitarian response.

     EFFECTS ON INFRASTRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL ASSETS
     The disaster’s effects on the infrastructure and physical assets of the health system are then described, including:

              •	 physical damage to health system infrastructure (both total numbers and percentage against
                 baselines of the various levels of health facilities, whether partially or fully damaged, disaggregated
                 by administrative units, and including private and public facilities); physical damage to furniture,
                 equipment and medical supplies; and

              •	 types and numbers of temporary health facilities established to replace damaged health facilities or
                 in settlements of displaced populations.

     EFFECTS ON SERVICE DELIVERY, ACCESS AND DEMAND
     Answering the questions below will help to assess the effects of the disaster on service delivery, access and
     demand.

              •	 To what extent did the damage to infrastructure affect the functionality of the facilities and de-
                 crease availability of health service delivery?

              •	 What is the effect of the disaster on morbidity patterns, in particular injuries, mental health (www.
                 who.int/mental_health/emergencies/en/) and incidences and nature of SGBV?

              •	 How are health facilities in unaffected areas able to deal with trauma, SGBV and injuries, including
                 capacity for transport and medical evacuations?

              •	 How do population movements influence the caseload for health facilities in unaffected areas that
                 host displaced populations?

              •	 What are the direct effects on health workers (including displacement, deaths and disabilities) and
                 indirect effects on the capacity to train health workers to address new and/or increased morbidity?

13   |   HEALTH
              •	 What are the effects on the availability of pharmaceutical products?

              •	 How does the disaster affect the access to health services of women and men of all ages and sub-
                 groups of the affected population?

              •	 How did the disaster affect the ‘ability to pay’ for access to health services for affected households
                 and those that lost their livelihoods?

              •	 Are there new geographic barriers to access functional health facilities?

              •	 As a result of death, injury, displacement and migration caused by the disaster, household com-
                 position may change. As women and men may have different mobility and levels of access to and
                 control over income, specific attention must be paid to access to services of households newly
                 headed by women, older people or children.

     EFFECTS ON GOVERNANCE AND SOCIAL PROCESSES
     Analyse how the disaster affected health sector governance and social processes by considering the
     questions below.

              •	 How did the disaster affect the capacity of the health authorities to manage health services?

              •	 How did the disaster affect the capacity of the health authorities to coordinate the humanitarian
                 response and recovery process?

              •	 What capacities are brought to the disaster response through international aid agencies and how
                 can this capacity be used to support the recovery process?

              •	 Are health information management systems affected by the disaster and are the health authori-
                 ties able to establish early warning systems?

     EFFECTS ON RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES
              •	 When examining the disaster’s effects on health risks and vulnerabilities, be careful to consider
                 the status of children, pregnant and lactating women, older persons, persons with disabilities and
                 persons living with long-term or chronic illnesses.

              •	 What was the impact of the disaster on the health of women and men of all ages and sub-groups
                 of the affected population?

              •	 Did the disaster affect the pre-existing health risks?

              •	 What are the new disaster-induced health risks that women and men of all ages, households and
                 communities may face?

              •	 What are the increased risks for the transmission of communicable diseases (e.g., cholera, malar-
                 ia, influenza, measles, TB), but also health risks due to the interruption of emergency and routine
                 services, such as emergency obstetric care services and care for chronic and noncommunicable
                 diseases (e.g., heart disease, diabetes, cancer, etc.).

              •	 Has the disaster exposed populations to SGBV? (SGBV can increase after disasters and during crises).



14   |   HEALTH
     DAMAGE AND LOSS DUE TO THE DISASTER
     This section gives guidance on how to estimate the value of damages and losses to the health sector due to the
     disaster. Damage and loss valuation extracts from the section on effects of the disaster as a starting point. Iden-
     tify those elements that have financial implications, including damages to infrastructure and assets and losses
     due to changes in financial flows as linked to infrastructure, service delivery, governance and risks. Damage and
     loss should be disaggregated for public and private facilities.


     DAMAGE

     The damage analysis looks at health infrastructure including hospitals, health centres and other health sector-re-
     lated facilities, including health authority administration buildings, equipment and furniture and medical supplies.
     Damage is defined as the value of destroyed durable physical assets (buildings, equipment and machinery),
     replaced with the same characteristics and standards as prior to the disaster. In principle, assessment of infra-
     structure damage is done on a facility by facility basis, usually based on detailed estimates of numbers of square
     metres of the infrastructure damaged (disaggregated for roofing, floors, walls, etc.) with average unit costs per
     square meter for repair.

     When large numbers of health facilities are damaged in the disaster-affected area and it is not feasible to assess
     all damaged facilities separately, estimates of the numbers of partially and fully damaged health facilities are
     made. The estimate is based, for example, on reports from subnational health authorities and initial humanitar-
     ian assessments. The estimation uses the average estimated value based on standards for each type of health
     infrastructure and average costs for repair and rehabilitation of partially damaged facilities by type. The same
     applies for the value of damaged equipment, furniture and medical supplies. In principle, this should be based
     on a detailed assessment for each health facility against pre-disaster inventories. But in case of large numbers of
     affected health facilities, average estimates need to be made, for example as a percentage of full replacement
     costs against national standards.


     LOSS

     Loss refers to changes in the financial flows of the sector due to the temporary absence of infrastructure and
     assets and to increased or new demands for medical interventions for the affected population. Losses are mea-
     sured as the change in operational costs for the provision of post-disaster medical care. Operational costs post di-
     saster normally include higher expenditures over and above the normal budgetary appropriations for the health
     sector and lower revenues. Most interventions that involve increased expenditures are those that are managed
     as humanitarian response interventions to address the immediate consequences on health and health risks of
     the affected population.

     It is important to determine the time needed for rehabilitation and reconstruction of health facilities, not only for
     planning the reconstruction, but also as losses occur until reconstruction has been completed, and/or prevention
     or control of epidemics have been accomplished and health risks are back to pre-disaster levels. Annex 7 pro-
     vides a table to plan recovery interventions over time.




15   |   HEALTH
     As mentioned earlier, an assumption sheet must be produced, explaining how unit costs were estimated and
     what other assumptions were made to calculate damage and loss. More details on the method to calculate the
     costs of damage and loss can be found in Damage, Loss and Needs Assessment: Guidance Notes, Volume 2, The
     World Bank, Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery. 2010.


     EXAMPLES

     Typical examples for damage and loss are found in table 2 below. Annexes 3 and 4 provide examples of tables for
     baseline unit costs and assumptions on damage and loss for the health sector as included in PDNA sector reports.

     Table 2: Typical elements included in an assessment of damage and loss
         Damage                                                      Changes in flows

         Infrastructure and assets                                   1. Increased expenditures for:
         •	 Buildings disaggregated by community, tertiary,          infrastructure
            secondary and primary levels (hospitals, health cen-     •	 remove debris, mud and other bio-hazardous materials from
            tres, clinics, dispensaries, pharmacies, health posts,      the destroyed or damaged facilities
            blood banks, labouratories, etc.)
                                                                     •	 establish temporary health facilities or mobile clinics for
         •	 Equipment and furniture                                     displacement settlements or in the vicinity of damaged
         •	 Medical supplies                                            facilities until facilities are reconstructed
         •	 Transport and logistics, ambulances, etc.                service delivery and access
         •	 Infrastructure of the Ministry of Health at national     •	 treating increased number of patients due to new and/or
            and subnational levels                                      increased health risks
         Notes:                                                      •	 additional cost per patient treated in alternative, temporary
         Ambulances are included under the secondary and                medical facilities
         tertiary facilities.                                   •	 long term medical treatment for disabilities and psychologi-
         Pharmaceutical factories are included under the indus-    cal care of affected people
         try sector.                                            governance
         Schools and universities for training health workers        •	 costs for increased coordination needs, support manage-
         are usually included under tertiary education infra-           ment capacity for service delivery
         structure in the education sector. The reduced ability      •	 costs for establishing early warning systems
         to scale up health workers capacity may be a con-
         straint to service delivery.                                risk reduction
                                                                     •	 additional expenditures for surveillance and control of
                                                                        possible epidemics
                                                                     •	 health prevention campaigns, vaccinations, vector control, etc.
                                                                     •	 health promotion campaigns
                                                                     2. Loss of revenue, due to:
                                                                     •	 interrupted service delivery in damaged facilities during the
                                                                        period of rehabilitation and/or reconstruction; and
                                                                     •	 temporary suspension of user fees for affected population.




16   |    HEALTH
     ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT
     MACRO-ECONOMIC IMPACT
     The macro-economic impact analysis includes an estimation of the disaster likely effects on economic per-
     formance and the temporary macro-economic imbalances that may arise, as well as the temporary decline in
     employment, income and well-being of affected individuals and households. To measure the impact on mac-
     ro-economic variables, analyses are usually made of the post disaster performance on gross domestic product,
     the balance of payments and the fiscal sector. For the health sector, an additional analysis can be done on the
     impact of the cost of damage and loss in relation to total health expenditures.

     The health sector assessment team should deliver the following estimates of values to the PDNA team members
     handling the economic impact analysis:

              •	 The higher number of medical attention provided to patients and the lower number of surgeries
                 undertaken as a result of the disaster. This data will be used for the estimation of the disaster’s
                 impact on the value and growth of gross domestic product.

              •	 The higher costs of monitoring morbidity rate increases and of preventive measures arising as a
                 result of the disaster. This data will be used for the estimation of the disaster’s impact on the value
                 and growth of gross domestic product.

              •	 The estimated recovery items (including items related to prevention and mitigation for the health
                 sector) that must be imported from other countries in the absence of local production. This infor-
                 mation will be used for the analysis on the balance of payments.

              •	 The estimated portion of the health sector reconstruction costs that will have to be imported from
                 abroad due to not being produced locally, expressed in a percentage of the total estimated recon-
                 struction needs. This information will be used for the impact analysis on the balance of payments.

              •	 The total value of higher government expenditures and lower revenues, over and above regular
                 budget appropriations. This information will be used for the analysis of the fiscal sector impact.

              •	 Estimates of the higher-than-normal costs of obtaining medical or health care. This will be used for
                 the analysis of personal or household impacts.

     THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT IMPACT
     The human development impact is the difference between pre-disaster and post disaster levels of human de-
     velopment directly resulting from the disaster. The impact on human development is the disaster impact on the
     quality of human life in the medium and long term as measured through indexes, such as the Human Develop-
     ment Index, Gender Inequality Index, Multidimensional Poverty Index, the Millennium Development Goals and/
     or the new Sustainable Development Goals.

     To estimate the human development impact of the disaster, it is useful to analyse:

              •	 the performance on human development components before the disaster utilizing a pre-crisis base-
                 line (pre-disaster human development trends, including key challenges, and the salient features of
                 the policies implemented pre-crisis that influenced the condition of human development for affected
                 populations); and
17   |   HEALTH
                •	 the consequences of the disaster effects indicating short, medium and long term implications
                   through business as usual scenarios, worse case scenarios and/or best case scenarios, based on
                   past performance had the disaster not occurred, utilizing clearly stated assumptions.

     When using the health-related MDGs, several indicators are difficult to measure over short periods of time, as
     the indicators were not designed as dynamic measures and are not sensitive to shocks, such as disasters. Health
     information systems may not provide required data at disaggregated level for the districts affected, such as
     maternal mortality ratios. However, data on other indicators, such as measles immunization coverage, antenatal
     care coverage, or HIV, TB and malaria patients with access to treatment, are part of a standard PDNA health
     assessment. Using this data to estimate impact on MDGs remains complicated. (Refer to Table 3 below).

     Service availability and access to health programmes are often interrupted during and after disasters, but usually
     not for long. Services may be quickly restored by the health authorities. When collection of user fees is suspend-
     ed for the affected population and when service delivery is supported by international aid agencies, access to
     services may actually be higher compared to pre-disaster levels.	

     Table 3: Health-related MDGs, targets and indicators
                                                    Goal 4: Reduce child mortality
         Target 4.A:                                    4.1 Under-five mortality rate
         Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990             4.2 Infant mortality rate
         and 2015, the under-five mortality rate        4.3 Proportion of one-year-old children immunized against measles
                                                   Goal 5: Improve maternal health
         Target 5.A:                                    5.1 Maternal mortality ratio
         Reduce by three quarters, between 1990         5.2 Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel
         and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio
         Target 5.B:                                    5.3 Contraceptive prevalence rate
         Achieve, by 2015, universal access to          5.4 Adolescent birth rate
         reproductive health                            5.5 Antenatal care coverage (at least one visit and at least four visits)
                                                        5.6 Unmet need for family planning
                                     Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
         Target 6.A:                                     6.1 HIV prevalence among population aged 15-24 years
         Have halted by 2015 and begun to                6.2 Condom use at last high-risk sex
         reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS                  6.3 Proportion of population aged 15-24 years with comprehensive
                                                         correct knowledge of HIV/AIDS
                                                         6.4 Ratio of school attendance of orphans to school attendance of
                                                         non-orphans aged 10-14 years
         Target 6.B:                                    6.5 Proportion of population with advanced HIV infection with access
         Achieve, by 2010, universal access to          to antiretroviral drugs
         treatment for HIV/AIDS
         Target 6.C:                                    6.6 Incidence and death rates associated with malaria
         Have halted by 2015 and begun to               6.7 Proportion of children under 5 sleeping under insecticide-treated
         reverse the incidence of malaria and           bed nets
         other major diseases
                                                        6.8 Proportion of children under 5 with fever who are treated with
                                                        appropriate anti-malarial drugs
                                                        6.9 Incidence, prevalence and death rates associated with tuberculosis
                                                        6.10 Proportion of tuberculosis cases detected and cured under directly
                                                        observed treatment short course

18   |    HEALTH
     CROSS-SECTORAL LINKAGES, INCLUDING
     CROSSCUTTING ISSUES
     Intersectoral discussions should take place during all phases of the PDNA. Standards should be agreed upon,
     particularly on key dimensions such as administrative boundaries, place names and some of their key attributes
     such as demographics, which will provide a solid basis for data comparability and cross-sectoral analysis.

     Health sector specialists need to work closely with environmental health (water and sanitation), nutrition and
     food security, housing and education, and age and gender specialists. These sectors are relevant to health; and
     conversely health considerations need to be integrated into these sectors. Furthermore, clarification of which
     sector aspects are addressed in other sectors helps to avoid double counting. For example, damage to health
     training facilities is usually included under the education sector.

     Crosscutting issues relevant for health include the status of children, pregnant and lactating women, the
     elderly, persons with disabilities and persons living with long-term or chronic illnesses such as HIV/AIDS. In addi-
     tion, there are also social determinants to be considered that could lead to increased vulnerability. These include
     the conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work and age. These usually include poverty, ethnicity and
     religion. Crosscutting issues and gender and age analysis are integrated as relevant in the four components un-
     der the pre-disaster baseline, disaster effects and recovery strategy.

     In disaster situations, people are affected differently based on gender and age, and each category may have
     different resources available and different coping strategies. Available data suggests that there is a pattern of
     gender differentiation at all levels of the disaster process: exposure to risk, risk perception, preparedness, re-
     sponse, physical impact, psychological impact, recovery and reconstruction.

     Women, older persons and children - particularly girls - may face increased risks to adverse health effects and vi-
     olence due to their possible dependence on others, limited mobility, etc. They may be unable to access assistance
     safely and, therefore, often require different relief and recovery efforts and approaches. Additionally, females are
     often insufficiently included in community consultation and decision-making processes, resulting in their needs
     not being identified and met.

     Different age groups will also be affected differently and will have varying needs. Older people can be particu-
     larly vulnerable. For example, of those who died in the wake of Hurricane Katrina in 2005, 71 percent were 60
     years and older. Advanced age can result in decreases in mobility, sight, hearing and muscle strength, as well as
     greater vulnerability to heat and cold. Chronic diseases common to older age, such as coronary heart disease,
     hypertension, diabetes and respiratory disease, can worsen when treatment is interrupted.




19   |   HEALTH
         THE HEALTH SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY
     This section provides guidance on how to develop and present the health sector recovery strategy. When pos-
     sible, the health sector recovery strategy should be harmonized with the country’s existing health sector de-
     velopment plan, while taking into account pre-disaster vulnerabilities, post disaster conditions and stakeholder
     consultations.

     SECTOR RECOVERY VISION AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES
     The recovery vision is developed jointly during the consultative process, which ensures the support of key
     stakeholders for the recovery strategy. The recovery vision serves as a guide for the recovery process and provides
     the overall direction and ‘end state’ that the stakeholders desire to achieve.

     The overall goal of health system recovery is to build the health system back and even make it better so as to
     contribute to a reduction in morbidity and mortality and improve the health status of the disaster-affected pop-
     ulation. Health system recovery aims to strengthen and build upon humanitarian activities, while also correcting
     those aspects of the system that allowed for the negative impacts of the disaster on the health system in the
     first place. This means the system will have safer infrastructure, be better prepared for key public health hazards
     and future disasters and provide equitable and affordable services to all.

     The key reference that should inform the recovery vision is the national health strategic plan. Significant pre-di-
     saster constraints in the performance of the health system need to be taken into account, and planning for re-
     covery should include further analysis to address these constraints. If there are ambitions for health sector reform
     formulated in the national health strategic plan, they need to be reflected in the recovery process.

     At times, the recovery process is used to accelerate the introduction of health sector reforms. The enthusiasm for
     reconstruction may be high, the generosity of donors may be considerable and resistance to change reduced.

     However, stakeholders involved in PDNAs should be cautious with using this ‘window of opportunity’ to in-
     troduce institutional and regulatory reforms or to aim for significant improvements in a short recovery period.
     Reform goals must be balanced with what can be practically achieved in the context of the disaster recovery
     period. While expectations may run high, there is limited evidence that major reforms in such contexts works.
     Furthermore, there are risks of being encouraged to introduce new policy approaches by international consul-
     tants or influential donors that may not be appropriate or realistic.

     The below guiding principles apply to the recovery process in the health sector.Government commitment,
     leadership and ownership at all levels are critical for successful health system recovery.

              •	 Governments can use the recovery process to strengthen their capacity.

              •	 Planning health system recovery should start early, in parallel with the humanitarian response.

              •	 Health system recovery plans should reflect the priorities and concerns of affected communities
                 and focus on the most vulnerable and most affected.

              •	 Adopt a health system approach using the six health system building blocks.



20   |   HEALTH
              •	 Ensure that the recovery plans stay connected to development coordination processes and that the
                 recovery plans take into account national strategies on health development and poverty reduction.

              •	 Ensure continual coordination with other sectors.

              •	 Throughout the process, maintain synergies with humanitarian actions.

              •	 Work in partnership with civil society, donors, non-governmental organisations, the World Bank,
                 other United Nations agencies and the private sector.

              •	 Use the disaster as an opportunity to reinforce national capacities for disaster risk management
                 and disaster risk reduction.

     RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY NEEDS, INCLUDING BUILDING BACK BETTER
     This section provides guidance on how to define needs for reconstruction and recovery. R During the PDNA, it
     is important to conduct inter-sectoral consultations to avoid double counting in the identification of recovery
     needs and costs (see the World Bank’s GFDRR Damage, Loss and Needs Assessment Guidance Notes, Volume 3).

     The analysis of recovery and reconstruction needs aims at restoring the situation at least to pre-disaster levels,
     and also identifies needs and opportunities for building back better approaches. Building back better implies
     enhancing the health infrastructure’s resilience to disasters, improving access to services and goods, catalyzing
     the economy, supporting livelihoods, strengthening disaster risk management capacities of government and
     communities, and reducing risks and vulnerabilities to future disasters.

     While the recovery plan should be harmonized with existing national health development plans and any pro-
     posed sector reform reflected in these, the recovery plan cannot aim to include measures that address the full
     development objectives.

     Table 4 (below) summarizes the main effects of a disaster on the health system and recovery and reconstruction
     needs, including suggestions for ways to build back better.




21   |   HEALTH
     Table 4: Disaster effects, recovery and reconstruction needs, including building back better
                                                        Health Recovery and reconstruction needs
                       Disaster effect
                                                        Restore pre-disaster conditions Building back better
                       Partial or full destruction of   Establish temporary health structures Ensure all infrastructures are
         Infrastruc-   health infrastructure and        and possible mobile health units.     hazard resilient.
         ture and      assets.                          Reconstruct and repair destroyed           Modernize and rationalize the
         assets                                         and/or damaged heath infrastruc-           health network.
                                                        ture, replace assets lost.
                       •	 Reduced availability of       •	 Restore capacity to deliver             •	 Address possible pre-existing
                          health services and              health services and procure                constraints in capacity and
                          disrupted procurement            pharmaceuticals.                           performance of service delivery.
                          of pharmaceuticals.           •	 Provide additional capacity in          •	 Adapt the health workforce and
                       •	 Reduced access to and            availability of services to meet           availability of pharmaceuticals
         Service
                          possible increased               increased and possible new de-          •	 Reduce pre-existing and new
         delivery,        demand for health                mands for services.
         access and                                                                                   inequities in access to health
                          services delivery.            •	 Ensure equitable access to health          services. Improve utilisation
         demand
                                                           service delivery and ensure utili-         and reduce barriers for access,
                                                           sation of services, in particular for      taking into account reduced
                                                           pre-existing and new vulnerable            ability to pay.
                                                           groups by reducing old and new
                                                           barriers for access and utilisation.
                    •	 Effects on capacity of           •	 Restore governance role for service •	 Strengthen governance role of
                       the health authorities              delivery of health authorities at      national health authorities to
                       to manage service                   national and subnational level,        better manage equitable
                       delivery, including                 including community participation.     service delivery and disaster
                       community participation,         •	 Manage the response and recovery       risks, based on a disaster
         Governance    and capacity to manage              process and coordination mecha-        risk management capacity
                       the response and                    nisms, within the health sector and    assessment, including health
                       recovery process.                   between different sectors.             information management and
                                                                                                  early warning systems.
                                                        •	 Support health information
                                                           management and early
                                                           warning systems
                       •	 Effects on pre-existing       •	 Conduct targeted health pro-        •	 Reduce vulnerabilities and risks
                          risks to health, new             motion and disease prevention          to health, and support com-
                          health risks caused by           interventions to control and mit-      munity resilience.
                          the disaster, and effect         igate impact of pre-existing and    •	 Introduce longer term disaster
         Risks            on the health status of          new risks to health, reduce excess/    risk reduction interventions,
                          the affected population.         avoidable morbidity and mortality      based on more detailed
                                                           caused by the disaster.                vulnerability and risk
                                                                                                  assessment and mapping.


     RECONSTRUCTION NEEDS FOR INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSETS

     Infrastructure needs include the requirement to repair and/or reconstruct damaged infrastructure and repair or
     replace assets. Credit schemes can be considered for reconstruction and repair of private hospitals and other
     private health service-related facilities.

     For reconstruction needs related to building back better approaches, several elements can be taken
     into consideration, as seen below.



22   |    HEALTH
              •	 Ensure that buildings are able to withstand future hazards and remain functional if or when the
                 next disaster happens. A first step is ensuring adherence to building codes and retrofitting. The
                 safe hospital approach, for example, proposes making hospital infrastructure more resilient to
                 common hazards and conducting training of health staff in managing disaster responses, including
                 mass casualty management (for examples of the interventions used in safe hospital programmes,
                 see Annex 8). A more detailed assessment of the safety of health infrastructure is often not feasi-
                 ble during the first three months after a disaster occurs, but such an assessment can be included in
                 the recovery plan.

              •	 When standards for health infrastructure have changed, the reconstruction can be used as an
                 opportunity for the ‘modernization’ of the health facilities.

              •	 The existing health network in the affected areas may need to be rationalized and streamlined to
                 meet the changed needs because of population movements and changes in disease patterns.


     RECOVERY NEEDS FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, ASSETS AND SERVICES

     RESTORE TEMPORARY HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE
     While waiting for more permanent reconstruction of health infrastructures, which can take up to several years,
     it is necessary to establish temporary structures. This can be done, for instance, by renting a building and/or ini-
     tiating mobile health units in the vicinity of damaged health facilities that are not functional and in displacement
     settlements or areas hosting large numbers of displaced persons where the capacity of the existing facilities is
     no longer sufficient.

     RESTORE SERVICE DELIVERY CAPACITY AND ENSURE ACCESS TO SERVICES
     The immediate need in the affected areas is to restore the capacity to deliver health services at community,
     primary and secondary care levels, to ensure that health workers can resume their duties, and to procure phar-
     maceuticals. Additional capacity may be needed to meet increased and possible new demands for services based
     on changes in disease patterns, such as trauma and mental health. Ensure that appropriate triage and referral
     systems exist for emergency medical, surgical, trauma and obstetric care.

     Primary health care services should be easily accessible to populations remaining in the affected areas and at
     temporary settlement sites, while secondary care services can be provided at appropriate sites. Health facilities in
     areas that receive significant numbers of internally displaced populations need to be strengthened to cope with
     the increased number of patients.

     The availability of essential packages of health services needs to be reviewed, as well as how these packages
     may need to be adapted to changes in disease profiles and an increased burden of disease, as is often seen
     after disasters.

     If infrastructure related to the production of pharmaceuticals has been destroyed, their production capacity will
     need to be restored as well as the functionality of the cold chain.

     For service delivery needs related to building back better approaches, several elements can be taken
     into consideration, as seen below. The availability and performance of service delivery may need to be improved
     to address possible increases or changes in morbidity. If capacity was insufficient before the disaster, and access
     had been limited for vulnerable groups, these constraints need to be addressed.

23   |   HEALTH
              •	 The health workforce capacity can be adapted to meet priority gaps and new health demands, and
                 packages can be offered that encourage staff to return to or be (re)deployed to the affected areas.

              •	 Efforts can be made not only to restore, but also to increase the national production capacity
                 for pharmaceuticals. Also, regulations can be improved and better quality assurance mecha-
                 nisms initiated.

              •	 Address the pre-existing constraints related to performance of and access to health services.
                 As examples:

                  -- reduce financial barriers to access services by, for example, suspending user fees for displaced persons and oth-
                     er populations that have reduced ability to pay for health services as many may have lost assets and livelihoods
                     due to the disaster. Identify planned initiatives to reduce financial barriers, such as programmes for free Mother
                     and Child Health services, that may already have been introduced as part of the health sector reforms;

                  -- reduce pre-existing and new inequities related to access by taking into account new and old differentiated
                     vulnerabilities, needs and interests of women and men of all ages and sub-groups of the population, as well as
                     findings from gender analyses; and

                  -- repair roads and bridges that can allow access to still functioning health facilities, as this may make it unneces-
                     sary to establish temporary facilities in affected areas.

     RESTORE AND STRENGTHENING GOVERNANCE CAPACITY, INCLUDING DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT
     If it has been interrupted, the governance role for service delivery of the health authorities at national and sub-
     national level needs to be restored, including community participation as it existed prior to the disaster. This
     capacity is required to coordinate and manage the response and recovery processes. When large numbers of
     international health agencies enter the country to assist, these need to be registered nationally to ensure they
     meet national quality criteria. Furthermore, systems need to be put in place to ensure adequate and regular re-
     porting by national and international partners, adapted to the emergency conditions (for example, more regular
     reporting, using simplified reporting formats). This includes the activation of early warning systems.

     For governance related building back better needs, the recovery phase poses opportunities to strategy inte-
     grate or strengthen the existing national disaster risk management programme for the health sector, in coordina-
     tion with the national disaster management authorities. The recovery phase can be used to scale-up existing health
     systems to manage emergencies and to protect and increase the resilience of the health systems and communities.
     While the PDNA itself cannot do an in-depth assessment of disaster preparedness capacity and plans for disaster
     risk reduction, the recoverycan plan for such further analysis and include a budget to address obvious gaps.

     Other building back better initiatives may include the following:

              •	 Strengthen governance role of national health authorities to better manage equitable service
                 delivery, including health information management and early warning systems.

              •	 Strengthen the role of communities in the management and planning of health services and
                 support to community resilience.

              •	 Strengthen governance for disaster risk management, including updating of national disaster manage-
                 ment laws. Depending on what is already known about the disaster risk management capacity of the
                 MoH, a capacity assessment may need to be planned. This is often not feasible during the first three
                 months after a disaster happened, but such an assessment can be included in the recovery plan.
24   |   HEALTH
              •	 Revise and/or update preparedness plans and consolidate early warning systems.

              •	 If not already specifically mentioned in the national health strategic plan, ensure that disaster risk capaci-
                 ty is included in the next Joint annual review and in the revision of the national health strategic plan.

              •	 Promote participatory processes and systems inclusive of women, girls, boys and men with
                 national stakeholders.

     ADDRESSING HEALTH RISKS AND DISASTER RISK REDUCTION INTERVENTIONS FOR FUTURE RISKS
     The immediate need following a disaster is to control and mitigate the effects of pre-existing and new risks to
     health and to support community resilience. Risks need to be broken down in prevention and disaster risk reduc-
     tion programmes, into the following parts:

              1.	 the probability of the risk occurring;

              2.	 the severity of its consequences when it occurs; and

              3.	 who is exposed to the risks and how.

     The PDNA analysis should examine the root causes of disaster, including the vulnerability of assets, sectors and
     communities to the related hazards. This should be based on in-depth vulnerability and risk assessment and
     mapping, when such analysis is available.

     To mitigate the most common risks, the below interventions should be undertaken:

              •	 Prevent disease outbreaks and ensure capacity for early detection and rapid response to public
                 health emergencies by strengthening early warning systems and ensuring outbreak preparedness
                 and prepositioning of supplies;

              •	 Resume vaccination services as soon as possible and consider mass vaccination in crowded settings,
                 such as camps, or for other populations at increased risk;

              •	 Conduct vector control exercises and implement preventive measures to reduce the risk of
                 vector-borne diseases;

              •	 Intensify community social mobilisation, including health risk communication, to promote safe water,
                 sanitation and hygiene practices and key information messages. (For examples, see: www.cdacnet-
                 work.org/i/20140728102420-genh0). Support adequate maternal and newborn health services,
                 ensuring privacy and cultural sensitivity, with registration in camps, early detection of and referral for
                 complications of pregnancy and childbirth, safe delivery and provision of relevant commodities;

              •	 Support appropriate infant and young child feeding, supplementation for pregnant and lactating
                 mothers and management of malnutrition, including building health worker capacity and support-
                 ing referral and hospital care for management of severe malnutrition in communities;

              •	 Ensure continuity of treatment for chronic diseases (communicable and noncommunicable);

              •	 Implement programmes that prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based violence.

     For further examples of disaster risk reduction and preparedness interventions, see Annex 9.




25   |   HEALTH
     THE SECTOR RECOVERY PLAN

     PRIORITIZATION AND SEQUENCING OF RECOVERY NEEDS

     Following the rational of the recovery strategy, it is necessary to identify key outcomes, outputs and interven-
     tions based on the needs identified, then prioritise and sequence them over time (short, medium and long term)
     and distinguish those interventions that are related to restoring the situation as it was before the disaster from
     building back better interventions.

     This prioritisation and sequencing exercise should be based on a consultative process and should include, and

     The following considerations should be taken into account when conducting the prioritisation:

              •	 Be informed by and aligned with the national health development objectives, as reflected in, for
                 example, national health development policies, poverty reduction strategies, etc.

              •	 Address and prioritise the key risks and vulnerabilities that contributed to the extent of disaster’s
                 impact on communities, systems and infrastructure. Note those that can be avoided (an obvious
                 example is that damaged infrastructure that is rebuilt according to proper building codes and disas-
                 ter retrofitting is more likely to ensure continued services and protect investments in infrastructure
                 reconstruction during future hazards).

              •	 When possible, building back better interventions should also have a positive contribution to the
                 recovery from the current disaster.

     Post disaster health recovery needs often outweigh available resources and cannot aim to take on the entire na-
     tional health development agenda, hence the need to prioritise. The first group of priority interventions include
     those that will reconstruct damaged infrastructure, ensure access to services, restore governance and address
     health risks. Then priorities need to be established for interventions to building back better, as linked to these
     prior areas.

     Mostly prioritisation is done based on expert opinion consensus, but should not be driven by international ex-
     perts and development partners. Often in late stages of prioritisation, lobby groups or political interests may
     divert evidence-informed priorities. While discussions and arguments for prioritisation should be informed by
     available evidence, time usually does not allow in-depth ranking based on various methods of prioritisation, such
     as single criteria and multi-criteria decision analysis. The criteria for these prioritisation methods are listed below:

     Single criteria analysis

          1.	 Burden of disease analysis (e.g., top ten morbidity and mortality)

          2.	 Cost-effectiveness analysis

          3.	 Equity and gender analysis

     Multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA - ranking)

          1.	 Population affected

          2.	 Severity of the problem



26   |   HEALTH
          3.	 Ease of implementation of required interventions

          4.	 Emergency situation

          5.	 Burden of disease

          6.	 Population vulnerability

          7.	 Cost effectiveness

     With regards to sequencing, PDNAs usually have three timeframes: short, medium and long term. The short
     term or early recovery interventions overlap with the humanitarian response. For example, for the reconstruction
     of infrastructure, the period required for staged reconstruction of facilities and services needs to be estimated,
     taking into account existing construction sector capacity and replacement availability of specialised equipment.

     The humanitarian and recovery phase should ensure access to an essential health care package and public health
     programmes that reduce vulnerabilities and save lives. The reconstruction phase needs to restore and further
     develop service packages, ensure that the medium- to longer-term health consequences of the disaster are ad-
     dressed and build the health system back better.


     COSTING

     This section explains the logic of how costs for reconstruction and recovery are calculated based on the projected
     needs and offers realistic approaches to estimating the costs for building back better.

     All assumptions, possible formulas and references used for unit costs for each budget line item need to be made
     explicit, including for building back better, and attached as an annex to the sector chapter.

     The following considerations should be taken into account for costing:The total required budget should be real-
     istic and take into account the existing total health expenditures and absorption capacity of the health sector as
     to what is feasible to achieve over a period of three to five years.

              •	 The costs for building back better should be proportionate to the costs of recovery and reconstruc-
                 tion needs, as well as the type of disaster (for instance, a slow onset drought may have very low
                 reconstruction needs, but have high needs to invest in resilience and building back better).

              •	 The costs for building back better should be realistic compared to the government’s recovery bud-
                 get and the financial envelope pledged by the government and international development part-
                 ners. Building back better plans must take into account that a large percentage of the funds will be
                 needed for physical reconstruction and compensation for losses, even though partially.

              •	 The costs for building back better should also be realistic in terms of the absorption capacity of
                 the country.

     The difference between the cost of the proposed recovery and reconstruction needs and the value of the dam-
     age and loss should not become too large. (It is important to note that the value of recovery and reconstruction
     needs is not equal to the sum of damage and losses, it may be more or less.)

     For post-disaster donor pledging conferences, the development partners are accustomed to looking at the size
     of the damage and loss and pledging accordingly. There is usually little funding remaining for investments in
     improved access, improvement of governance performance and risk reduction measures.
27   |   HEALTH
     Costing of infrastructure reconstruction is guided by the estimated value of damage, augmented by
     additional costs involved in the introduction of quality improvements, technological innovations and risk
     reduction measures.

                              Reconstruction needs = value of damage + cost of
         (quality improvement + technological modernization + relocation, when needed + disaster risk
                                  reduction features + multi-annual inflation)

     To plan for the incremental costs to make the health infrastructure ‘all hazard’ resilient depends on the original
     structural design criteria for the buildings and on the degree of improvement in construction standards and
     norms, as defined in the reconstruction strategy adopted after the disaster. The additional costs have been found
     to range from 10 to 35 percent of the replacement cost. Structural and civil engineers who are familiar with
     disaster-resilient construction standards would be able to define the percentages. When relocation of a hospital
     or clinic to a safer area is required to reduce disaster risk, the additional cost of land acquisition and provision of
     water, sanitation, electricity and other utilities need to be taken into account. Furthermore, the reconstruction
     strategy may include a rationalization of the health network, taking into account possible population movements
     and opportunities for increased efficiency. This may make the costs for reconstruction either higher or lower.

     A scheme of structural retrofitting of hospitals and health facilities may also be required, to ensure that undam-
     aged or lightly-damaged units are able to withstand the impact of future disasters and to continue functioning
     uninterruptedly. The financial needs are estimated by specialised structural or civil engineers after defining the
     standards for retrofitting and the degree of disaster resilience to be achieved, particularly in the case of earth-
     quakes.

     Health facility safety is not limited to disaster resilient buildings. Not only must the buildings remain standing
     after a disaster, but the facility must remain fully functional and even be able to cope with increased numbers
     of patients. A comprehensive recovery plan for the health facility will encompass not only disaster resilience of
     buildings, but also focus on emergency preparedness at the level of the health facility, including response plan-
     ning and mobilisation of emergency medical response teams, training of health facility staff and conducting of
     simulation exercises. The action of individual hospitals should be integrated into a national programme to make
     hospitals safer and prepared for disasters.

     An indicative range of the required budget for the development of a national programme on safe and prepared
     hospitals (not including implementation of extensive structural or non-structural measures) is as follows:

         Risk assessment, including social economic assessment                 $50,000 - $200,000
         Rapid assessment of safety of health facilities                       $50,000 - $200,000 per annum
         Implementation of a national safe hospitals programme                 $100,000 - $500,000 per annum
         Training and capacity development                                     $30,000 - $100,000 per annum
         TOTAL                                                                 $230,000 - $1million


     COSTING FOR HEALTH SECTOR RECOVERY

     The costs of providing health services under temporary conditions while damaged infrastructures are being
     repaired or rebuilt (in some cases taking several years) – whether it be the introduction of tent hospitals and
     clinics, rented premises or mobile services – must be carefully estimated. Additionally, funding is required for


28   |    HEALTH
     re-establishing essential services, addressing crucial issues such as access and quality in the context of possibly
     increased morbidity and lower purchasing power, and support to governance and management capacity and to
     management of health risks.

     The costs for the basic recovery needs are guided by the value of estimated changes in flows, which cannot be
     covered by the regular budget of the government without negatively impacting the sector’s normal develop-
     ment activities.

                                              Recovery needs =
          estimated value of changes in flows over the total period until reconstruction is achieved -
                  the amount of funds available in the government budget for this purpose
     The costing for investments related to building back better for the health system is more complicated and needs
     to take into account the building back better considerations mentioned earlier. For the purpose of the recovery
     plan, it is often not necessary or possible to do a detailed bottom up costing or to use formulas. Examples of
     recovery interventions and subsequent building back better approaches can be found in Table 4 and Annex 2.
     An assumption sheet is used to explain how cost estimates are made, including those for building back better
     (see Annexes 3 and 4).


     STRUCTURE OF THE RECOVERY PLAN

     In line with the PDNA guidance on a recovery strategy (in Volume A), the sector recovery plan should be for-
     mulated following a results-based model, and therefore include: 1) priority needs; 2) interventions required; 3)
     expected outputs; 4) recovery costs; and 5) intended outcomes. See Annex 10 for a table that may be used for
     a recovery plan.

     There is no blueprint for recovery planning. The depth of response analysis will be limited, largely due to time
     constraints. The PDNA can identify issues that need to be assessed and analysed in further detail at a later stage,
     before making more explicit policy and planning choices for which implications cannot yet be overseen. This
     includes, for example, the rationalizing of the health network when there have been major population move-
     ments, policy issues as human resource production and distribution, or health financing to address reduced
     capacity to pay. Possible policy responses need to be based on an analysis of the main constraints in the health
     system (see: WHO’s manual on Analysing Disrupted Health Sectors, Module 12: Formulating strategies for the
     recovery of a disrupted health sector and Annex 13, pages 382-385). Table 4 and Annex 2 include examples of
     typical early to longer term responses, based on previous PDNAs.

     The reconstruction and recovery plan for the health sector of the PDNA should follow the same main headings
     used to describe the effects of the disaster, and the interventions of the plan should be based on the priorities of
     the identified needs. Furthermore, expected outputs and outcome indicators need to be added.

     IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS

     PARTNERSHIPS, COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT

     The mechanisms that need to be in place for implementation of a health recovery strategy follow the same prin-
     cipals as discussed in section 1.2. Management of the health recovery strategy should be led by the MoH and be
     part of the multisectoral implementation by the government entity that has that mandate.

29   |   HEALTH
     Depending on funding mechanisms, additional management structures may need to be established, for exam-
     ple, when multi-partner recovery funds are created (as was the case after the earthquake in Haiti in 2010).

     Implementation mechanisms should involve regional and district health authorities and ensure links with devel-
     opment partners, who can use the recovery strategy for updating and revising their national and subnational
     annual operational plans in areas significantly affected by the disaster. When revising district health plans, the
     recovery needs can be integrated to provide more detailed implementation plans that will link recovery to devel-
     opment, with bottom up budgets. During this process, it is realistic to expand consultations and involve subna-
     tional health authorities and communities.

     Many humanitarian health organisations offer assistance to a country after a major disaster. In addition to sup-
     porting life saving interventions, some humanitarian agencies will also support early recovery approaches and/or
     support recovery programmes of the MoH. Humanitarian health partners need to be informed about the PDNA,
     which they can use as guidance to integrate early recovery approaches into their humanitarian programmes to
     support the recovery process.


     MONITORING AND EVALUATION

     Establishing a monitoring system - if possible based on the existing health information management system - will
     allow assessing progress and effectiveness of the recovery interventions. The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
     plan should:

              •	 focus on a few critical indicators;

              •	 have a clearly defined frequency and timeline; and

              •	 preferably be implemented by a multisectoral team comprised of surveyors and evaluators.

     For an example of such a monitoring system, see the Tsunami Recovery Impact Assessment and Monitoring
     System (http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2006/a91183.pdf). A budget, usually 5-10 percent of the recovery and
     reconstruction budget, should be set aside for this purpose.


     RESOURCE MOBILISATION AND FUNDING MECHANISMS

     Reaching consensus on funding mechanisms often poses a major challenge during the recovery phase. Decid-
     ing which funding mechanisms to use should be based on the local context and aim at achieving the greatest
     efficiency. Such decisions begin with dialogue between the national government and international partners
     and consider the pros and cons of each proposed arrangement to arrive at a mechanism that is agreeable to all
     parties. Financial modalities are often influenced by a Financial Management Assessment done by the World
     Bank and the funding preferences of specific donors. The result is often a mix of on and off budget funding
     mechanisms, and may include pooled funding arrangements, such as Multi-Partner Recovery Trust Funds. The
     modalities chosen should support the governance role of the MoH in financial management. Adequate financial
     tracking mechanisms for pledges, disbursements and actual expenditures need to be established.




30   |   HEALTH
     CHALLENGES TO SECTOR RECOVERY PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION

              •	 Some challenges to be aware of when planning the recovery and its implementation are below.

              •	 Focusing only on infrastructure and service delivery and neglecting the support components that
                 enable access to services.

              •	 Embarking on ambitious investment plans, without a comprehensive analysis of absorption
                 capacity and available resources.

              •	 Reproducing the same political and social systems that were at the root of the crisis, or not ad-
                 dressing the underlying vulnerabilities and inequalities that may have contributed to the impact of
                 the disaster.

              •	 Particularly when national policy making capacity is weak, international stakeholders pushing
                 politically-oriented policy options or applying standard solutions that may have worked elsewhere
                 but may not be appropriate for the country.

              •	 Working within a limited and often unrealistic timeframe, which leads to inadequate consultation
                 with all stakeholders.

              •	 Unreliable and incomplete information is always a major challenge in countries in fragile situations.

              •	 The risk that the assessments and recovery planning are done in isolation, not sufficiently
                 embedded in either the humanitarian coordination or linked to longer term development
                 cooperation mechanisms.



     ANNEX 1: STEPS FOR THE PDNA PROCESS FOR THE
     HEALTH SECTOR
     When a disaster occurs:

              •	 Start collecting baseline information: this can be done in country, as well as remotely (off site); start
                 filling in the analytical matrix with relevant information.

              •	 Establish a database of pre-existing health facilities.

              •	 Start collecting information on functionality/damage of health facilities.

              •	 Start collecting information on disease trends, pre-existing and possible new risks to health, previ-
                 ous and new vulnerable groups, and response interventions done to mitigate health consequences
                 of the disaster.

              •	 Collect relevant reports that describe the health system and its pre-disaster performance.

              •	 Prepare to send health recovery expert(s) to assist the country.

     When a PDNA is requested by government:

              •	 Government to appoint focal points in the ministries whose sectors will be included in the PDNA,
                 this should include a recovery focal point in the MoH.

31   |   HEALTH
              •	 World Bank, European Union and World Health Organisation health experts liaise with the MoH
                 focal point.Establish a Steering Committee to oversee the PDNA process and divide tasks.

              •	 Prepare for training on the health component of the PDNA as part of the usual one-two day work-
                 shop that formally initiates the PDNA, and train relevant stakeholders.

              •	 Call for a meeting with health development partners, identify key stakeholders that can assist in
                 the assessment, and agree on how this group will be linked to recovery planning.

              •	 Present the PDNA process and objectives to the humanitarian health coordination body, identify
                 humanitarian partners, including donors, with an interest and capacity to support the (early)
                 recovery process.

              •	 Develop a time schedule, according to the overall deadlines of the PDNA, including:

                  -- site visits to verify reports of damages;

                  -- national and subnational workshops or focus group discussions with health authorities to discuss needs and
                     constraints in health system functions and recovery needs and priorities;

                  -- regular meetings of the Steering Committee;

                  -- periodical engagement with other relevant sectors and crosscutting topics;

                  -- periodical meetings with the humanitarian coordination mechanism;

                  -- periodical reporting to the national health sector development coordination body; and

                  -- validation workshop of first draft.

              •	 Assist the MoH to prepare for the donor conference, when this is organised.

              •	 Hold meetings with donors and government to advocate for the importance of health in the
                 recovery strategy.

              •	 Include the MoH in the governing structures to manage the allocation of funds to and/or within
                 the health sector.

              •	 Agree on financing and implementation modalities and establish an M&E system for health system
                 recovery based on the recovery strategy.




32   |   HEALTH
33
|
         ANNEX 2: ANALYTICAL MATRIX BASED ON HEALTH SECTOR RESPONSE DOMAINS




HEALTH
         AND BUILDING BLOCKS
                             Pre-disaster baselines and challenges - key                                                        Possible humanitarian              Possible (early) recovery
                                                                                       Disaster impact - key issues
                                             indicators                                                                               responses                            response

                           Crude mortality rate; Under 5mortality rate;             Increased number of deaths due to     Top five causes of mortality and     Rehabilitation of disabled
                           disability                                               the immediate impact of the disaster morbidity to prioritise the health    persons
                                                                                                                          interventions and adjust these as
                           Proportional mortality                                   New health risks (e.g., potential
                                                                                                                          morbidity patterns evolve over time
         Health                                                                     outbreaks or interruption of services
                           Life expectancy (by sex)
         outcomes                                                                   for chronic diseases)                 Appropriate management of dead
                           Morbidity patterns                                                                             bodies (See Management of dead
                                                                                    Effects on the health related MDGs
                                                                                                                          bodies after disasters. A field man-
                                                                                                                          ual for first responders. PAHO,
                                                                                                                          WHO, ICRC and IFRC. 2006)
                           Database of health facilities (e.g., SARA)               Availability of health resources and   (Re) establish provision of essen-   Support to the decentralisation
                                                                                    services:                              tial service package services:       process when this is part of the
                           Availability of functioning 24/7 referral system
                                                                                                                                                                national health policy
                           between levels of care                                   Health facilities damaged/ de-         cost per case/per capita per year
                                                                                    stroyed, including equipment and                                            Support to management of
                           Average population covered by functioning health                                                When necessary set up tempo-
                                                                                    furniture and records                                                       health facilities
                           facility by type of health facility and by administra-                                          rary health facilities, and deploy
                           tive unit                                              Assess damage and loss                   medical brigades, supported by       Repair of health facilities
         Service                                                                                                           international assistance
         delivery 1:       #of hospital beds per 10,000 population by admin         Estimate reconstruction costs                                               Replacement of damaged
                           unit                                                                                            Support health facilities in areas   health and medical equipment
         Organisation                                                               by type and extend of destruction
                                                                                                                           that received high numbers of IDPs   (based on the safe hospital
         and               # of outpatient consultations per person per year        ($)
                                                                                                                                                                concept)
                           by admin unit                                                                                   Temporary pre-hospital units
         management                                                                 Effect on transport, logistics for
                                                                                                                           to treat injuries, and/or medical    Replacement of furniture
                           # of consultations per clinician per day by admin unit   supplies and referral between levels
         (including                                                                                                        evacuation
                                                                                    of care, including communication                                            Relocation of facilities
         infrastructure,   Cost per case (treatment, transportation, etc.)
                                                                                    network, accessibility by roads that   (Temporary) Increase outreach        Re-establish blood banks
         equipment         Costs for campaigns                                      may be blocked, etc.                   services
         and transport)                                                                                                                                         Review health network and
                           Average revenue per patient                              Blood banks destroyed                  Make buffer emergency medical        rationalize numbers, types and
                           Proportional mortality                                                                          supplies and emergency medical       distribution of health facilities,
                                                                                    Staff killed, injured or displaced
                                                                                                                           teams available; establishment       when appropriate
                           # and % of health facilities that meet basic service Increased demand for health
                                                                                                                           of semi-permanent structures,
                           capacity standards                                   services in unaffected areas due to        mobile health units
                                                                                population movements
34
|
                             Pre-disaster baselines and challenges - key                                                       Possible humanitarian               Possible (early) recovery
                                                                                      Disaster impact - key issues
                                             indicators                                                                              responses                             response




HEALTH
                           # health facilities with Basic Emergency
         Service deliv-    Obstetric Care (EmOC)/
         ery 1:            500,000 population by administrative unit

         Organisation      # health facilities with Comprehensive
         and               EmOC/500,000 population by administrative unit

         management        % of health facilities with availability of clinical
                           management of rape survivors +EC +PEP
         (including
         infrastructure,   % of births assisted by skilled attendant
         equipment
         and transport)
         (cont)




                             Pre-disaster baselines and challenges - key                                                      Possible humanitarian                 Possible (early) recovery
                                                                                     Disaster impact - key issues
                                             indicators                                                                             responses                               response

                                                                           Service delivery 2: Health sector response domains
                           Under-five mortality rate                               Increased child mortality/ Under    Total cases of respiratory tract infec-   Re-establish routine vaccination
                                                                                   5 mortality rate/ neonatal mor-     tion + cost per case                      2x/year de-worming campaigns
                           Infant mortality rate
                                                                                   tality                              Total cases of Under 5 diarrhoea +        in schools
                           Proportion of 1 year-old children immunized
                                                                                   Disruption of routine vaccination   cost per case                             Scale up Integrated Manage-
                           against measles (and estimate of coverage 6
                                                                                   services                            Mass measles vaccination campaigns        ment of Childhood Illnesses as
                           months - 15 years)
                                                                                   Increase in malnutrition/disease    (combined with vitamin A and bed          part of an essential package
         Child health      Coverage of DPT3 in under 1 year by admin unit
                                                                                   interactions among vulnerable       nets, de-worming, etc.)                   of health services, including
                                                                                   children                                                                      a strengthened community
                                                                                                                       Basic neonatal care for newborns
                                                                                                                                                                 component
                                                                                                                       linked to deliveries in health facil-
                                                                                                                       ities - see Minimum Initial Service
                                                                                                                       Package (MISP) for EmOC
35
|
                         Pre-disaster baselines and challenges - key                                                     Possible humanitarian                 Possible (early) recovery
                                                                                Disaster impact - key issues
                                         indicators                                                                            responses                               response




HEALTH
                                                                    Service delivery 2: Health sector response domains
                        # of admissions to SFT and TFC (age/sex)              Food shortage, lack of access to     Incorporate vitamin A, zinc, and iron     Growth monitoring
                                                                              food by vulnerable populations,      foliate in ongoing immunization           Nutrition programmes within
                        Proportion/number of U5 with global acute
                                                                              reduced diversity in diets           campaigns                                 Integrated Management of
                        malnutrition and severe acute malnutrition cases
                        detected at the outpatient department/inpatient       Changes in breastfeeding practic- Screening for malnutrition in health         Childhood Illnesses
                        department                                            es as a result of the disaster    facilities and population
                        Prevalence of underweight children under-             Treatment of malnutrition dis-       Supplementary and therapeutic
                        five years                                            rupted by disaster                   feeding programmes
         Nutrition
                        Proportion of population below minimum level of       Increased risk of malnutrition       Treatment of medical complications
                        dietary energy                                        (women, children and older           of malnourished children
                                                                              persons)
                        consumption
                        Prevalence of global acute malnutrition + severe
                        acute malnutrition.
                        Level of food security based on IPC
                        # or incidence rates for selected diseases relevant   Increased incidence and Case         Treatment of increased morbidity          Community health education/
                        to the local context by age/sex. (cholera, measles,   Fatality Rate, possible outbreaks                                              promotion
                                                                                                                   Reactive mass vaccination in epidem-
                        acute meningitis, hemorrhagic fever, zoonotic                                              ic settings (yellow fever epidemic,  Restore or establish a compre-
                                                                              Treatment disruption for patients
                        diseases, others)                                     on ARV (including for PMTCT)         meningitis epidemic, measles)        hensive TB, malaria and HIV
                        Case Fatality Rate for most common diseases           and TB/DOTS                                                               control programme
                                                                                                                   Disease control surveillance
                        Incidence, prevalence and death rates or Case         Increased risk of HIV transmission                                        Preventive vaccination cam-
                                                                                                                   Tracing and treatment of known TB
                        Fatality Rates associated with tuberculosis                                                                                     paigns in risk areas (yellow
                                                                              increased risk of malaria            patients
                                                                                                                                                        fever, meningitis)
                        # and proportion of tuberculosis cases detected       (increased exposure due to loss      Ensure appropriate HIV prevention
                        and cured under directly observed treatment                                                                                     Further integration of verti-
         Communicable                                                         of homes, bed nets, etc. )           measures
                        short course                                                                                                                    cal programming with other
         Diseases                                                             Total cases of typhoid/ fever +      Tracing and provision of ART for     services
                        Incidence and Case Fatality Rates associated with     cost per case                        people previously on treatment,
                        malaria                                                                                    including PMTCT
                                                                              Total cases of diarrhoea + cost
                        Proportion of children under 5 sleeping under         per case                             Mass distribution of bed nets
                        insecticide-treated bed nets
                                                                              Total cases of malaria/ dengue       Environmental vector control (in
                        Proportion of children under 5 with fever who are     + cost per case prevention and       crowded places)
                        treated with                                          control of disease outbreaks         Establish standard precautions (dis-
                        appropriate anti-malarial drugs                                                            tribution of hygiene kits, Provision of
                                                                                                                   disinfectants; and safety boxes)
36
|
                            Pre-disaster baselines and challenges - key                                                    Possible humanitarian              Possible (early) recovery
                                                                                  Disaster impact - key issues
                                            indicators                                                                           responses                            response




HEALTH
                                                                        Service delivery 2: Health sector response domains
                          HIV prevalence among population aged 15-24
                          years
                          # of patients on ART
                          Condom use at last high-risk sex
         Communicable     Proportion of population aged 15-24 years with
         Diseases         comprehensive correct
         (cont)           knowledge of HIV/AIDS
                          Ratio of school attendance of orphans to school
                          attendance of non orphans aged 10-14 years
                          Proportion of population with advanced HIV
                          infection with access to antiretroviral drugs

                          % of births assisted by a skilled attendant           Increased risk of maternal and       Ensure provision of reproductive      Ensure sustainable provision of
                                                                                infant mortality and mortality       health services guaranteeing avail-   MISP and beyond
                          % expected deliveries by CS by admin unit
                                                                                                                     ability of MISP and expanding as      establish minimal availability for
                                                                                Increased risk of sexual and other
                          # of cases or incidence of sexual                                                          possible
                                                                                forms of gender-based violence                                             MISP, including EmOC
                          violence (by sex and age)                                                                  Clinical management of rape services Integration of interventions, in-
                                                                                Disruption in access to family
         Sexual and       Maternal mortality ratio; fertility rate                                                   and EmOC (basic and comprehen-
                                                                                planning                                                                  cluding antenatal care , PMTCT,
         reproductive                                                                                                sive)                                nutrition and immunization
                          Contraceptive prevalence rate                         Disruption of PMTCT regimens
         health                                                                                                      Financial protection maternity
                          Adolescent birth rate                                 for HIV+ pregnant women                                                   Strengthening of national family
                                                                                                                     services: free access to deliveries, planning programme
                          Antenatal care coverage (at least one visit and at                                         EmOC, and follow up post-partum
                          least four visits)
                          Unmet need for family planning

                          Prevalence of hypertension and diabetes, mental       Interruption of treatment            Ensure continuity of treatment for    Re-establish data system for
                          health, renal dialysis                                                                     chronic diseases                      patients on treatment
                                                                                Patients lost for treatment of
                                                                                hypertension and diabetes, renal     Tracing of patients cases on hyper-   Strengthen home care for
         Non-communi-                                                           dialysis                             tension, diabetes and/or mental       patients with chronic diseases
         cable diseases                                                                                              health treatment, renal dialysis      (communicable and noncom-
                                                                                Worsening of diabetes and
                                                                                                                                                           municable)
                                                                                hypertension status after disaster
                                                                                due to changes in diet and stress
37
|
                          Pre-disaster baselines and challenges - key                                                  Possible humanitarian                Possible (early) recovery
                                                                              Disaster impact - key issues
                                          indicators                                                                         responses                              response




HEALTH
                                                                   Service delivery 2: Health sector response domains
                         % of population with severe or extreme difficul-   Potentially high number of           Treatment of injuries - prevention of   Rehabilitation of persons with
                         ties in functioning                                injuries                             long-term disability                    disability
                                                                            Increased # of people with           # of total cases of injuries and cost   Strengthen capacity for prosthe-
                                                                            disabilities                         per case                                ses and rehabilitation
                                                                            Untreated wounds and infec-          Field hospitals, surgery and basic      Disability care to be taken into
                                                                            tions of wounds are major public     EmOC                                    consideration in new health
                                                                            health problem, risks for tetanus                                            system
         Injuries                                                                                                Set up referral mechanism, including
                                                                                                                 international evacuation of patients
                                                                                                                 Vaccination campaigns to include
                                                                                                                 tetanus
                                                                                                                 Amputations follow up care to be
                                                                                                                 done at primary care level



                         % of population with severe or extreme difficul-   Interruption of treatment of         Strengthen community self-help and      Initiate development of sustain-
                         ties in functioning                                mental health diseases               social support                          able community mental health
                                                                                                                                                         system :
                         Severe disorder (e.g., psychosis, severe depression, Decrease in functioning            Ensure access to psychological first
                         severely disabling form of anxiety disorder): 2-3% On average prevalence of severe      aid to people in acute distress         build long-term, basic, sustain-
                                                                                                                                                         able community mental health
                         Mild or moderate mental disorder (e.g., mild and     mental disorder increases 1%       Ensure continuity of treatment,
                                                                                                                                                         services in areas affected by
                         moderate forms of depression and anxiety disor-                                         managing new and pre-existing
                                                                              On average rates of mild or mod-                                           emergencies
                         ders, including mild and moderate Post-Traumatic erate mental disorder increases        severe mental disorders in general
                         Stress Disorder): 10%                                                                   health care                            In districts without psychiatric
         Mental health                                                        5-10%
                                                                                                                                                        inpatient care, plans for new
         and psychoso-                                                                                           Address the safety, basic needs and
                                                                            Mild or moderate: 15-20%                                                    general hospitals as part of
         cial support                                                                                            rights of people in mental hospitals +
                                                                                                                                                        health recovery investment
                                                                                                                 cost per case
                                                                                                                                                        should include considering
                                                                                                                                                        planning for a staffed acute
                                                                                                                                                        psychiatric care inpatient unit
                                                                                                                                                         Include mental health in curricu-
                                                                                                                                                         lum and of Primary Heath Care
                                                                                                                                                         staff
38
|
                            Pre-disaster baselines and challenges - key                                                  Possible humanitarian               Possible (early) recovery
                                                                                  Disaster impact - key issues
                                            indicators                                                                         responses                             response




HEALTH
                                                                       Service delivery 2: Health sector response domains
                          Proportion of people with less than 15 litres of      Destruction of clean water supply Provision of safe drinking water        Drinking water supply resto-
                          water/day                                                                                                                       ration to prevent the further
                                                                                Health hazards resulting from      Provision of wastewater and solid
                                                                                                                                                          spread of water-borne diseases
                          % population urban/rural, access to improved          stagnant waters and deteriorated   waste disposal
                          water sources and sanitation by sex                   water quality                                                             Reconstruction of wastewater
                                                                                                                   Environmental vector control (in
         Environmental                                                                                                                                    and solid waste disposal
                          Distance to nearest water access point, by sex and                                       crowded places)
         health
                          age                                                                                      Disposal of medical waste
                          Distance to nearest sanitation facility, by sex and
                          age


                          Disaster and emergency risk management capaci-        Reduced national capacity to       Coordination mechanism in the          Link recovery planning to
                          ties in the MoH                                       respond to disaster                acute response/leadership (humani-     coordination with development
                                                                                                                   tarian health cluster - government)    partners (e.g., SWAp, IHP+,
                          Existence of a health sector preparedness and         Many stakeholders already
                                                                                                                                                          UNDAF)
                          response strategy document linked to national         present, and new stakeholders      Ensure adherence to national policies
                          needs and priorities that includes the role of the    entering, further challenging      and guidelines by international actors Exit strategy for international
                          lead and partner agencies                             health coordination                                                       humanitarian NGOs, and/or use
                                                                                                                   Ensure/promote national ownership
                                                                                                                                                          capacity of (I)NGOs to support
                          Existence of a functioning coordination mecha-        Governments likely to send
                                                                                                                                                          recovery process and capacity
                          nism at central level and subnational level within    technical assistance/experts to
                                                                                                                                                          building of district and central
                          the health sector and crosscutting themes (from       strengthen MoH functions for
                                                                                                                                                          health authorities
                          DRM and health sector development)                    longer term
                                                                                                                                                          Integrating disaster risk reduc-
                        Health sector policies and guidelines, standard         MoH infrastructure and gover-
                                                                                                                                                          tion and disaster management
         Leadership and operating procedures for response; oversight and        nance capacity compromised
                                                                                                                                                          in health strategy
         Governance     regulation; governance capacity                         (loss of human resources,
                                                                                infrastructure and equipment                                              Preparedness strategies and
                                                                                damaged)                                                                  plans: identification of hazards,
                                                                                                                                                          vulnerabilities and capacities,
                                                                                PDNA/Recovery Framework as
                                                                                                                                                          hazard early warning systems,
                                                                                opportunity to guide new invest-
                                                                                                                                                          established disaster risk man-
                                                                                ments coming 6-18 months
                                                                                                                                                          agement, risk awareness and
                                                                                                                                                          educational programmes for
                                                                                                                                                          disaster and emergency risk,
                                                                                                                                                          risk prevention and avoidance
                                                                                                                                                          programmes and preparedness
                                                                                                                                                          programme
39
|
                          Pre-disaster baselines and challenges - key                                                Possible humanitarian                  Possible (early) recovery
                                                                                Disaster impact - key issues
                                          indicators                                                                       responses                                response




HEALTH
                                                                      Service delivery 2: Health sector response domains
                        National workforce policies and investment plans; Loss of workforce, health staff      Replacing, strengthening, and/or          Replacing/strengthening/reacti-
                        human resource norms, standards and data; distri- affected by the disaster - (dis-     reactivating workforce                    vating workforce
                        bution and competencies of health workers          placed, family members to care      Financial incentives to re-activate the   Reconstruction and reopening
                                                                           for, etc.)                          health workforce                          of training facilities
                        Infrastructure for training/production of human
                        resources for health and its capacity              # of health workforce (doctor,      Train and deploy community out-           Adapt training programmes on
                                                                           nurse, midwife) per 10,000          reach workers (with a sex and age         new relevant issues
                        Supervision mechanisms
                                                                           population by admin unit (by        balance)
                        # of health workforce (doctor, nurse, midwife) per sex) remaining; effect of human                                               Task shifting
                        10,000 population by admin unit (by sex)           resources for health displacement                                             Capacity building in first aid,
         Health Work-
                        # of Community Health Workers per 10,000 by        on distribution                                                               disaster preparedness, response
         force
                        admin unit                                        Damages in schools for health                                                  and recovery
                        Annual number of graduates of health professions workers, # of training facilities
                        from educational institutions per 100,000 popula- affected
                        tion by level and field of education              Damages to institutes of public
                                                                          health and research and effects
                                                                          on and capacities of training
                                                                          institutions


                        National guidelines and formats for facility and      Break down of information        Strengthen early warning system,          Re-establish routine health in-
                        population based information and surveillance         system and reduced analysis      including disease surveillance            formation system and reporting
                        systems                                               capacity for decision making                                               by age and sex (as relevant)
                                                                                                               Coordinate information collection
         Information    # of health facilities routinely collecting and re-                                    and analysis by all partners              Risk assessment, including
                        porting relevant data                                                                                                            hazards, vulnerabilities and
                                                                                                                                                         capacities
40
|
                          Pre-disaster baselines and challenges - key                                                       Possible humanitarian                   Possible (early) recovery
                                                                                 Disaster impact - key issues
                                          indicators                                                                              responses                                 response




HEALTH
                                                                     Service delivery 2: Health sector response domains
                        National health financing policies                     Further loss of livelihood and        Ensure health services and access           Establish capacity to analyse
                                                                               reduced ability to pay for health     to essential medicines are free of          possible consequences on qual-
                        Existence of user fee protection for those unable
                                                                               services                              charge at point of delivery in public       ity and access when waiving
                        to pay
                                                                                                                     and private not-for-profit facilities:      user fees
                                                                               Increased dependence on exter-
                        Tools and data on health expenditures (national                                              initially three months, then review
                                                                               nal funding                                                                       Establish mechanism to com-
                        health accounts)
                                                                                                                     NB: Consider the effect of provid-          pensate for loss of revenue, in
                                                                               Loss of revenue due to health
                        Costing of services; financial barriers to access                                            ing essential medicines free to the         particular in private not-for-
                                                                               facilities rendered non functional,
                        services; ability to pay, catastrophic health expen-                                         private sector also, in particular if the   profit, that work on the basis of
                                                                               and temporary waiving of user
                        ditures                                                                                      private sector also waives or reduces       cost recovery schemes
                                                                               fees
                        External resources for health as a % of private                                              service delivery fees.                      Creation of social solidarity or
         Financing                                                             Increased expenses for treat-
                        expenditure on health                                                                                                                    emergency fund to finance
                                                                               ment, including due to increased
                        Per capita total expenditure on health at average                                                                                        purchasing of services
                                                                               demand
                        exchange rate                                                                                                                            Medium-long term reform of
                                                                               Increased costs for transport, etc.
                        Per capita government expenditure on health at                                                                                           financing system, exploring
                        average exchange rate (US$)                                                                                                              different modalities of (mixed)
                                                                                                                                                                 prepayment mechanisms,
                        Out-of-pocket expenditure as a % of private
                                                                                                                                                                 that include adequate social
                        expenditure on health
                                                                                                                                                                 protection for health, and that
                                                                                                                                                                 includes all groups of service
                                                                                                                                                                 providers
                        Access to essential medical products, vaccines         Break down of supply chain and        Provision of kits, medicines and med- Procurement of medicines, safe
                        and technologies, assured quality, safety, efficacy,   medical logistics                     ical inputs; replacement of drug kits, delivery kits, medical equipment
                        norms, standards                                                                             vital medicines                        and generators
                                                                               Damage to pharmaceutical fac-
                        Existence of an essential medicine list that satisfies tories, pharmacies, warehouses,       Advocate for application of national        Reestablishment of the cold
                        the priority health care needs of the population       equipment and stocks                  essential medicine list by service          chain
                        and that is adequate for the competence level of                                             providers                            Integrate access to essential
                                                                               (Inappropriate) drug donations
         Medical        health workers                                                                               Free access to medicines during the  medicine within the new
                                                                               NB: consider effect on private
         products and   National pharmaceutical infrastructure for produc- pharmacies when donated medi-             emergency phase (first three months, financing modalities (including
         technology     tion capacity and pharmacies                                                                 then review)                         creation of social solidarity or
                                                                               cines are provided for free;
                                                                                                                                                          emergency fund to finance pur-
                        Procurement and supply chains; quality assurance; possible increase in sales of coun-        Waiving of customs fees for medical
                                                                                                                                                          chasing of services and essential
                        drug donations guidelines; health transport and                                              supplies for humanitarian partners
                                                                               terfeit medicines;                                                         medicines)
                        logistics, warehouses, cold chain
                                                                                increase of traditional medicines;
                        % of health facilities without stock out of a          also due to lack of financial
                        selected essential drug in four groups of drugs by resources
                        admin unit
41
|
         ANNEX 3: WORKSHEET ON BASELINE UNIT COSTS FOR INFRASTRUCTURE




HEALTH
         AND ASSETS TO ESTIMATE DAMAGES (EXAMPLE)
         Baseline unit costs for infrastructure and assets to estimate cost of damage in the health sector
                                Type of    Number     Replacement         Furniture,   Equipment***,    Medical supplies,            Ownership
         Health center
                                center*    of units   cost, US$           US$**        US$              US$****             Public         Private
         Full Destruction
                                       1
                                       2
                                       3


         Partial Damage
                                       1

                                       2

                                       3



         Totals


         Sources:								

         * Define each type of center								
         ** Define furniture in center, using standard lists and their costs for each type of health facility							
         *** Define equipment, using standard lists and their costs for each type of health facility	
         **** Define medical supplies, using standard lists of medical supplies and stocks for each type of health facility						
         		
42
|
         ANNEX 4: WORKSHEET ON BASELINE UNIT COSTS TO ESTIMATE




HEALTH
         LOSSES (EXAMPLE)
                                                                                                                                                        Estimated
         Baseline unit costs for loss estimation in Health Sector                                                                       Assumptions               Ownership
                                                                                                                                                        Cost, US$
                                                                                                                                         Provide ex-
                                                                                                                                        planation for
                  Component                                                      Item                                                                            Public Private
                                                                                                                                        each estimate
                                                                                                                                         of unit cost
         Infra-   Demolition      Average costs for demolition and rubble remval per type of health facility
         struc-   and rubble
         ture     removal
                  Temporary       Costs for tent or other temporary infrastructures for emergency hospital and other health facili-
                  health facil-   ties (both to replace damaged infrastructure, as well as additional facilities in IDP settlements)
                  ities           Average rental costs of temporary premises
         Ser-     Costs for       Transport of injured to other centers and average costs per injured patient
         vice     temporary       Overtime salary payment to staff
         de-      increased
         livery   health care     Above-normal use of medical supplies
         and      provision       Costs per patient for medium to long term medical and psychological care
         access
                                  Average costs per patient for increased overall disaster related patient case load
                                  Duration of period with increased case load, and additional numbers of patients estimated per month
                  Costs relat- Average costs per patient for which there was a revenue loss in health facilities, or people no
                  ed to loss of longer able to pay health insurance premium
                  revenue       Duration and numbers of patients for revenue loss
         Gov-     Costs for       Average costs per admin unit in affected areas of staff and other resources required to man-
         er-      additional      age the response and recovery process, including community participation
         nance    coordination    Costs for disaster response and recovery management at national level
                  and disaster
                  manage-         Cost of Early warning and alert systems to detect morbidity increases, and other temporary emer-
                  ment needs      gency related health information systems (per admin unit and/or standard # target population)
         Risks    Interven-       Costs for health promotion and public awareness campaigns (per admin unit and/or standard
                  tions above     # target population)
                  normal          Control of possible outbreaks costs, including for example vaccination campaigns (by each
                  budget          disease per admin unit and/or standard # target population)
                  allocations
                  to mitigate     Vector control costs (for each intervention per admin unit and/or standard # target population)
                  disaster
                  related risks
     ANNEX 5: DISTRICT DATA COLLECTION FORM (EXAMPLE)
     	                   Sector: 	 Health
     	              Province:	 add province name
     	                 District:	 add district name
     	 Data provided by:	 add staff name
     	 Data provided on:	 add date
                                     Number                                                Medical         Ownership
                                                                       Equipment***
         Institution        Baseline (and %) of                                            supplies        (no. or %)
                                                      Furniture**
         Type               Number Infrastruc-                      Totally     Partially
                                                                                          Destroyed Public Private
                                     ture                           Destroyed   Damaged
         Hospital
         Health centre
         Health Clinic
         Blood Bank
         Dispensary
         Labouratory
         Mobile
         Healthcare
         Unit
         etc
                                   3


         Totals

     Estimation of Losses
     Duration of reconstruction period, months                        Cost of EWARN and surveillance:	
     Cost of demolition and rubble removal                            Cost of health promotion campaigns:	
     Higher expenditures for treatment of injured*                    Cost of vector control:	
     Lower revenues for attending lower number of pa-                 Cost of prevention (vaccination, etc):	
     tients                                                           Higher expenditures for increased case load:	
                                                                      Pre-disaster morbidity, #
     Pre-Disaster number of patients:                                 Post-Disaster morbidity, #
     Post-disaster number of patients:	                               Increased morbidity, #
     Difference:	                                                     Treatment cost per person
     Average cost of treatment per patient:	                          Total estimated cost
     Loss of revenue:	
     Duration of increased morbidity and/or outbreaks:	




43   |    HEALTH
44
|
         ANNEX 6: WORKSHEET TO ESTIMATE COSTS OF DAMAGES AND LOSSES (EXAMPLE)




HEALTH
                                                                                    Damage, million US$                Losses, million US$
                                                                                                  Ownership                   Ownership
                                                                                Damage   Public   Private   Losses   Losses   Public   Private
         Infrastructure Estimation of Damage
         and assets
                          a) Facilities fully destroyed        Hospitals
                                                               Health Centers
                                                               Others
                          b) Facilities partially destroyed    Hospitals
                                                               Health Centers
                                                               Others
                          c) Equipment
                          d) Furniture
                          e) Medications and supplies de-
                          stroyed
                          f) Other assets destroyed
                          g) Summary of estimated damage,
                          million US$
                          Estimation of Losses
                          Cost of demolition and rubble        Hospitals
         Infrastructure
                          removal
                          Creation of temporary facility       Health Centers
                          Renting temporary space for          Others
                          health facility
         Service          Duration of reconstruction period,
         delivery and     months
         access
                          Higher expenditures for treatment
                          of injured*
45
|
                                                                                                               Damage, million US$                Losses, million US$
                                                                                                                             Ownership                   Ownership




HEALTH
                                                                                                           Damage   Public   Private   Losses   Losses   Public   Private
                      Higher expenditures on patients
                      referred to other facilities**
                      Reduction of revenues due to           Pre-Disaster number of patients paying
                      temporary closure to patients in
                      damaged/dysfunctional facilities
                                                             Post-disaster number of patients paying
                                                             Difference
                                                             Average cost of treatment per patient,
                                                             US$/person
                                                             Loss of revenue
                      Higher expenditures for overall        Pre-Disaster total number of patients/
                      increased case load                    month
                                                             Post-disaster total number of patients/
                                                             month
                                                             Difference
                                                             Average cost of treatment per patient
                                                             Increased costs
                      Reduced revenues in case of
                      temporary waiving user fees, or
                      reduced ability to pay health insur-
                      ance premium
                      Costs for additional coordination      Average costs per admin unit in affected
                      and disaster management needs          areas of staff and other resources required
         Governance
                                                             to manage the response and recovery pro-
                                                             cess, including community participation
                                                             Costs for disaster response and recovery
                                                             management at national level, million US$
                                                             Cost of Early Warning systems to detect
                                                             morbidity increases, and other temporary
                                                             emergency related health information
                                                             systems, million US$
46
|
                                                                                                             Damage, million US$                Losses, million US$
                                                                                                                           Ownership                   Ownership




HEALTH
                                                                                                         Damage   Public   Private   Losses   Losses   Public   Private
                         Higher expenditures to mitigate   Duration of period with increased risks for
         Risks
                         disaster related risks            outbreaks
                                                           Cost of health promotion campaigns,
                                                           million US$
                                                           Cost of vector control, million US$
                                                           Cost of prevention (vaccination, etc),
                                                           million US$
                                                           Mitigation of other health risks as identi-
                                                           fied




                         Estimated summary of losses,
                         million US$

         * Physical and psychological injuries; cost over and above normal budget assignations, including personnel overtime when necessary
         ** Cost of transport and of treatment of injured sent to undamaged facilities, whether privately or publicly owned

         Additional Information for Macro-Economic Impact Estimation
         Per cent value of imported component for hospital reconstruction
         Per cent value of imported component for equipment and materials
     ANNEX 7: FORM TO CALCULATE LOSS OVER TIME IN THE
     HEALTH SECTOR (EXAMPLE)
         Loss per component                      Months after the disaster
                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11 12   13 14   15   16   17   18   Total
         Duration of recovery period,
         months
         A. Loss of revenues
         1. Pre-disaster number of patients
         2. Post disaster number of patients
         (in damaged health facilities)
         3. Lower number of patients, post
         disaster (1 - 2)
         4. Average revenue per patient, $/
         patient
         5. Loss of revenue, $ (3 * 4)
         B. Costs of increased services
         6. Increased cost of medical treat-
         ment of injured during emergency
         stage, $*
         7.Increased costs of treatment due
         to increased morbidity, $
         8. Increased cost of medical
         treatment in higher cost, private
         facilities, $
         9. Increased cost of disease surveil-
         lance after disaster, $
         10. Increased cost of disease
         prevention and health promotion
         campaigns, $
         11. Increased cost of vector control
         campaigns, $
         12. Cost for long-term disability
         and psychological treatment, $
         13. Total increase in costs, $ (6 + 7
         + 8 + 9 + 10 + 11 + 12)
         C. Other losses
         14. Costs for demolition and clear-
         ing of debris
         15. Costs for reinforcements of
         infrastructure, temporary facilities
         Total losses (5 + 13 + 14 + 15 + 16)




47   |    HEALTH
     ANNEX 8: SAFE HOSPITAL INTERVENTIONS (EXAMPLES)
              •	 Development of comprehensive national policies as well as specific policies focusing on building
                 safety and emergency preparedness of health facilities and staff.

              •	 Coordination of programmes related to the safety of health facilities and emergency preparedness
                 in the ministry of health, other health agencies, emergency services and civil protection organisa-
                 tions and other sectors, such as water, power, transport and communications.

              •	 Ensuring development proposals and plans for all new health facilities include hazard and vulnera-
                 bility assessments.

              •	 Assessment of existing health facilities to identify the priorities for retrofitting and other action
                 (e.g., by using the Hospital Safety Index).

              •	 Implementation of independent mechanisms to control and supervise infrastructure projects, such
                 as by involving qualified professionals to work with a project team.

              •	 Development and application of comprehensive and integrated system design, including land-use
                 planning, architectural design, and building codes standards for the development and maintenance
                 of health facilities.

              •	 Guidance and promotion of best practices for:

                  -- assessment and maintenance of safety of health facilities before and after disasters, including structural,
                     non-structural and functional safety;

                  -- emergency preparedness programmes in health facilities;

                  -- multi-task training to manage basic life-saving emergency and surgical interventions;

                  -- development of safe and resilient health facilities in safe locations;

                  -- retrofitting and reconstruction of existing vulnerable facilities;

                  -- safe working environments for health workers; and

              •	 Safe infrastructure for health facilities, including continuity of essential services for power, water
                 and waste disposal, and of medical and health supplies of during times of emergency.

              •	 Development and delivery of training courses in safety and emergency preparedness in undergrad-
                 uate, graduate and continuing professional courses, for construction, health and other sectors.

              •	 Case study development and promotion of good practices in safety and emergency preparedness
                 of health facilities.




48   |   HEALTH
     ANNEX 9: DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND PREPAREDNESS
     INTERVENTIONS (EXAMPLES)
              •	 Integration of emergency and disaster management into legislative frameworks, policies and plans.

              •	 A multidisciplinary unit in the MoH with authority, capacity and resources to provide coordination of
                 health emergency management activities at all levels within the health sector and with other sectors.

              •	 Risk assessments, including hazard identification and vulnerability (population and health system
                 vulnerabilities) and capacity assessments in collabouration with the multisectoral disaster manage-
                 ment authority.

              •	 National capacity development programme for health emergency and disaster risk management
                 with necessary resources.

              •	 Health sector capacity to conduct risk awareness campaigns, including health education, health
                 promotion and social mobilisation to reduce risks and prepare to respond to emergencies.

              •	 All hazards early warning systems which takes into account risks to public health and to the
                 health sector.

              •	 Integration of disaster and emergency risk management into undergraduate, graduate and profes-
                 sional education of health and relevant human resources for health and other sectors.

              •	 Programmes to reduce underlying risk factors (such as improving the safety and preparedness of
                 health facilities).

              •	 Risk reduction and preparedness programmes for epidemic/pandemic disease prevention and
                 control, reproductive health, mass casualty management systems, nutrition, environmental health,
                 mental health and other noncommunicable diseases, maternal and child health, prevention of and
                 service delivery for SGBV, and management of the dead and missing.

              •	 Health sector response and recovery planning and other elements of the preparedness pro-
                 gramme, including pre-positioning of supplies and exercises to test plans, with other sectors.




49   |   HEALTH
     ANNEX 10: WORKSHEET FOR A RESULTS-BASED
     RECOVERY PLAN (EXAMPLE)
                                                                 Expected
         Priority     Interventions                                              Recovery costs
                                                                 outputs                                                    Intended
         recovery
                      Short-         Medium-         Long-                       Short-        Medium- Long-                outcomes
         needs
                      term           term            term                        term          term    term
         By region    To repair/rebuild damaged infrastructure and physical assets, and Build Back Better




         By region    To resume service delivery and access to goods and services, and Build Back Better




         By region    To restore governance and social processes, and Build Back Better




         By region    To address immediate new risks, and disaster risk reduction




     ANNEX 11: GLOSSARY
     The definitions below are from the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) 2009.

     DISASTER
     A serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society involving widespread human, material, economic, or environ-
     mental losses and impacts which exceeds the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources.
     DISASTER RISK
     The potential disaster losses, in lives, health status, livelihoods, assets and services, which could occur to a particular community
     or a society over some specified future time period.
     DISASTER RISK REDUCTION
     The concept and practice of reducing disaster risks through systematic efforts to analyse and manage the causal factors of disas-
     ters, including through reduced exposure to hazards, lessened vulnerability of people and property, wise management of land and
     the environment, and improved preparedness for adverse events.



50   |    HEALTH
     RECOVERY
     The restoration, and improvement where appropriate, of facilities, livelihoods and living conditions of disaster-affected communi-
     ties, including efforts to reduce disaster risk factors.
     RESILIENCE
     The ability of a system, community or society exposed to hazards to resist, absorb, accommodate to and recover from the effects
     of a hazard in a timely and efficient manner, including through the preservation and restoration of its essential basic structures
     and functions.
     RESPONSE
     The provision of emergency services and public assistance during or immediately after a disaster in order to save lives, reduce
     health impacts, ensure public safety and meet the basic subsistence needs of the people affected.
     RETROFITTING
     Reinforcement or upgrading of existing structures to become more resistant and resilient to the damaging effects of hazards.




     ANNEX 12: REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
     Health Metrics Network. Guidance on recommended Indicators for HIS Strengthening. www.who.int/healthmetrics/tools/
     GFGuidanceOnRecommendedIndicators09.pdf

     Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) (2008). Humanitarian Action and Older Persons: An essential brief for humani-
     tarian actors.

     IASC, Needs Assessment Task Force (2010). Operational Guidance for Coordinated Assessments in Humanitarian Crises.

     IASC Reference Group for Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings (2010). Mental Health and Psy-
     chosocial Support in Humanitarian Emergencies: What Should Humanitarian Health Actors Know? Geneva,

     Pan American Health Organisation (PAHO) (2010). Health Sector Self-Assessment Tool for Disaster Risk Reduction. Wash-
     ington, D.C.

     PAHO, WHO, ICRC and IFRC (2006). Management of dead bodies after disasters. A field manual for first responders.

     United Nations Development Group (2009).

     Integrating Disaster Risk Reduction into the Common Country Assessment and United Nations Development Assistance
     Framework. Guidance Note for United Nations Country Teams,

     World Bank (2008). Data against natural disasters: establishing effective systems for relief, recovery and reconstruction.
     Editors Samia Amin and Markus Goldstein.

     World Bank GFDRR (2010). Damage, Loss and Needs Assessment guidance notes, volume 1, 2 and 3.,

     World Bank (July 2008). Good Practice Notes 1 Health.

     World Health Organisation (WHO) (2009). Analysing Disrupted Health Sectors, Module 12: Formulating strategies for the
     recovery of a disrupted health sector.www.who.int/hac/techguidance/tools/disrupted_sectors/en/.

     WHO (2007). Everybody’s Business. Strengthening Health Systems to Improve Health Outcomes. WHO’s Framework for
     Action. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2007/9789241596077_eng.pdf.

     World Health Report (2000). Health Systems: Improving Performance.

     Guidance Note for Integration of Disaster Risk Reduction in Bank Projects in the Health Sector 16 March 2009. Work in
     progress.


51   |   HEALTH
     WHO. Health Cluster Guide. A practical guide for country-level implementation of the Health Cluster.www.who.int/hac/
     network/global_health_cluster/guide/en/index.html

     WHO. Global Health Cluster tools.www.who.int/hac/global_health_cluster/guide/tools/en/index.html.

     Further reading:

     Early Warning Systems, World Health Organisation
     www.who.int/csr/labepidemiology/projects/ewarn/en/

     Emergency Risk Management for Health, World Health Organisation
     www.who.int/hac/techguidance/preparedness/en/index.html

     Hospitals Safe from Disasters, 2008-2009 World Disaster Reduction Campaign
     www.unisdr.org/2009/campaign/wdrc-2008-2009.html.

     The Hospital Safety Index, tool developed by the Pan American Health Organisation
     new.paho.org/disasters/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=964&Itemid=911




52   |   HEALTH
