                                     Approach Paper
                     Engaging Citizens for Better Development Results
                 An IEG Evaluation of World Bank Group Citizen Engagement

                                                    April 4, 2017



Background and Context
1.     This proposed evaluation aims to inform the Board and Management of the World Bank
Group on the effectiveness of World Bank Group citizen engagement (CE) activities to support
development processes and outcomes. The evaluation is intended to provide a timely
contribution to management’s review and update of corporate CE goals, targets, and approaches
upon completion of the 2018 corporate CE commitment. This is the first IEG evaluation that
systematically reviews the World Bank Group CE efforts (including IFC and MIGA).

2.      CE is the umbrella term adopted by the World Bank Group to denote a multitude of
different interactions with a variety of stakeholders —such as government, private sector, and
development institutions, including the World Bank Group—at different points in the project or
program cycle that give citizens a stake in decision making with the objective of improving
development outcomes. 1 It is a two-way relationship that implies the existence of a tangible
response to citizens’ feedback. 2

3.     Under different names, CE has a long history. The first United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development in 1992 recognized that achieving sustainable development
would require the active participation of all sectors and all types of people. Many donor and
government agencies have expanded their efforts to engage with and seek the participation of
external stakeholders often labeled as “citizens,” “beneficiaries,” or “communities.”

4.      Stakeholder engagement, as expressed in consultations, social accountability,
community-driven development, participatory approaches, and empowerment, has long been an
integral part of the World Bank Group’s operational activities, documented as far back as the
1970s. Engagement has included stakeholders at multiple levels, ranging from consultations with
client country governments, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and civil society
organizations (CSOs), and the private sector, to participation of direct and indirect project
beneficiaries. The World Bank Group Strategy (2013) describes citizen voice as “a key
accelerator for achieving results.”



1
 IFC more commonly refers to “Stakeholder Engagement” instead of “Citizen Engagement”.
2
 This two-way relationship distinguishes CE from the concepts of “transparency” and “information sharing”. While
informing citizens is a necessary aspect of CE, it is insufficient, as CE also requires a response to citizens’ feedback.

                                                            1
5.      This stream of activities has intensified over the years and culminated in 2014 in the
development of a Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen Engagement in World Bank
Group Operations (World Bank 2014), which aims to provide a more coherent approach to
incorporating CE across World Bank Group operations. The Strategic Framework will serve as
the primary reference point for this evaluation.

6.      The objective of the Strategic Framework is to “mainstream citizen engagement in World
Bank Group-supported policies, programs, projects, and knowledge and advisory services where
such engagement can improve development results and, within the scope of these operations, to
contribute to sustainable processes for citizen engagement with governments and the private
sector.” The Framework builds on lessons from World Bank Group-financed operations across
regions and sectors, and underscores the importance of country context, government ownership,
and clear objectives for citizen engagement. It proposes five underlying principles for
mainstreaming citizen engagement in Bank Group-supported operations: focusing on results;
engaging throughout the operational cycle; seeking to strengthen country systems; applying
context specificity; and using a gradual rollout approach.

7.      A review of the history of CE in the World Bank Group reveals that the Strategic
Framework builds on and brings together several streams of work that have been evolving over
decades from an initial focus on reputational risk management to operational engagement to
stakeholder influence on policies and strategies at the macro level (Box 1). These streams are:
stakeholder consultation in policies and operational instruments (1980 onward); collaboration
with beneficiaries to boost local ownership and responsiveness to local needs (1993 onward);
and consultation with stakeholders, including beneficiaries, for information sharing and
increased voice at the macro level in formulation of policies, strategies, and policy lending (1996
onward). CE is part of a broad move toward greater openness and transparency, as witnessed
also by World Bank initiatives around governance and anticorruption, open data, and access to
information enacted in the 2007-12 period.

8.      In 2013, the World Bank Group committed to integrate beneficiary feedback into 100
percent of projects where beneficiaries can be clearly identified by FY18. 3 The World Bank
Corporate Scorecard, the IDA Results Measurement System, and the President’s Delivery Unit
track the progress of this commitment. The indicator used to track progress is based on World
Bank investment projects and is narrower than the wording of the corporate commitment.

9.      The International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency (MIGA) have their own systems for approaching stakeholder and community
engagement. They require their clients to adhere to a set of eight Performance Standards,
representing the bulk of their CE activities. The Performance Standards constitute an integrated
sustainability and risk management framework. IFC adopted the Performance Standards in 2006
and revised them in 2012. MIGA followed a year later (respectively, 2007 and 2013). The

3
 This commitment applies to all Investment Project Financing (IPF) operations financed with IBRD loans or IDA
credits.

                                                       2
Performance Standards impose requirements for meaningful stakeholder engagement on all IFC
and MIGA projects, with variation depending on project type and risk factors. Clients implement
the Performance Standards which, among several other things, call for: information disclosure
and engagement of local communities on matters that directly affect them; active management
by clients of social and environmental risks; and grievance redress mechanisms for affected
communities, workers, and any people affected by displacement. IFC and MIGA supervise
clients’ implementation of the Performance Standards. The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)
reviews the environmental and social performance of projects using a framework linked to the
Performance Standards as part of its validation of IFC and MIGA self-evaluation, a review that
includes field visits to select projects. IEG undertakes similar reviews for all cancelled MIGA
guarantee projects as well as some active MIGA guarantee projects.


 Box 1. Citizen Engagement Has a Long History at the World Bank Group
 Consultation in the World Bank Group policies and operational instruments . Starting in
 1980, stakeholder consultation in policies, approaches, and instruments was initially driven
 by a concern for reputational risk management as the World Bank formulated policies to
 address the criticism of various forms of adverse impacts generated by World Bank-
 supported operations. This reactive approach gradually evolved into more proactive
 engagement with citizens through participatory assessments and deliberate strategies aimed
 at reflecting stakeholder concerns in project.
 Collaboration in operational work. Collaboration with beneficiaries in operational work was
 formalized in 1993 through new language on consultation in operational policies for forestry
 and water resource management. It was aimed at ascertaining demand and enhancing the
 voice of user groups in sector operations. Over time, this effort gave rise to partnerships with
 civil society organizations as service providers. Also, a range of multisector operations aimed
 at providing goods and services to beneficiary communities through demand-driven
 operations were brought under the loose umbrella of community-driven development
 operations.
 Consultation at the macro level. Consultation with stakeholders in policy and strategy
 formulation became more systematic after 1996. All major policy reforms of safeguard
 policies and policies governing new lending instruments, such as development policy
 lending and program-for-results, involved extensive consultations with borrowers,
 development partners, and civil society organizations. Stakeholder consultation also became
 more systematic and routine in the formulation of country assistance and sector strategies.
 Consultation and participation was also integrated within development policy lending.


10.    In addition to overseeing client implementation during the portfolio relationship, IFC
does have project-related CE in a limited number of projects where IFC evaluates whether




                                                3
projects have “broad community support” 4 and may follow up directly on client CE in some
instances. IFC also engages with stakeholders in policy development activities and Spring and
Annual Meetings.

11.     The World Bank Group established the Global Partnership for Social Accountability
(GPSA) in 2012. Through its grant-making and knowledge and learning activities, the GPSA
seeks to expand opportunity for civil society and government actors to collaborate to tackle
governance challenges and improve development outcomes, especially in service delivery.
Situated in the Governance Global Practice, the GPSA is governed by a Steering Committee
comprised of CSOs, government, and donor representatives, and is chaired by the Vice President
of the Equity, Finance, and Institutions Practice Group. The program provides grants to CSOs
for social accountability work and operates a knowledge and learning platform on the impact of
social accountability interventions. The program has allocated about $21 million from World
Bank Group funds to 32 projects mostly in health, education, public financial management, and
local governance in 25 countries. Grants are embedded in the sectors and areas where the World
Bank has an active engagement. Grants are awarded to CSOs only in countries that formally opt-
in to GPSA. In addition, trust funds, such as the Japan Social Development Fund, also contribute
to the social accountability and CE agenda, as do multilateral initiatives such as the Open
Government Partnership.

ENGAGING CITIZENS: WHY AND HOW?

12.     The World Bank Group rationale for involving stakeholders and citizens rests on the need
to improve development outcomes: “Supporting client engagement with citizens where such
engagement can improve development outcomes is a key component of the World Bank Group’s
strengthened focus on results” (World Bank 2014, 5). This “instrumental” rationale for CE will
also inform this evaluation, while recognizing the intrinsic value that the World Bank Group
assigns to CE. CE can be used to mitigate unintended adverse outcomes, for example, through
safeguards (World Bank) and Performance Standards (IFC and MIGA). It can also be used to
better achieve intended positive outcomes, for example, by lending voice to service users,
helping tailor services to their needs, and providing avenues to hold service providers
accountable. The World Development Report 2004 (World Bank 2003) famously coined the
term “short route of accountability” to describe client power in relation to service providers and
“long route of accountability” for citizen influence on the state (“voice”), see Figure 1.

13.     There are multiple views and approaches to CE and different schools of thought, and the
“instrumental” view adopted by the World Bank Group is contested. Where the World Bank
Group frames CE as a means to an end, others see participation as a value in itself, reflecting the
right and ability of citizens to contribute to the governance process. Sen (2005) argues that the

4 Broad community support is required in cases where the business activity to be financed is likely to generate
potential significant adverse impacts on communities or is likely to generate potential adverse impacts on indigenous
peoples. In those cases, IFC clients are required to engage in a process of Informed Consultation and Participation
(ICP). IFC determines whether ICP by the affected communities is required and whether the business activity will
need to receive broad community support.

                                                         4
opportunity for citizens to participate in political discussions and influence public choice is
central to participatory governance and a critical component of democracy. The approach
proposed by the United Nations (2008) recognizes that the “rights” component and the
“development management” component are two separate but complementary aspects of public
governance. It also highlights that the two perspectives are interdependent: citizens may be
involved in defining the goals of development.

Figure 1. The Long and Short Routes of Accountability




14.     The entry points utilized by the World Bank Group in its analytical and operational work
indicate many opportunities to engage with stakeholders. Table 1 shows that entry points exist at
every level (corporate, country, project) and type of instrument: in project design, project
implementation, and project evaluation; policy design and policy implementation; analytical
products and services; accountability mechanisms; and country strategy formulation. Each entry
point involves one or more CE activities. The Strategic Framework proposes a classification of
CE activities into seven types: (i) consultation; (ii) grievance redress mechanisms (GRM); (iii)
collecting, recording, and reporting on inputs from citizens; (iv) collaboration in decision
making; (v) citizen-led monitoring and evaluation or oversight; (vi) empowering citizens with
resources and authority over their use; and (vii) building citizen capacity for engagement. Each
activity in turn may involve a number of specific mechanisms. For example, consultations
(category i) may be carried out through public hearings, focus group discussions, or advisory
committees. Empowering citizens (category vi) may be achieved through participatory planning,

                                                5
community management, community contracting, or participatory monitoring (World Bank
2014, 24).5

Table 1. Main entry Points for Citizen Engagement

    Level and
                                                                  Citizen Engagement Entry Point
    Instrument
                        Dialogue with CSOs
                        Partnership programs, including the GPSA and the Open Government Partnership
    Corporate
                        Regional strategies
                        Monitoring of corporate indicator
                        Consultations for the preparation of country diagnostics and partnership frameworks (SCD/CPF)
    Country             Identification of CE for the inclusion in country operations
                        Use of CE indicators in CPF results frameworks
    FINANCING INSTRUMENTS:
                        Projects triggering OPs (mostly safeguards) requiring consultations and GRMs
                        Projects with one or more CE activities (such as consultations; GRM; collecting, recording, and reporting on inputs
                        from citizens; collaboration in decision-making; citizen-led monitoring and evaluation or oversight; empowering
                        citizens with resources and authority over their use; building citizen capacity for engagement), particularly in the
    IPF and PforR       following areas:
                        CDD projects
                        Service delivery projects
                        Governance and public financial management projects
                        Natural resource management projects
                        Government engagement with citizens in the design of reform programs
                        Reporting by the Bank on country’s arrangements for consultations with and participation of key stakeholders in the
    DPF                 operation and on outcomes of the participatory process.
                        Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
                        Prior actions and benchmarking related to CE
    IFC and MIGA        Implementation of the Performance Standards
    Advisory            CE in design, elaboration, and evaluation of knowledge products
    Services and        Technical Assistance
    Analytics           Analytic work on specific aspects of CE
Source: (World Bank 2014, 22).
Note: CDD = community-driven development; CE = citizen engagement; CPF = country partnership framework; CSO = civil
society organization; DPF = Development Policy Financing; GPSA = Global Partnership for Social Accountability; GRM =
grievance redress mechanism; IFC = International Finance Corporation; IPF = Investment Project Financing; MIGA = Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency; OPs = Operational Policies; PforR = Program for Results; SCD = systematic country diagnostic.

15.    Depending on the type of activities and entry points utilized, the ‘citizens’ may be
defined as the ‘beneficiaries’ of World Bank projects (population targeted by the project, whose
feedback is required by the corporate indicator), as ‘stakeholder’ communities from the
perspective of IFC and MIGA (mostly reached through the client), or even all the citizens of a



5
  The Strategic Framework presents a mapping between CE activities and mechanisms described in Table 3.2 of the
Strategic Framework (World Bank 2014, 24). This evaluation will adopt terminology and classifications identical to
the Strategic Framework to the extent feasible.

                                                                    6
specific country, when the focus is on country-level activities to strengthen government
accountability vis-à-vis its citizens.

EVIDENCE ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF CITIZEN ENGAGEMENT

16.      Reviews of the literature on CE point to important variations in the effectiveness of CE
depending on context, nature of intervention, and type of outcome (Gaventa and Barrett 2012;
Mansuri and Rao 2013; World Bank 2014). CE in areas such as CDD, service delivery, and
natural resource management has been extensively studied and a number of comprehensive
literature reviews exist. Much simplified, the gist of these reviews is that CE can lead to
improved outcomes in some circumstances, but that no effects or even adverse effects are also
possible. Much depends on what type of development outcome one looks at, the vehicle for
participation, a variety of contextual factors, and the quality of implementation. These issues are
briefly outlined here:

   x   Many types of outcomes have been studied. The strongest evidence links CE to improved
       delivery of public services such as water, health, and education. CE can contribute to
       increase access to and quality of services, and make them more responsive to user needs.
       There is also evidence of positive outcomes in areas such as empowerment, social
       inclusion, and cohesion; local public goods such as public safety; and processes for
       citizen participation in public financial management and natural resource management.
   x   Results are not always positive. Studies have found no results or even negative outcomes
       in the form of state failure to respond to citizens’ claims, instances of participatory
       processes that were manipulative or unrepresentative, and violent oppression of citizen
       demands.
   x   The vehicle for participation matters. Organic participation through social movements,
       community associations, and other civic groups emerges spontaneously. These groups
       often have charismatic leaders and exploit political opportunities to effectively channel
       citizen voice. In contrast, induced participation refers to initiatives endorsed by the state
       and implemented by government officials. Donor-supported initiatives fall in this latter
       category: participatory spaces that are imposed from the outside (Mansuri and Rao 2013).
   x   Contextual factors have attracted much attention in the literature, given findings of mixed
       outcomes of CE. The CE Strategic Framework contains a useful compilation grouped
       into demand-side factors (people’s willingness and capacity to engage); supply-side
       factors (politicians’ and officials’ willingness and capacity to respond to citizen voice and
       participation); and legal, economic, and political factors (history, power relations, legal
       frameworks, and so on). Inequality and the possibility for elite capture is often
       highlighted as a contextual factor that may cause negative outcomes.
   x   Mansuri and Rao (2013) criticize the quality of implementation of many participatory and
       decentralization projects for paying insufficient attention to contextual factors and for
       weak monitoring and evaluation (M&E)—aspects that invariably will also be part of the
       scope of this evaluation.



                                                 7
17.     CE activities and mechanisms, their goals, and the channels through which impacts are
achieved vary by type of project. Results chains for CE are therefore specific to the area of
analysis. The Strategic Framework identifies five broad “outcome areas” amenable to the
inclusion of CE activities which this evaluation chose to collapse into four areas (figure 2):
public service delivery; natural resource management; governance and public financial
management; and social inclusion and empowerment.6 Specific CE activities are used in each of
these areas to support and enhance the achievement of the primary development objectives. The
intermediate and final results (last column) are specific to each area. By contrast, the same CE
activity or mechanism may be used in more than one area.

Figure 2: A Framework for the World Bank Group’s Approach to Citizens Engagement

                Area                                Tools and mechanisms                                     Intermediate and final results
    Public service                                                                               Accessibility of service delivery
    delivery                            Consultations                                            Coverage of service delivery
                                                                                                 Quality of service delivery


    Natural resource                    Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM)                       Increasing participation of CSOs
    management                                                                                   Disclosure of contracts
                                                                                                 Increased revenue transparency
                                        Collaboration in decision-making                         More sustainable resource management
                                                                                                 More equitable distribution of resources

    Governance and                                                                               Changes in policy, regulation, reforms
    public financial                    Citizen-led monitoring and evaluation or                 Improved transparency
    management                          oversight                                                Reduced corruption
                                                                                                 More active citizen and community
                                                                                                 participation
                                                                                                 Improved responsiveness to citizen demand
                                                                                                 More inclusive budget processes
                                        Empowering citizens with resources
                                                                                                 Pro-poor fiscal policies
                                                                                                 Improved governance

    Social inclusion                    Building citizen capacity for engagement                 Inclusion of marginalized groups
    and empowerment                                                                              Social cohesion
                                                                                                 Empowerment

                                                             Context
           Willingness of and capacity to engage of citizens and governments. Sociopolitical, economic, cultural, legal, and other factors




6
  A stocktaking done for the Strategic Framework found that CE activities are most frequently found in public
service delivery, followed by natural resource management and social inclusion and empowerment, and finally by
governance and public financial management. Based on their relatively lower frequency and some similarity in
issues, this evaluation chose to group governance and public financial management into the same outcome area.

                                                                           8
PREVIOUS IEG FINDINGS

18.     The proposed evaluation is the first at IEG to focus explicitly on the World Bank Group’s
approach to citizen engagement in a comprehensive way. Previous IEG evaluations have touched
on related concepts such as consultations, stakeholder engagement, participatory methods, and
community-driven development (CDD). IEG has considerable evidence and experience on the
topic. Evaluations covering these themes include social funds (OED 2002); the Poverty
Reduction Strategy Initiative ([PRSI], OED 2004); community-based and community-driven
development (OED 2005); Poverty and Social Impact Analysis ([PSIA], IEG 2010a); safeguards
(IEG 2010b); governance and corruption (IEG 2011); self-evaluation systems (IEG 2016a); and
several project performance assessment reports (PPAR) on CDD projects (IEG 2014, 2015,
2016b).

19.     The OED evaluation of social funds found that social funds have increased awareness of
the potential of participatory approaches. It also highlighted the challenge of engaging all
members of the community in the project’s activities and avoid elite capture, and recommended
the adoption of measures to ensure that beneficiaries are adequately informed and consulted.

20.     The OED evaluation of community-based and community-driven development also
highlighted the increasing use of participatory approaches in a variety of sectors that involve
local communities. It identified the lack of buy-in from borrower officials as a specific challenge.
The evaluation found that concerns about capacity levels in communities and the unwillingness
of officials to devolve control over decisions and resources to communities can undermine
community engagement.

21.      The evaluation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Initiative found that, according to most
stakeholders, the Poverty Reduction Strategy process allowed for increased transparency and
involvement of new actors into the development dialogue. CSOs, however, did not perceive they
had more influence over the design of Poverty Reduction Strategies. The evaluation found a lack
of clear intermediate process indicators relating to the participatory requirement, which in turn
led to lack of clarity and incompatible expectations among stakeholders.

22.     The Poverty and Social Impact Analysis evaluation found wide variability in stakeholder
participation in the examined PSIAs, with no consultations mentioned in about two-fifths of the
sample. The identification of relevant stakeholders had been variable, leading to a moderate
effect on country policies.

23.     The safeguards evaluation helped inform the World Bank’s new Environmental and
Social Framework, which was approved in August 2016 after three rounds of extensive global
consultations and will take effect in 2018. Qualitative research conducted by IEG revealed the
widespread perception among World Bank staff and NGOs that safeguards and sustainability
policies generate multiple benefits, including enhanced citizen voice at the local level and greater
citizen ownership at the level of civil society.



                                                 9
24.     The evaluation of the World Bank Country-Level Engagement on Governance and
Anticorruption (GAC) looked at the first GAC strategy (2007–2011) and found that World Bank
shareholders and various CSOs have shaped the governance agenda. Some groups have
increasingly voiced strongly held views that the World Bank should provide more, not less,
support to governance.

25.     The report on self-evaluation systems (ROSES) of the World Bank Group found that
Implementation Completion and Results Reports (ICRs) did not systematically report on
mandatory CE activities related to safeguards. Further, beneficiary surveys measuring
satisfaction were used in less than half of projects with identifiable beneficiaries, with survey
results not well integrated into the sampled ICRs. Half of the reviewed projects contained at least
one citizen engagement indicator in the results framework. However, many indicators captured
feedback at the end of the project cycle, which was too late to inform mid-course corrections. CE
plays a marginal role in World Bank Group self-evaluation.

26.     IEG recently adopted a more in-depth qualitative fieldwork methodology for its CDD
PPARs to better capture the voice of project beneficiaries, a methodology that will be a useful
starting point for fieldwork done for this evaluation. Findings from these in-depth PPARs align
with the broader literature on citizen engagement presented above. For example, a PPAR on the
Poverty Reduction Fund in Lao People’s Democratic Republic highlighted the importance of
context in that there was incompatibility between the government’s centralized approach and
broad and deep participation of local communities (IEG 2016b). A PPAR of the Fadama II
project in Nigeria identified elite capture in participatory projects as group members with
stronger interpersonal networks had more voice in the choice of and access to assets financed by
the projects (IEG 2014).7

Purpose, Objective, and Audience
27.     This proposed evaluation aims to inform the Board and Management of the World Bank
Group on the effectiveness of World Bank Group citizen engagement activities to support
development processes and outcomes. It will be completed by the target date (end of FY18) to
integrate beneficiary feedback into 100 percent of Investment Project Financing operations
financed with IBRD loans or IDA credits with identifiable beneficiaries. It is expected that the
evaluation will feed into any review and update of corporate CE goals, targets, and approaches
by management at that time.

28.    This evaluation aims to support both of IEG’s overarching goals, namely to assess (i) the
relevance, efficacy, and efficiency of the World Bank Group’s operational activities, and (ii) the
implementation of its strategy and enable mid-course corrections.



7
 IEG has also done other relevant evaluative work, including in several participatory PPARs, which the evaluation
will draw on.

                                                        10
29.    The stakeholders for this evaluation are the World Bank Group Board’s Committee on
Development Effectiveness (CODE); management of the World Bank Group Institutions; the CE
Secretariat; the GPSA; operational staff, especially those working on CE activities in the World
Bank, IFC, and MIGA; borrower and implementing agencies collaborating with the World Bank
Group on CE; select civil society organizations and academics; and staff of donor agencies.

Evaluation Questions and Scope
EVALUATION QUESTIONS

30.    The overarching questions for this evaluation are “How effectively has the World Bank
Group mainstreamed citizen engagement at the project, program, country, and corporate level,
and what is the evidence on how this process contributes to the achievement of development
outcomes?” This will be operationalized through the following descriptive and evaluative
questions:

   1. What has been the quality of design of CE activities? Is there attention to context factors
      such as the capacity and willingness of stakeholders to engage? When are project-specific
      mechanisms used to engage and when do efforts build on and strengthen existing
      national, sectoral, or regional platforms for participation?
   2. What has been the quality of implementation of CE activities? How are CE activities
      implemented and monitored? Are expectations created at design met during
      implementation? What are the costs of CE, including for participants? Who participates
      and whose voices are heard (e.g., women, men, rich, poor)?
   3. What are the objectives and results of CE? What is the World Bank Group’s rationale
      for mainstreaming CE? What does participation achieve, and does it help make projects
      and governments more responsive to citizen needs? Does it help improve intermediate
      and final outcomes? Are there unintended outcomes?
   4. Is the corporate environment enabling of CE? Is there a clear approach that is
      understood and owned by staff? What are the incentives, motivations, resources, and
      constraints for staff to integrate and innovate on CE? Is there learning on what works for
      CE? Have tools, mechanisms, and approaches evolved over time? What is the role of the
      GPSA? What has been the impact of the Strategic Framework?

These questions will be explored at the project, program, country, and corporate levels, as
explained in the Evaluation Design section and in attachment 3.
31.     IFC and MIGA stakeholder and community engagement activities will be assessed in
relation to the effectiveness of the Performance Standards to achieve stakeholder engagement
and IFC’s and MIGA’s commitments to environmental and social sustainability articulated in the
Sustainability Framework, as well as in the context of country level work.

32.     How the World Bank Group takes context into account when designing and
implementing CE will be assessed. The Strategic Framework classifies contextual factors into
three types: (i) the willingness and capacity of citizens to engage with governments and service
                                                11
providers; (ii) the willingness and capacity of governments to engage with citizens and share
information; and (iii) socioeconomic and legal factors that impact on the outcomes of CE. These
factors include the degree of decentralization, history of citizen-government relationships, the
rule of law, inequality and social inclusion, norms, values, and culture.

33.    As discussed, the World Bank Group considers CE important for achieving better
development outcomes and this will be the perspective adopted by this evaluation.8 The
evaluation will also explore to what extent CE policies and programs have broader objectives,
and results, such as inclusion of marginalized groups, empowerment, social cohesion, and social
mobilization.

Scope
34.     The scope of this evaluation was defined in a consultative process that involved
management and CSOs—taking as starting points the Strategic Framework, a stocktake of the
history of CE in the World Bank, and published literature reviews. An earlier version of this
Approach Paper was discussed with World Bank Group representatives at a workshop in
December 2016.

35.      The main challenge for scoping this evaluation consists in the diffused presence of CE
activities across World Bank Group operations at all levels and for all types of instruments (table
1), stemming from the cross-cutting nature of CE. This makes it infeasible to identify a singular
portfolio and requires selectivity in defining the scope.

36.     Arguably, the evaluation can make its most strategic contributions though country-level
perspectives. The country approach will therefore be a central element of the analysis. The
country-level angle will review issues related to sustainability, commitment, coordination,
ownership, and coherence, allowing a focus on how the CE approach works. In addition,
implementation and results of individual activities and mechanisms will be reviewed. Countries
will be selected based on a number of criteria including openness to CE, fragility, and diversity
across regions and outcome areas (Appendix 3).

37.     Since many CE activities are not exhaustively documented, traditional portfolio reviews
will be de-emphasized. World Bank CE activities are tracked at the project level primarily for
reporting on the corporate indicator. Based on these data, figure 3 shows how frequently
different CE tools and mechanisms are being used by the World Bank. Mechanisms such as
satisfaction surveys, GRMs, and consultations are the most commonly reported ones. The data
also indicate a doubling of the number of reported indicators from FY15 to FY16. However, this
data source only reports one indicator per project, even if more than one CE mechanism is
deployed, resulting in a partial picture.


8
  However, the evaluation recognizes that CE is also important in its own right, for example, to increase the sense of
citizenship.

                                                         12
38.      The selection of CE activities and mechanisms for a deep-dive analysis will be
accomplished based on the country-level analysis. The country lending portfolios will be used as
a starting point. This evaluation will then assess how selected CE activities are designed and
implemented and review evidence of results. The evaluation will refer to area-specific results
chains for specific pieces of the analysis as needed.

Figure 3. Prevalence of Citizens Engagement Indicators in World Bank Projects

                                Citizens' Engagement Indicators
            120

            100

            80
   Number




            60

            40

            20

             0




                                             FY15    FY16



Source: Data provided by the CE Secretariat.
Note: A number of indicators are provided, not mechanisms. A project can have more than one mechanism but it will report one
indicator. The indicator is tracked for all Investment Project Financing (IPF) operations financed with IBRD loans or IDA credits.
39.     The evaluation will look at financing instruments (investment, policy-based, Program for
Results, IFC investments, MIGA guarantees); Technical Assistance; country approaches; the
GPSA and, to a limited extent, other partnerships programs; and the corporate scorecard
indicator. Referring back to table 1, it will cover the entry points listed there with the following
exceptions:

      x           CE in analytical work was addressed in IEG’s 2010 study of the Poverty and Social
                  Impact Analysis and will not be systematically covered. The evaluation will however
                  systematically analyze relevant ASA in the case studies.
      x           Likewise, World Bank safeguards policies will not be evaluated as such, but the CE
                  mechanisms that have been used to fulfill safeguards requirements will be assessed
                  alongside the other CE mechanisms.
      x           The annual CSO forum and corporate consultations, such as those done for the design of
                  the Environmental and Social Framework, have different goals and audiences than
                  operational CE, and are therefore excluded. CSO engagements will be addressed only to

                                                                13
         the extent they are an avenue for, or have direct implications for, CE. Broad,
         multipurpose CSO consultations will not be reviewed.
    x    The operations of the Inspection Panel and IFC’s and MIGA’s Compliance
         Advisor/Ombudsman related to the implementation of safeguards also are not directly
         relevant and will not be reviewed.

40.     The focus will be on recent years while being cognizant of the long history of CE in the
World Bank Group. The evaluation time frame will be flexibly geared to the questions. For
example, analysis related to IFC and MIGA will cover the time period since their adoption of the
PS, analysis related to CE mainstreaming processes will focus on the implications of adopting
the Strategic Framework in 2014, and analysis of outcomes of CE will not be time bound.

Evaluation Design
41.    The complex nature of the topic will be best served by adopting a multi-level, mixed-
methods design with both quantitative and qualitative methods, as laid out in Attachment 3 and
Table 2. The evaluation will cover the topic at four levels—corporate, country, sector and
outcome area, and mechanism. The bedrock will be 10–11 field-based country case studies and
2–3 desk-based ones. Cases will include fragile contexts as well as high and low willingness to
engage citizens. Several complementary PPARs are planned and will help the team cover in
some depth a sample of World Bank and IFC projects with objectives or components related to
CE. Whenever possible, the PPARs will be conducted in the selected case countries so as to
provide in-depth reviews of particular projects to complement the review of the entire country.
Attachment 3 shows the tentative list of case studies.

42.     Cases will be selected with a view to ensure coverage across the four outcome areas
identified in the Strategic Framework (see Table 2): public service delivery; natural resource
management, governance and public financial management; and social inclusion and
empowerment. Stratification across these outcome areas will help ensure diversity in the types
and goals of CE activities reviewed. 9

43.      This evaluation will focus on the part of the results chain that the World Bank can be
deemed accountable for—that is, attributable results in terms of changes in awareness, policy,
practice, behavior, and power relations for better development. The evaluation will further use
literature reviews to explore/describe how CE tools and mechanisms may be linked to final
development outcomes, develop theories of change, and explore process tracing and other
methods to link World Bank Group CE activities to intermediate and possibly final outcomes.
The evaluation methodology will build on the literature, for example in relying on existing
findings about what are key enabling or conditioning elements necessary for results, and review

9
 A category of projects that frequently include CE mechanisms, often in response to safeguards, are infrastructure
projects. These projects will be reviewed through various prisms such as access to transport, energy and other public
services, as well as in relation to safeguards implementation. They will be included in structured reviews of CE
mechanisms whenever relevant.

                                                         14
how well the design of World Bank Group CE activities factors in the presence or absence of
those elements.

Table 2. Main Goals of Each Component of the Evaluation Approach

 Evaluation                     Main goals
 approach/method
 Country sector case studies    - Assess the quality of design of CE activities in a specific context;
                                - Assess the quality of implementation of CE, the quality of monitoring, the cost
                                  effectiveness and the results achieved;
                                - Understand who are the citizens, how they are engaged;
                                - Assess when and how the World Bank Group strengthens and uses country systems
                                  and when and how it embeds specific CE mechanisms in its work;
                                - Assess the critical factors determining meaningful engagement (or lack thereof).
 Structured review of IFC and   - Assess IFC and MIGA’s oversight of client’s Performance Standards implementation
 MIGA operations                  during the portfolio relationship and other policy commitments regarding Stakeholder
                                  Engagement.
 Structured review of country   - Assess how the World Bank Group accounted for context factors related to the
 strategies                       capacity and willingness of stakeholders and governments to engage with citizens.
 Structured literature review   - Assess how the design and implementation of CE has impacted results of
                                  interventions in specific outcome areas;
                                - Identify theories of change.
 Structured desk-based          - Understand the extent to which the design of CE activities is informed by existing
 reviews of interventions and     evidence of what works and for whom in a specific context;
 mechanisms                     - Assess how much and how effectively the WBG builds on country systems;
                                - Assess the quality of design of CE mechanisms.
 PPARs                          - Assess quality of design, implementation, and results of CE in the context of specific
                                  projects.
 Big data analytics             - Assess who are the citizens that engage and whose voices are heard;
                                - Assess the alignment between citizens’ expectations and World Bank Group
                                  responsiveness.
 Analysis of corporate          - Understand the corporate incentives, motivations and constraints for CE
 enabling environment           - Understand how the World Bank Group learns and improves in CE.


44.     Additional design elements will help the team generate broader findings that can extend
and complement the case studies and PPARs. These include: structured reviews of the most
salient CE mechanisms; a structured review of policy operations’ prior actions ; a structured
review of CE in country strategies; assessment of the data process behind the corporate scorecard
indicator used to monitor progress toward the CE target; literature reviews; interviews with
teams, social and governance specialists, country management units, and country stakeholders;
potentially an electronic survey; and a review of the Global Partnership for Social
Accountability. The team will review IFC and MIGA’s implementation of the community
engagement dimensions of the Performance Standards based on IEG’s environmental and social
project performance reviews as well as select site visits. The evaluation will collaborate with the
United Nations Global Pulse to assess how responsive to citizen’s voice the World Bank has
been on social media (Twitter) in one country (this is referred to in the World Bank Group
Strategy as “digital engagement”). The purpose will be to analyze the approach, the

                                                             15
implementation, the results, and extract interesting lessons. A traditional portfolio review
covering all projects with elements of CE will not be possible. See Attachment 3 and Table 2 for
additional details.

Quality Assurance Process
45.     This evaluation will go through IEG’s regular quality assurance process. The peer
reviewers are Vijayendra Rao (lead economist, DEC); Cyprian Fisiy (former director, Social
Development); Jonathan Fox (professor, American University); and Ritva Reinikka (former
sector and country director, World Bank). In addition, the draft Approach Paper has been
discussed at a workshop with management representatives and, likewise, the draft final report
will be discussed at a workshop. The detailed methodology plan will be finalized in close
consultation with IEG’s methods advisor.

Expected Outputs, Outreach and Tracking
46.   The main output will be an evaluation report of no more than 50 pages. This will be
complemented by PPARs, working papers analyzing knowledge gaps, and potential learning
engagements to be identified.

47.     The evaluation team has already started and will continue to conduct active external
outreach to civil society and to staff coordinating CE activities. The Civil Society Policy Forum
during the 2016 Annual Meetings was used to engage with CSOs and other stakeholders and
gather input and reactions to the evaluation. The team proposes to similarly engage at future
forums. The team has and plans to maintain a constructive dialogue with staff working on CE.
The final evaluation report will be disseminated both internally and externally.

Resources
48.    Under the direction and guidance of Marie Gaarder (Manager) and Auguste Kouame
(Director), the evaluation will be prepared by a team from all parts of IEG and led by Elena
Bardasi and Rasmus Heltberg and comprising Sahra Abdi Nur, Anna Aghumian, Eduardo
Fernandez Maldonado, Gisela Garcia, Lauren Kelly, Gurkan Kuntasal, Mari Noelle Lantin
Roquiz, Javier Lanza, Christopher David Nelson, Estelle Raimondo, Kathryn Steingraber, and
Giovanni Tanzillo. Barbara Befani, Anis Dani, and Jos Vaessen will advise the team. Faby
Chacaltana and Yezena Yimer will provide administrative support.

49.    The evaluation will be prepared with an estimated net budget of $977,000 (including
dissemination) of which 67 percent will be spent in FY17. The report will be finalized and
submitted to CODE in the third quarter of FY18.




                                                16
Attachment 1. References
Amartya, Sen. 2005. The Argumentative Indian. London: Penguin.
Gaventa, John, and Gregory Barrett. 2012. “ Mapping the Outcomes of Citizen Engagement.” World
       Development 40 (12): 2399–2410.
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2010a. Analyzing the Effects of Policy Reforms on the Poor: An
       Evaluation of the Effectiveness of World Bank Support to Poverty and Social Impact Analyses.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2010b. Safeguards and Sustainability Policies in a Changing World: An Independent Evaluation
    of World Bank Group Experience. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2011. World Bank Country-Level Engagement on Governance and Anticorruption: An
    Evaluation of the 2007 Strategy and Implementation Plan. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2014b. Project Performance Assessment Report of the Second National Fadama Development
    Project. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015. Project Performance Assessment Report. Investing in Social Capital:͒Lessons from a
    Decade of Village Development in Sri Lanka. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016. Project Performance Assessment Report: Lao People’s Democratic Republic Poverty
    Reduction Fund Project. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016. Behind the Mirror: A Report on the Self-Evaluation Systems of the World Bank Group.
    Washington, DC: World Bank.
Mansuri, Ghazala, and Vijayendra Rao. 2013. Localizing Development: Does Participation Work? Policy
       Research Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.
OED (Operations Evaluation Department). 2002. Social Funds: Assessing Effectiveness. Washington,
      DC: World Bank.
———. 2004. The Poverty Reduction Strategy Initiative: An Independent Evaluation of the World Bank’s
    Support Through 2003. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2005. The Effectiveness of World Bank Support for Community-Based and –Driven
    Development: An OED Evaluation. Washington, DC: World Bank.
United Nations. 2008. People Matter: Civic Engagement in Public Governance. World Public Sector
       Report 2008. New York: United Nations.
World Bank. 2003. Making Services Work for Poor People. World Development Report 2004.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2014. Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen Engagement in World Bank Group
    Operations. Washington, DC: World Bank.
    https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/21113
World Bank Group. 2013. World Bank Group Strategy. Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                 17
Attachment 2. Detailed Timeline
AP to Management                                January 12, 2017
World Bank Group Management comments due        February 3, 2017
E-submission to SEC of AP                       March, 2017
One Stop Meeting (Report)                       December 2017
REACT Workshop with counterparts                January 2018
Send evaluation draft to Bank Mgt.              January 2018
Report finalized and e-Submitted to CODE        March 6, 2018
CODE discussion?                                TBD




                                           18
Attachment 3: Methodological Approach
The evaluation’s objective is to assess how effectively the World Bank Group has mainstreamed
citizen engagement at the project, program, country, and corporate levels, and what is the
evidence on how this process contributes to the achievement of development outcomes. These
overarching questions are further articulated as several lines of inquiry summarized in table 3-3.
The evaluation will adopt a multilevel, mixed-methods design. Given the particularly complex
nature of the topic, it was decided that a country lens was to be the bedrock of the evaluation;
sector specific portfolios will be analyzed for each country case study. The evaluation will cover
the topic at four levels (country, sector, mechanism, and corporate) through a range of evaluation
approaches, but with diverse degrees of depth and breadth. What follows is a description of the
proposed evaluation approaches, recapitulated in tables 3-2 and 3-3, respectively, by evaluation
questions and by levels of analysis.

NESTED COUNTRY/SECTOR CASE STUDIES
Given its time and budget constraints, the evaluation aims to conduct at least ten field-based and
two desk-based case studies. The case selection strategy will be an iterative process, considering
a number of conditions concomitantly:
    x   Sufficient diversity of country context along the important dimensions of “country
        willingness to engage citizen” and fragility;
    x   Representation of all six regions and of IDA and IBRD countries;
    x   Diversity of substantive CE activities across outcome areas;
    x   Countries highlighted by key informants as having prominent CE programs going back
        some time, as well as countries considered to not have that.

The case identification processes will involve a number iterative steps:
   x    Countries will be grouped according to their “willingness” to engage with citizens. The
        “Voice and Accountability” indicator within the World Governance Index will be used as
        proxy.
   x    The World Bank, African Development Bank, and Asian Development Bank harmonized
        list of states in a fragile situation will be used in addition to considerations of fragile
        situation within otherwise nonfragile states.
   x    Conversations with key informants knowledgeable about CE will help identify countries
        with prominent CE programs; the duration of those programs; and the likelihood of
        obtaining good data on results. Suggestions from key informants will be cross-referenced
        with a list of the size of the World Bank portfolio in the core outcome areas (public
        service delivery, public finance management, natural resource management, governance,
        and social inclusion) with a view to achieve diversity of cases across outcome areas.
   x    Pragmatic considerations will also factor in. For example, some countries and issues have
        been extensively studied already (India, Indonesia, CDD) and can be covered by desk
        review. Opportunities to combine case studies with PPAR work, and to visit countries
        where relatively few IEG missions have visited in recent years will also be explored.

                                                19
A tentative list of case studies, subject to budget, ability to travel, and evaluative judgments, is
shown in Table 3-1.

Table 3-1. Indicative list of case studies

                           Region        Type of study             Fragile    Voice and
                                                                   context    accountability
                                                                              percentile
                                                                              rank
 Burkina Faso             AFR       Impact evaluation                              40
 Cambodia                 EAP       Desk study, PPAR                               19
 Dominican Republic       LAC       Country study                                  51
 Ethiopia                 AFR       Country study                                  14
 Kazakhstan               ECA       Country study                                  17
 Kyrgyz Republic          ECA       PPAR, Country study                            32
 Lao PDR                  EAP       Country study, PPAR                             4
 Madagascar               AFR       Country study               Yes                34
 Mali                     AFR       Country study, PPAR         Yes                40
 Morocco                  MENA      Country study                                  28
 Nepal                    SAR       Desk study, PPAR                               33
 Pakistan                 SAR       Country study, PPAR                            27
 Peru                     LAC       Country study, IFC PPAR                        54
 Philippines              EAP       Country study, PPARs        (One region)       52
 Vietnam                  EAP       PPAR                                           11
 West Bank and Gaza       MENA      Country study               Yes                23
Note: Source for the “Voice and Accountability percentile rank” is the Worldwide Governance
Indicator. Values are for 2015.

THREE NESTED LEVELS OF ASSESSMENT
In each case study selected for field-based inquiry, the World Bank Group’s support to citizen
engagement will be assessed at three levels: country, sector or outcome area, and project.
    x   Country: context; government priorities; role, goals, strategy, portfolio, and results of the
        World Bank Group; the extent to which the World Bank Group supports and builds on
        domestic frameworks for CE; synergies across operations.
    x   Sector or outcome area: the quality of design, implementation, and results of CE
        activities for the portfolio of activities in one or two selected sectors.
    x   Project and CE mechanism: in a subset of cases, in-depth inquiry into CE mechanisms
        deployed in specific projects will take place.

Data collection and analysis

A structured protocol for case studies will be developed. For field-based inquiry a core
evaluation team will conduct early on a pilot study where all of the data collection tools will be


                                                    20
tested and calibrated. The method will be finalized and deployed in the other case studies. The
data collection methods will comprise the following:
   x   Desk-review of project documents and country strategies
   x   Literature review of relevant CE literature in the country
   x   Interviews of Bank staff in Country Management Units
   x   Interviews with teams
   x   Interviews with government officials
   x   Interviews with project management units
   x   Interviews with CSOs
   x   Interviews and focus groups with citizens/beneficiaries/stakeholders (whenever
       appropriate and feasible).

For each country, a case narrative will be drafted as a basis for synthesizing evidence in the
overall evaluation report. In addition, specific case-based analytical approaches are under
consideration, such as:
   x   Cross-case comparison: for each type of outcome area, evidence from different countries
       will be compared and contrasted.
   x   Within-case inquiry: Given the importance of understanding the processes underlying
       citizen engagement, specific within-case methods, such as process-tracing will be
       explored
   x   Stakeholder mapping: Given the centrality of understanding who gets to engage, specific
       stakeholder mapping techniques will be used, including possibly Social Network
       Analysis.

STRUCTURED REVIEW OF COUNTRY STRATEGIES
In order to assess the extent to which the World Bank Group has mainstreamed CE into its
country engagement strategy a structured reviews of country strategy documents and process will
be undertaken and will build on the existing analysis of 22 SCD/CPF recently undertaken for the
FY17 IEG evaluation. Document reviews and in-person or phone interviews will serve as a basis
for the assessment.

STRUCTURED LITERATURE REVIEW
For the purpose of this evaluation, IEG will review the evidence on CE implementation and
impact in four outcome areas: (i) public service delivery; (ii) social inclusion and empowerment;
(iii) natural resource management; and (iv) governance and public financial management. For
each outcome area, the review will attempt to shed light on the following questions:
   1. What are the CE mechanisms used?
   2. What are the objectives of the CE mechanisms? What results are the CE mechanism
      trying to achieve and how are they supposed to contribute to improving the outcomes of
      the development intervention?


                                                21
   3. Is there evidence that the CE mechanisms are implemented as planned (i.e.,
      implementation fidelity)? For instance, is there evidence that the feedback loops were
      closed? Is there a discussion of the incentives faced by the implementers (e.g., “street
      level bureaucrats”) of the CE mechanism?
   4. How is the success of CE measured? Two critical questions: What is the indicator used to
      measure the outcome (i.e., measurement validity)? What is the evaluation design used to
      measure plausible causality?
   5. What factors affect the implementation and success of the CE mechanism?

The possibility of synthesizing the findings from the literature through a Qualitative Comparative
Analysis to identify patterns of regularity in particular causal configurations —of specific citizen
engagement mechanisms leading to particular outcomes under certain contextual
circumstances—will be explored. These causal packages, which are well supported by empirical
evidence in the literature, will also serve as a basis to assess the extent to which World Bank
Group CE activities are likely to lead to positive results.

STRUCTURED DESK-BASED REVIEWS OF INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS
   x   Systematic review of a random sample of investment operations approved after 2014,
       assessing (1) the CE mechanisms described in the Appraisal document and (2) reported
       on in the supervision report. Possibly, a subset of projects including select mechanisms
       will be identified for more in-depth analysis.
   x   Structured review of policy operations’ prior actions: Through Development Policy
       Financing (DPF), the World Bank also supports or requires CE under certain
       circumstances. The evaluation will use the database built for the review of social and
       environmental risk management in DPF to conduct a structured review to assess CE prior
       actions.

SPECIFIC REVIEWS OF IFC AND MIGA

The team will review IFC and MIGA’s activities to overseeing clients’ implementation of the
community engagement dimensions of the Performance Standards based on IEG’s environmental
and social project performance reviews. All projects reviewed by IEG during the last three years
will form part of the review. IEG will develop a systematic coding scheme focused on the design
and implementation of stakeholder engagement by clients, evidence on outputs and intermediate
outcomes, the degree to which clients internalize CE mechanisms, and GRMs. Documentation
quality will also be assessed. This data will be analyzed for trends over time, across regions and
sectors, and for countries with strong and weak legal requirements. The assessment will be
complemented by site visits to select projects that benefit from IFC support to review how they
pass on the Performance Standards requirements to subprojects and by interviews with IFC and
MIGA social specialists.




                                                22
PPARS
Several complementary PPARs are planned and will help the team cover in some depth a sample
of Bank-supported projects whose objectives relate to CE. Because they can be staggered, these
PPARs will also allow the team to gradually refine its methods and expertize. These will cover
CDD projects in Kyrgyz Republic, Mali, and Nepal; a Demand for Good Governance project in
Cambodia; community-based water in Nepal; community-based forestry in Lao PDR and
Vietnam; IFC advisory in Peru; and possibly more. IEG’s ongoing impact evaluation of a citizen
scorecards project in Burkina Faso will also be an input.

BIG DATA ANALYTICS OF WORLD BANK’S DIGITAL ENGAGEMENT
Given the rising importance of social media as a platform for citizen’s voice, the evaluation will
also seek to assess how engaged with and responsive to citizen’s voice on social media the
World Bank has been. To do so, the evaluation team is attempting to partner with United Nations
Global Pulse, a leading lab on the use of big data analytics in international development to
leverage Global Pulse’s access to Twitter database. This experimental evaluation approach will
be tested in one specific country where the rate of Twitter penetration and World Bank Twitter
activity is quite high.

FOCUSED SURVEYS AND KEY INFORMANT INTERVIEWS
A series of interviews and, possibly, an electronic survey of selected staff is being planned.
These will aim to explore staff’s attitudes, knowledge and resources regarding CE. Selected staff
includes country directors, country managers, other CMU staff, social development specialists,
and teams in various sectors. (Interviews with external stakeholders will also be done as part of
country case studies.)

STRUCTURED REVIEW OF THE GPSA AND OTHER RELEVANT PROGRAMS AND PARTNERSHIP
Global Partnership for Social Accountability will be assessed as an in-depth case study to inform
the evaluation. The partnership review will be carried out by adapting IEG’s evaluation
framework for assessing global and regional partnership programs. This will be based on a desk
review of key program documents, GPSA’s external evaluation(s), and interviews with the
program stakeholders and beneficiaries. Where possible, country visits for the main evaluation
will be used to provide evidence on program’s contribution. External evaluations and interviews
will be used by IEG to get insights on the relevance and effectiveness of other partnership
programs, such as the Open Government Partnership, and the activities funded by trust funds,
such as the Japan Social Development Fund.

REVIEW OF CORPORATE INDICATORS
The strengths and limitations of the corporate scorecard indicator used to monitor progress
toward the CE target will be assessed by reviewing how the indicator data is collected,
aggregated, and used.



                                               23
Causal inference and generalizability of findings
Many of the methods proposed rely on configurational causation, such as qualitative comparative
analysis, process tracing, and other methods of causal inference. These techniques – combined
with structured literature reviews for each main outcome areas – will allow reconstructing CE
activity-specific results chains and establishing whether the intervention (or CE mechanisms)
made a difference, for whom, and under what circumstances.

The evaluation cannot rely on a global portfolio review and comprehensive assessment of the
universe of corporate CE activities. The design of different evaluation elements will aim at
optimizing the ability to draw causal inferences across cases spanning diverse contexts and
outcome areas. The nested country-sector approach will allow for a certain degree of
generalization depending on the quality of the selection of countries, sectors, and activities as
well as on the degree to which there is convergence or divergence in patterns uncovered in these
cases. The evaluation will aim for generalizability of findings on other evaluative questions, such
as the quality of design, through survey and structured review techniques.




                                                24
    Table 3-2. Evaluation Design by Evaluation Questions
                                       Nested             Literature review              CE         PPAR     Structured   Key informant    Big data
                                    country/sector                                   mechanisms                 desk-      interviews     and social
                                     case studies                                    case studies              based                       network
                                                                                                              reviews                      analysis
What has been the quality of
                                           9                       9                                     9        9             9
design of CE activities?
x How has the World Bank                                                                                     Structured
    Group accounted for context                                                                              reviews of
    factors such as the capacity                                                                                country
                                          X           Identify influential context
    and willingness of                                                                               x       strategies
                                                                 factors
    stakeholders and                                                                                          (building
    governments to engage?                                                                                      on IEG
                                                                                                                 FY17)
x   To what extent is the design                                                                             Structured
    of CE activities informed by                                                                             reviews of
    existing evidence of what                          Identify configuration of                              PAD and
                                                                                          x          x
    works, for whom and in what                      Context/mechanism/outcome                                 ICRR of
    context?                                                                                                  “core CE
                                                                                                              projects”
x    How much and how
                                                                                                             Structured
     effectively does the World
                                                                                                             reviews of
     Bank Group build on and              X                                                          x                         X
                                                                                                             DPOs prior
     strengthen countries’ own
                                                                                                               actions
     systems for CE?
x Are potential synergies
     across projects exploited,
                                          X                                                                                    X
     especially at the country
     level?
What has been the quality of
implementation of CE                       9                       9                                     9        9             9
activities?
x What are the incentives,
     motivations, and constraints
                                          X                        X                                 X                         X
     for implementers on the
     ground?

                                                                                        25
x   How are CE activities                                 Structured
    monitored?                       x            X       reviews of
                                                            ICRR
x    Is attention paid to the cost
     effectiveness of instruments    x            x                    x
     (including for citizens)?
x Does the World Bank Group
     work with the right partners
                                     x            x           x        x
     and intermediaries to achieve
     its CE objectives?
x Who participates and whose
     voices are heard (e.g.,         x   x        x                        x
     women, men, rich, poor)?
What are the objectives and
                                     9   9            9                    9
results of CE?
x What is the World Bank
     Group’s rationale for
     mainstreaming CE?
x Does CE help make World
     Bank Group projects and
                                     x   x        x                        x
     strategies more responsive to
     citizen needs?
x Under what circumstances
     does World Bank Group’s CE
     help make governments           x                                 x
     more responsive to citizen
     needs?
x Does CE improve
     intermediate and final              x    x   x
     outcomes?
x What are the unintended
                                     x   x        x
     outcomes?
Is the corporate environment
                                     9   9                    9        9   9
enabling of CE?
x Is CE understood and owned
                                     x                                 x
     by Bank Group staff?

                                             26
x   What are the incentives,
    motivations, and constraints
    for task team leaders to
    integrate and innovate on
    CE?
x   What has been the impact of
    the Strategic Framework and    x                         x
    of the corporate indicators?
x   Is there learning on what
    works for CE? How have
    tools, mechanism,              x   x                     x   x
    approaches, and technology
    evolved over time?
x   What is the role of the                     Structured
    GPSA?                                       review of
                                                  GPSA




                                           27
Table 3-2. Evaluation Design by Level of Analysis
                       Country level        Sector level     Mechanism level     Corporate level
 Country case               X                   (X)
 studies
 Literature review                                  X               X
 Mechanism case                                     X               X
 studies
 Process Tracing                                                    X
 Key informant               X                      X               X                   X
 interviews
 PPAR                        X                      X               X
 Structured desk             X                      X               X                   X
 reviews
 Social network                                                                         X
 analysis
 Big data analytics          X                                                          X

QUALITY ASSURANCE MECHANISMS

Steps will be taken to ensure the validity of findings and guarantee consistency of approach
across members within the evaluation team. For instance, a case study template and interview
protocols will be developed to ensure a common framework and evaluative lens across studies.

Furthermore, the team will apply triangulation at multiple levels. First, triangulation will be
applied by cross-checking sources of evidence within a given methodological component. For
instance, within case studies, evidence stemming from interviews with CSOs, development
partners, Bank staff, and citizens on the same topic will be compared and contrasted. Second,
triangulation will be applied across evaluation components. For example, findings stemming
from case studies will be cross-validated with findings emerging from surveys and structured
document reviews.

The evaluation team will also apply external validation mechanisms at various intervals during
the evaluation process. For example, peer-reviewers and senior advisors will provide feedback at
the beginning, during, and at the end of the evaluation process. A workshop was held with
stakeholders at the inception of the evaluation process to validate the scope and the approach,
and another will be convened at the end around the relevance and feasibility of the evaluation’s
recommendations.




                                                28
