    Environmental Management
5



                       The DOS & The DONTS
Environmental Management
    General Considerations - Site Screening - Construction Site
  Management - Roads - Water Supply - Sanitation - Solid Waste
                                Management - Markets - Rivers
Author :
Ekart Hartmann dan Heinz Unger

Editor :
Octaviera Herawati, Vivianti Rambe, Richard Gnagey

Photos by :
Ekart Hartmann

Published by :
World Bank Jakarta
PNPM Support Facilities (PSF) Office
Jalan Diponegoro No. 72
Jakarta 10310
Phone : (62-21) 3148175 (hunting)
Fax : (62-21) 31903090
Website : www.worldbank.org

All, or any part of this book may be reproduced for training needs

For Further information, please contact :
Octaviera Herawati
Phone : (62-21) 3148175
Fax : (62-21) 31903090
Email : oherawati@worldbank.org
Preface
Environment is all about living and extinct things on earth. The surrounding environment
condition is very much influencing our life pattern. A clean and well maintained environment
will make us feel comfortable in doing a lot of activities. Conversely, a bad environment
condition will cause a lot of problems, such as, disturbance of ecosystem 1), the lacking of or
even the lost of natural resources, and moreover which is also important, it may influences
our health.

Recently, we regularly have been faced with issues on activities where it potentially causes
environment damages or disturbances, such as, illegal deforestation, forest burning, the
coral usage for village road construction, improper domestic/factory waste disposal, and
also without exception, dirty public places. If these activities were not immediately stopped,
it may cause damages to our environment ecosystem. And if our ecosystem is damaged,
our lives on earth will also fall to pieces. Therefore, it needs efforts, at least, to minimize the
environment damages through the proper environmental management. These efforts can
be the form of among others; forest rehabilitation, restriction to disposal waste into location
that potentially may harm the environment, or also in the form of the delivery of awareness
to the society of the danger that may threaten their viability.

This book is drafted to help to deliver the awareness especially to the public society on
things that may potentially cause the environment disturbances and damages. This book is
simply and clearly presented, by showing good and bad samples where generally may be
seen in our surroundings.

It is expected that this book can be easily understood not only by the society who is not from
environment engineering group, but also can be used by government staff, institutions who
involved in environment preservation activities, civil engineers who regularly involved in
construction and others whose activities related to environment.

Finally, the writer wishes that this book can be distributed and provided to anyone who
demands; can also be used to complete the construction technique training material,
environmental awareness, operational and maintenance activities, etc.




1   Ecosystem can also be said as a unit arrangement completely and thoroughly between entire ele-
    ments of life circle who interact.




                                                             Picture Book - Environmental Management   i
     Gratitution
     Highest gratitude is awarded to some people who make this book into materialized: Scott
     Guggenheim who has the idea and financing this activity, Ekart Hartmann and Heinz Unger
     who carried the idea out, Vivi Rambe who has contributed ideas, and suggestion/input before
     and after this activity carried out, Octaviera Herawati who manages this activity (including in
     obtaining suggestion and input of the book contents, manages the printing and publishing,
     and translates it into Bahasa Indonesia) and Richard Gnagey who has provided his time for
     reviewing and giving valuable suggestion/input. Specifically to Victor Bottini and Sentot
     Satria who always gives their support towards this book. Also to colleagues who have made
     the illustration and layout, colleagues in administration section and whoever who has given
     his or her supports during the completion of this activity.




ii   Picture Book - Environmental Management
Introduction

       Making Your Project Protect the Community
                     Environment



                  WHY SHOULD YOU USE THIS MANUAL?

 •   A community will not be aware of all possible environmental impacts.
 •   A project will have unforeseen and unexpected impacts, which could include
     economic loss and even death and injury.
 •   A project will have environmental impacts unless project concept, design and
     implementation stage consider all potential impacts and plan to handle them.
 •   A project may present an opportunity to fix a local environmental problem.
 •   It is worth to protect Our Environment – for Ourselves and Our children.




                 HOW SHOULD YOU USE THIS MANUAL?

 •   Use the General Section – Environmental Aspects as a checklist for what not to do
     and not to buy.
 •   Use the Site Screening section to make sure the project does not have negative
     impact on environmentally or socially sensitive areas.
 •   Check the section on Construction Site Management for what to watch out for
     when implementing construction activities.
 •   Look at the different sector pages to see what environmental problems could arise
     from community infrastructure projects :
       • Imagine which hazards potentially came the most impact for the community.
       • Imagine which hazards are most likely to occur on the site.
       • Take measure to eliminate or minimize environmental damage.
       • Put environmental measures into design drawings and budgets.
       • Explain hazards and protective measures to the whole community.
 •   Learn from the sector pages how to prevent environmental impacts and problems,
     and see how to improve your project and the environment.
 •   Pay attention to the signs for good and bad samples provided on the top of each
     page; GOOD samples              BAD samples




                                                    Picture Book - Environmental Management   iii
                         Contents
   Preface                                              i
   Gratitution                                         ii
   Introduction                                       iii

    Good                                          Bad

        -           General Considerations          1-7

                         Site Screening
       -                Physical Features          9-11
     12-14             Biological Features           -
      15                 Social & Culture            -

        -              Construction Site          17-19
                         Management

23, 25-26, 28-30,            Roads           21-22, 24, 27, 31,
    32-34, 36                                     35, 37

  39-40, 43-48           Water Supply             41-42

     49-52                Sanitation                 -

     53-57          Solid Waste Management           -

   58-59, 61                Markets               57, 60

     64-65                   Rivers              63, 66-68
                 Chapter 1




General
Considerations
                                                                                                        General
   Illegal Timber                                                                                       Considerations




                                              Is this timber illegal?



                           USE ONLY LEGAL TIMBER FOR CONSTRUCTION

                                                    WHY ?

             •      Illegal timber has been logged without a proper license.
             •      Illegal timber may have been logged in a protected area.
             •      Illegal timber is usually logged in an unsustainable manner – the forest
                    may be lost forever.
             •      Use of illegal timber create a market that threatens protected species and
                    ecosystems and harms Indonesia’s natural resources.
             •      If illegal timber could not be sold it wouldn’t be logged.

                                                    HOW ?

             •      Always require the supplier to show a certificate for timber.

             Note: This requirement applies to large housing projects only.




Chapter 1                                                               Picture Book - Environmental Management          1
          General
    Considerations                                                                              Chainsaw




                                                    Chainsaw




                                     NO CHAINSAWS SHOULD BE USED


                                                      WHY ?


               •     Chainsaws could be used to cut a lot of trees very quickly.
               •     Chainsaws could be abused (??).


                                                     HOW ?

               •     Only use handsaw for getting wood.
               •     Cut only as little wood as needed.
               •     When sitting infrastructure try to avoid cutting any trees, or as few as
                     possible.




2         Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                Chapter 1
                                                                                                   General
   Asbestos                                                                                        Considerations




                                                                                          Roof with
                                                                                          asbestos
                                                                                        cement tiles




                                  A roof covered with asbestos cement tiles




                    DO NOT USE ANY MATERIALS THAT CONTAIN ASBESTOS


                                                  WHY ?

              •   Asbestos is a health hazard to people that slowly reduces long capacity
                  and can cause cancer.
              •   Even materials that contain asbestos, such as asbestos cement roof tiles or
                  asbestos cement panels, are a health hazard.
              •   The health hazard comes from handling and breathing dust from asbestos-
                  containing materials, such as cutting or sawing them.
              •   Hazards are especially dangerous and unsuspected when asbestos
                  materials are removed many years later.




Chapter 1                                                          Picture Book - Environmental Management          3
          General
    Considerations                                                                                Explosives




                                       Fishermen are catching fish using explosion


              DO NOT BUY OR USE ANY EXPLOSIVES, ESPECIALLY NOT FOR FISHING


                                                        WHY ?


               •	    Fishing	with	explosives	is		damages	to	the	marine	environment.
               •	    Fishing	with	explosives	is	not	sustainable.
               •	    Fishing	with	explosives	will	reduce	fish	catch	for	many	years	or	even	for	
                     ever.
               •	    Explosives	are	dangerous	to	handle	and	use.

                                                        HOW ?

               •	    Use	traditional	or	convential	fishing	nets	or	lines.




4         Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                  Chapter 1
                                                                                                General
   Pesticides/Herbicides                                                                        Considerations




                                    Pesticides/Herbicides




                           DO NOT BUY ANY PESTICIDES FOR THE PROJECT


                                                 WHY ?


             •    Runoff from field may contaminate surface water with pesticides.
             •    Seeping into ground may contaminate the groundwater.
             •    Over-application of pesticides poses a health risk to people, especially
                  young children.
             •    Pesticides may pollute the ecosystem, i.e. plants, and beneficial insects,
                  birds and mammals.

                                                 HOW ?

             •    Use natural, traditional ways to flight pests.
             •    Consult with Agriculture Office about “Integrated Pest Management”.




Chapter 1                                                       Picture Book - Environmental Management          5
          General
    Considerations                                                                             Coral Extraction




                        Coral road surface




                                                                              packed in bags




                                    Coral rocks being used for village road construction



                     DO NOT TAKE CORAL ROCKS (ALIVE OR DEAD) FROM THE SEA


                                                         WHY ?

               •     Corals are a valuable marine resource.
               •     Corals grow very slowly, so damage is extremely different to recover from.
               •     Coral reefs protect the shoreline from wave action and storms.
               •     Coral reefs are the habitat of a great variety of fish and marine life.
               •     Coral reefs are important breeding areas for fish and shellfish, even
                     deepwater fish.
               •     Coral reefs are a potential source of eco-tourism benefits.

               Note:
               • Alternative road building materials are usually available.
               • May be excavated coral rock from land.




6         Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                     Chapter 1
                                                                                                             General
   Quarries                                                                                                  Considerations




                                                                                     Theoretical
                                                                                      new river
                                                                                     alignment




                  Existing river
                       bed




                                   An illustration of what a river realignment might look like




                                            DO NOT REALIGN ANY RIVER


                                                            WHY ?


              •      River alignment projects are complex.
              •      Realignment of a river can have numerous environmental impacts that
                     are difficult to control and manage due to increased speed and uniformity
                     of flow, loss of microhabitats, loss of fertile sediments, and effects if
                     channeling.
              •      Bank and bed erosion and / or downstream flooding could be unforeseen
                     results of river realignment works.




Chapter 1                                                                    Picture Book - Environmental Management          7
                 Chapter 2




Site Screening
   Potential for Water Pollution                                                    Physical Features    Site Screening




                          Schematic diagram showing some potential sources of water pollution

                                   CONSIDER POTENTIAL WATER POLLUTION

                                                       WHY ?

             •     River alignment projects are complex.
                   Polluted surface and ground water are less valuable as economic resources.
             •     River alignment projects are complex.
                   Polluted surface and ground water are unhealthy for cunsumption by
                   human, plants and animals.

                                                       HOW ?

             •     River alignment projects are complex .
                   Prevent potential pollution from reaching ground or surface water, such as:
                    o Septic tank effluent that is not treated properly.
                    o Sediment from roads and slopes.
                    o Runoff from agricultural land that use fertilizer, pesticides or herbicides.
                    o Untreated wastewater from economic activities (dyeing, food
                       processing, leather, industrial waste).



Chapter 2                                                              Picture Book - Environmental Management            9
     Site Screening        Physical Features                                                                     Erodible Soil




                                                Deeper than a
                                               person’s height!




                      Severe gully erosion as a consequence of road construction in an zone of highly erodible soils


                                        AVOID BUILDING ROADS IN ERODIBLE SOILS

                                                                  WHY ?

                      •	     Many	soils	are	easily	eroded	by	rain	splash	and	surface	water.
                      •	     Removal	of	an	existing	vegetation	cover	worsen	erosion	problems.	
                      •	     Steep	slopes	increase	the	speed	of	the	flowing	water	and	making	erosion		
                             worse.
                      •	     Flows	are	channelled		along	roads	on	a	grade,	might	cause	gully	erosion	(as	
                             shown above).

                                                                  HOW ?

                      •	     Water	interception,	drainage	and	erosion	control	measures	must	be	taken.
                      •	     Flows	are	intercepted	before	they	reach	steeper	slope.
                      •	     Flowing	water	drains	into	ditches	that	drain	water	supply.
                      •	     Wayet	can	be	channeled	into	culverts	to	sofly	cross	roads	as	irrigation	
                             canals.
                      •	     Erosion	control	measures	can	be	taken.



10            Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                                  Chapter 2
   Eroding River Banks                                                              Physical Features   Site Screening




                                                                                Upper edge of river
                                                                                bank before erosion




                                                                      Energy of water




                 Road washed away




                A section of a kabupaten road was completely washed away by erosion of the river bank



                   BUILD ROADS OR STRUCTURES AWAY FROM RIVER BANKS

                                                      WHY ?

            •     The outside bend of river banks is progressively eroded by the force of the
                  flowing water especially from larger or fast flowing rivers.
            •     Stopping this erosive force requires significant protective structures.
            •     It is better to respect the natural forces and build away from the river,
                  especially away from the outside bend of the river.


                                                      HOW ?

            •     Choose a different road alignment away from the river banks.
            •     Do not locate any roads or structures too close to river banks.
            •     Check for evidence of bank erosion.




Chapter 2                                                             Picture Book - Environmental Management            11
     Site Screening        Biological Features                                                          Wetlands




                                                                                       Wetlands –
                                                                                     resource of life




                          Swamp


                            Wildlife in
                            wetlands


                                                                         Mangroves

                            Heron




                           PROTECT WETLANDS FROM INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION


                                                          WHY ?

                      •     Wetlands serve as water reservoirs.
                      •     Wetlands help recharge groundwater.
                      •     Wetlands filter and clean water.
                      •     Wetlands provide special habitat for wildlife.
                      •     Marine wetlands are important breeding areas for fish and shellfish.
                      •     Mangrove trees protect the shore.




                                                                     Photos: Jakartagreenmonster.com



12            Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                   Chapter 2
   Marine Habitat                                                                Biological Features     Site Screening




                                                          Fish, turtles and other marine life can be
                                                         affected by infrastructure in or near the sea




                       PREVENT POLLUTION IN OR NEAR MARINE HABITATS


                                                    WHY ?


            •       Infrastructure development in the ocean or near the ocean can adversely
                    affect marine life.
            •       Fuel or oil spills from boat engines can pollute the sea and kill marine life.
            •       Near shore drainage polluted by septic tanks, or high in sediment, or
                    effluent from economic activities can also affect marine life.
            •       The catch from fishing by the community may be reduced if ocean water
                    quality is affected.




Chapter 2                                                           Picture Book - Environmental Management               13
     Site Screening       Biological Features                                                       Wildlife Habitat




                                                Indonesia has many special wildlife habitat areas



                                           PROTECT SPECIAL WILDLIFE HABITAT
                                          FROM INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION


                                                                    WHY ?


                      •    Wildlife habitat, such as in primary forest or in swamps, provides a haven
                           for many special and algae endangered wildlife.
                      •    Infrastructure development, especially roads, will disturb the wildlife.
                      •    Roads will also provide access to other activities that may destroy the
                           wildlife habitat.




14            Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                     Chapter 2
   Protected Areas                                                                 Social & Culture   Site Screening




                       Boundary of Protected Area (Note: The signboard needs re-painting)


                                    RESPECT PROTECTED AREAS


                                                   WHY ?

            •    Protected areas are set up to give protection to unique or special habitats
                 or ecosystems, including rare or endangered species.
            •    Protected areas can be a source of local revenue from visitors and eco-
                 tourism businesses.
            •    The government has given legal protection to the area.




Chapter 2                                                           Picture Book - Environmental Management            15
                  Chapter 3




Construction
Site Management
                                                                                                    Construction Site
   Waste Management                                                                                 Management




                      Old oil drums – empty?
                                                                Old tires




                                                                        Ponding water



                                 A very poorly managed site with several hazards


                         KEEP CONSTRUCTION SITES FREE OF HAZARDS

                                                    WHY ?

            •    Poorly managed construction sites pose environmental risks.
            •    Waste materials, such as fuels, oil and grease, can contaminate the soil and
                 the groundwater.
            •    Waste materials can also be a hazard for the people living in the vicinity,
                 especially children.
            •    Unattended equipment and unsecured materials may be unsafe.
            •    Ponding water is always a health risk.


                                                    HOW ?

            •	   Remove the waste materials to more secure place and organize it neatly
            •	   Make a sign on material which may contains hazard




Chapter 3                                                           Picture Book - Environmental Management             17
     Construction Site
        Management                                                                               Noise Control




                                             REDUCE AND CONTROL NOISE

                                                         WHY ?

                    •    Excessive noise can affect human health.
                    •    Loud noise is a great nuisance.


                                                         HOW ?

                    •    Use proper equipment, such as mufflers on gensets and engines.
                    •    Use noise-reducing insulation on buildings, such as for a diesel genset.
                    •    Operate noise-generating facilities only during day-time hours.
                    •    Do not locate noise-generating facilities close to sensitive areas such as:
                         o clinics or hospitals.
                         o schools.




18             Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                 Chapter 3
                                                                                                    Construction Site
   Dust Control                                                                                     Management




                                A simple way to control dust by water sprinkling



                  MAKE EFFORTS TO CONTROL DUST DURING CONSTRUCTION

                                                   WHY ?

            •     Dust is a potential health problem for some people, especially longer
                  exposure to dust poses a health risk.
            •     Dust is a great nuisance to the entire community.
            •     Dust affects yards and gardens, and penetrates building and houses.

                                                   HOW ?

            •     Use water sprinkling to control dust.
            •     Cover materials that produce dust.
            •     Avoid or at least limit activities that produce a lot of dust.
            •     If permanent roads through a housing area produce a lot of dust, use
                  bitumen to seal the gravel surface and thereby control dust.




Chapter 3                                                           Picture Book - Environmental Management             19
Roads
        Chapter 4




Roads
                                                                                                   Roads
   No Roads in Primary Forests




                                                                                          Forest




                                                                                     Road




                                 This road is already causing erosion problems



                      AVOID BUILDING ROADS THROUGH PRIMARY FORESTS


                                                   WHY ?


            •    New roads into primary forest can cause many problems, such as:
                 o Open up the forest to illegal logging.
                 o Give access to illegal mining.
                 o Forest clearing for agriculture.
                 o Erosion of soils.
                 o Damage to the watershed.
                 o Give access to illegal hunting.
                 o Endanger rare species of animals.
                 o Destroy special habitat and fragile ecosystems.




Chapter 4                                                           Picture Book - Environmental Management   21
     Roads
                                                                                                Eroding Slopes




                               Trees will fall and
                                block the road




             Ditch is       led
             with eroded material

                                                                                Roots are exposed
                                                                                    by erosion



                                The erosion of this slope is in an advanced stage



                                    PROTECT SLOPES FROM EROSION


                                                     WHY ?

         •      Steep, unprotected bare slopes are prone to erosion.
         •      Falling trees are a hazard for all road users.
         •      Eroded materials blocked the ditch on the up slope side causing drainage
                problems, potentially damaging the road surface.


                                                     HOW ?

         •      Reduce side slopes.
         •      Terrace side slopes.
         •      Divert water from rechange side slopes.
         •      Add slope protection with vegetation or bioengineering measures.
         •      A low retaining wall could be built and the slope be cut back.




22   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                         Chapter 4
                                                                                                     Roads
   Bioengineering




                      g rass
                Growing
                          h




                      Fast-growing grass was planted on cut and embankment slopes of this road


                                         REDUCE SLOPE EROSION


                                                     WHY ?

            •       Over time or in heavy rainfalls slopes can be eroded easily.
            •       In some cases steep slopes can be washed out by progressive erosion.
            •       Ditches and roads can be quickly filled with sediment causing blockages.


                                                     HOW ?

            •       Plant locally available, fast-growing grass on slopes prone to erosion.
            •       Some grasses grow quickly and have deep roots that help to stabilize the
                    slope.
            •       The grass plants protect the soil from erosion by rain and runoff.
            •       Ask the community and / or local or regional experts which grass varieties
                    are best suited for erosion prevention.
            •       Grass planted on the bare slope requires organic fertilizer and watering.




Chapter 4                                                             Picture Book - Environmental Management   23
     Roads
                                                                                         Unstable Slopes




                                                 Ditch is blocked
                                                 by a land slide




              Flow in ditch is
              diverted onto
             the gravel road




                         Landslides have blocked the ditch and may soon block the road



                                 PREVENT LANDSLIDES ON CUT SLOPES


                                                   WHY ?

         •     Landslides can block ditches and water will flood the road during heavy
               rainfall events.
         •     Landslides occur when the slope is too steep in sandy soil.
         •     During the rainy season the risk of land slides is higher, because adding its
               weight to the forces causing instability.

                                                   HOW ?

         •     Cut back the slopes in areas where land slides tend to happen frequently.
         •     Build a retaining wall at the lower part of the unstable slope.
         •     Build a crib at the toe of the slope, together with bioengineering plantings.
         •     Use bioengineering plantings on the steep slope in the long term.




24   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                    Chapter 4
                                                                                                       Roads
   Unstable Slopes




                                                               Natural slope
                     Slope too steep




                             Weep water
                             from holes to




                                                                            Retaining wall
                                                                             for cut slope




                                             Retaining wall for cut slope



                          USE RETAINING WALLS TO STOP LANDSLIDES


                                                      WHY ?

            •    If the cut slope is too steep, build a retaining wall at the toe of the slope is
                 cheaper than extensive earth works.


                                                      HOW ?

            •    Weep holes should be filtered to keep soil behind the wall.
            •    The slope above the wall must be at the natural slope.
            •    Keep the weep holes clear to allow drainage from behind the wall.
            •    A solid foundation is essential for a well built retaining wall.




Chapter 4                                                               Picture Book - Environmental Management   25
     Roads
                                                                                                                               Bioengineering




                                                                                           Road


                                                                                                         During planting
             Steep slope of road
                embankment



                  Detail

                                                                   Protrudes 2 to 3 inches
                    Cross section                                  above bundle
                    Not to scale
                                             Mulching between                      Slightly exposed
                                             live fascine rows                     after installation
                                                                                            Moist soil
                                                                                            backfill



                                                                                           Prepared
                                                                                           trench

                    Slope
                    surface


                                                                                        Live fascine
                                                                                        bundle
                   Note:                                              Live stake (2- t0 3-foot spacing
                   Rooted/leafed condition of                         between dead stout stakes)
                   the living plant material is not
                   representative of the time of
                   installation
                                                          Dead stout stake
                                                          (2- to 3-foot spacing along bundle)
                                 Live branches
                                 (stager throughout
                                 bundle)


                                                                                                            vegetation fully
                                                                                                              established
                         Bundle
                         (6 to 8 inches      Twine
                         in diameter)




                Schematic view of a bioengineering instaliation, and BEFORE and AFTER pictures


              STOP SLIDING AND ERODING SLOPES WITH BIOENGINEERING


                                                                                             WHY ?


         •     Landslides on road cuts and embankments could cause a road to be
               partially or completely lost and communications would be cut off.
         •     Progressive erosion and slides could damage the roads and ditches.
         •     Bioengineering is a “natural” solution and the slope will be green in a short
               time as illustrated above.
         •     Bioengineering uses live plant materials to stabilize slopes with their roots;
               the plants also protect the slope against erosion.
         •     Different techniques are available for use, depending on the conditions.
         •     The local community and / or local or regional experts might know which
               plant varieties are best suited for this application.




26   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                                                        Chapter 4
                                                                                                   Roads
   Unstable Slopes




                       Stone covered
                     embankment slope




                                                                                   Land slide




                        Landslides happened on the downslope and upslope side of the road


                 PREVENT LANDSLIDES ON ROAD CUTS AND EMBANKMENTS


                                                    WHY ?

            •    A landslide can block the ditches and drainage, potentially damaging the
                 road through erosion or washouts.
            •    A landslide can block road drainage.
            •    A road may be completely lost when a major landslide happens.
            •    Communication and transport link can be cut.
            •    Restoration of the road would be very costly.


                                                    HOW ?

            •    Cut back the slope to make it less steep (this is not always possible).
            •    Build a retaining wall at the toe of the unstable slope.
            •    Stabilize the toe of the slope with sand bags or similar measures.
            •    Use bioengineering measures to stabilize slope.
            •    Intercept drainage to prevent it from flowing into and over the slope.




Chapter 4                                                           Picture Book - Environmental Management   27
     Roads
                                                                                                   Bioengineering




                                          Use of bioengineering could
                                          stop this slope from sliding




                    Riprap placed
                    around plants                                           Schematic view of
                                                                         bioengineering on slope


                               This slope could be stabilized with bioengineering


              STOP SLIDING AND ERODING SLOPES WITH BIOENGINEERING

                                                    WHY?

         •     Landslides on road cuts and embankments could cause a road to be
               partially or completely lost and communication would be cut off.
         •     Progressive erosion and slides could damage the surrounding area.
         •     It’s a “natural” solution and the slope will be green in a short time.


                                                    HOW ?

         •     Bioengineering uses live plant materials to stabilize slopes with their roots;
               the plants also protect the slope against erosion.
         •     Quick-growing local tree cuttings are planted as shown above.
         •     Rocks (riprap) can be used in addition to protect the slope.
         •     Ask the community and / or local or regional experts which plant varieties
               are best suited for this application.




28   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                             Chapter 4
                                                                                                        Roads
    Bioengineering




                                                                           Special support for
                                                                         the toe of steep slopes




                               10°




                                 Road level




                        Two different methods of bioengineering support at the toe of steep slopes



             STOP SLIDING SLOPES WITH TOE SUPPORT AND BIOENGINEERING

                                                        WHY ?

            •        Landslides on road cuts and embankments could cause a road to be
                     partially or completely lost and communication would be cut off.
            •        The toe of a slope needs special support to prevent it from sliding.


                                                        HOW ?

            •        Place large rocks or rock-filled gabions at the toe of unstable slopes.
            •        Use live plant materials (=bioengineering) to reinforce and stabilize the toe
                     protection.
            •        Ask the community and / or local or regional experts which plant and grass
                     varieties are best suited for this application.



Chapter 4                                                                Picture Book - Environmental Management   29
     Roads
                                                                                             Gabions




                   Gabions are useful for building
                     stable road embankments


                                                                              Road




                             Gabions are used to build a stable embankment slope


                    USE GABIONS TO STABILIZE EMBANKMENT SLOPES


                                                     WHY ?

         •     Embankment slopes, if too steep or in unstable soil material, may slide or
               may be eroded.
         •     Gabions are a fairly low cost method for stabilizing steep, potentially
               unstable or erodible slopes.
         •     Gabions use mostly local material and labour.



                                                     HOW ?

         •     Use gabion baskets, place on slope and fill with locally available rocks.
         •     Build gabion “wall” in steps, but not too steep (for reasons of stability).
         •     Make sure that road drainage does not run down the slope.




30   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                 Chapter 4
                                                                                                     Roads
    Unstable Slopes




             Landslide blocked
                 the road




                            A landslide totally blocked a road and almost buried a truck



                      NO ROAD CONSTRUCTION IN STEEP UNSTABLE SLOPES

                                                     WHY ?

            •     Unstable slopes, when causing a landslide, are a hazard to traffic and
                  people.
            •     Heavy rains usually set off landslides when the soils in the slope become
                  saturated with water.
            •     Water runoff from further above can also cause landslides.
            •     Retaining walls or bioengineering cannot stop large landslides.

            Note:
            Before locating roads or other infrastructure, check for signs of instability, trees
            leaning down, traces of previous slides.




Chapter 4                                                             Picture Book - Environmental Management   31
     Roads
                                                                                               Bioengineering




                                                                                Slope stabilization




                            Schematic views of different bioengineering techniques


                              STOP SLIDING AND ERODING SLOPES

                                                  WHY ?

         •     Landslides on road cuts and embankments could cause a road to be
               partially or completely lost.
               Progressive erosion and slides could damage the road and ditches.

                                                  HOW ?

         •     Use live plant materials to stabilize slopes with their roots; the plants also
               protect the slope against erosion.
         •     Different techniques are available for use, depending on the conditions.
         •     Ask the community and / or local or regional experts which plant varieties
               would be best suited for this application.



32   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                          Chapter 4
                                                                                                              Roads
   Bioengineering




                                                                                       Live branch cuttings


                                         Slope cut




                       On very steep slopes it is better to cut “steps” into the slope before planting


                STOP SLIDING AND ERODING SLOPES WITH BIOENGINEERING

                                                         WHY ?
            •       Landslides on road cuts and embankments could cause a road to be
                    partially or completely lost.
            •       Transport and communication would be cut off.
            •       Progressive erosion and slides could damage the surrounding area.
            •       It’s a “natural” solution and the slope will be green in a short time.


                                                         HOW ?

            •       Bioengineering uses live plant materials to stabilize slopes with their roots;
                    the plants also protect the slope against erosion.
            •       Quick-growing local tree cuttings are planted as shown above.
            •       As shown above, small “steps” like terraces, may be cut on very steep slopes
                    before planting the cuttings.




Chapter 4                                                                  Picture Book - Environmental Management    33
     Roads
                                                                                                 Cribs




                Ground / road
                    level




                       Use of crib structure in combination with bioengineering plantings


                                USE CRIBS TO STOP SLIDING SLOPES


                                                   WHY ?

         •     The toe of an unstable slope is the most critical spot.
         •     Stabilizing the toe will help to stop a slope from sliding.
         •     A timber crib gives extra structural support to the toe of the slope.
         •     If the toe cannot slide, the slope will remain stable.


                                                   HOW ?

         •     Use a timber crib structure reinforced by plantings to stabilize the toe of a
               unstable slope.
         •     Set the timber crib in a stone or rock base, then fill with soil and plant live
               cuttings of branches.




34   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                 Chapter 4
                                                                                                   Roads
   Eroding Ditches




                                                                                   NO ditch on
                                                                                   this side of
                                                                                    the road




                      Road material has
                     been washed away




             Water that was not managed has eroded its own ditch and thereby damaged the entire road


                                     STOP DITCH (AND ROAD) EROSION

                                                    WHY ?

            •        Water must be drained to and down through the side ditches.
            •        Water flowing over a gravel road surface can cause severe gully erosion,
                     especially on steeper road grades.
            •        Such erosion washout could also happen when ditches are too small or
                     completely blocked.


                                                    HOW ?

            •        Adequate ditches should have been built when the road was constructed.
            •        Rebuild the road section in such a situation.
            •        Make sure there are ditches and cross drainage to remove water from road.
            •        Fill gullies slightly higher than road (after compaction).



Chapter 4                                                           Picture Book - Environmental Management   35
     Roads
                                                                                                  Eroding Ditches




                                                                   Drop structures
                            Steep road

                                                                        Grade of ditch less
                                                                        than grade of road




                      Place stones
                     adjacent to the
                     drop structure




                            Concrete drop structures were built to halt ditch erosion


                                PROTECT DITCHES FROM EROSION

                                                    HOW ?

         •     Build drop structures on regular intervals.
         •     The velocity of the flowing water is reduced and it cannot erode the ditch.
         •     Distance between drop structures depends on the grade of the road.
         •     The steeper the grade the more drop structures must be built.
         •     If there is too much flow in the ditch, install a culvert to “downslope” side.
         •     Loose rocks adjacent to the drop structure help to dissipate the erosive
               force of the flowing water.
         •     Drop structures work for earth and for lined ditches but if grade of earth
               ditch is too steep it must be lined.

         Note:
         Due to the lower flow velocity, there may be more sedimentation                      clean the
         ditch periodically.




36   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                              Chapter 4
                                                                                                            Roads
    Sand / Gravel / Rocks from River




                                                                   Stones taken from the river
                                                                     bed and banks for sale




                                       River rocks to be sold for use in road construction



                        DO NOT DIG SAND, GRAVEL OR ROCKS FROM RIVERS
                                    FOR ROAD CONSTRUCTION

                                                            WHY ?

             •    Extraction of sand, gravel and stones from the river bed and banks can
                  seriously affect the flow pattern of the river.
             •    The river may erode other sections of its bed and banks and thereby cause
                  serious problems elsewhere.
             •    The river may scour around bridge piers and abutments and endanger
                  their stability.
             •    The river may even change its course and bed, potentially causing serious
                  problems to human infrastructure or productive areas.

             Note:
             Sand and gravel extraction from old, dry river beds is not a problem if
             permission from land owner(s) has been obtained.




Chapter 4                                                                    Picture Book - Environmental Management   37
               Chapter 5




Water Supply
                                                                                                      Water Supply
    Watershed Management




                                           Hydrologic cycle




                 A simple schematic of the hydrologic cycle showing the central importance of trees


                     ALWAYS PRACTICE GOOD WATERSHED MANAGEMENT

                                                     WHY ?

            •	   A	well-managed	watershed	will	provide	a	good	supply	of	water.
            •	   Intact	forests	are	the	best	cover	for	a	watershed	because	forests:
                  o Store water (together with the soil).
                  o Release water slowly during the dry season.
                  o Help to prevent or reduce floods.
                  o Decrease erosion and sedimentation when there is ground cover.
            •	   Good	water	supply	is	equally	important	for	
                  o Drinking and clean water supply for communities.
                  o Irrigation use.
                  o Hydro power and mini hydro power generation.
                  o Use by economic activities and industry.




Chapter 5                                                             Picture Book - Environmental Management        39
     Water Supply
                                                                                              Watershed Management




                                Water is ou r
                              natu ral treasur e




                                          Pristine forest watersheds “produce” good water supply



                           PROTECT AND MANAGE FORESTED WATERSHEDS


                                                         WHY ?

                    •	    Forested	watersheds	supply	water	for	human	use.
                    •	    Healthy	watersheds	also	provide	water	for	irrigation	use.	
                    •	    Mountainous	and	hilly	watersheds	also	provide	water	for	hydro	
                          power, including mini hydro system that generate electricity for rural
                          communities.
                    •	    Healthy	watersheds	will	also	provide	enough	water	during	the	dry	
                          season.
                    •	    Upper	watersheds	often	recharge	groundwater	resources.




40        Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                          Chapter 5
                                                                                                    Water Supply
    Watershed Management




                                                                              Trees logged off
                                                                                and burned




                                 Forest clearing for hillside planting of crops


                 DO NOT ALLOW OUTSIDERS CLEAR LARGE FOREST AREAS
                         IN HILLY AND MOUNTAIN WATERSHEDS


                                                   WHY ?

                 •	   The	trees	in	the	forest	together	with	the	soil	hold	back	runoff	and	
                      store it for slow release into springs and streams.
                 •	   Forests	help	to	recharge	the	groundwater.
                 •	   Without	tree	and	vegetation	cover,	the	soils	will	be	easily	eroded.
                 •	   Erosion	of	the	slopes	will	cause	sedimentation	in	streams	and	creeks	
                      downstream.
                 •	   Sedimentation	will	decrease	water	quality	and	could	cause	flooding.
                 •	   The	fertility	of	soils	in	logged-off	areas	is	usually	limited.




Chapter 5                                                            Picture Book - Environmental Management       41
     Water Supply
                                                                                         Watershed Management




                                                             Air
                                                          pollution




                                    Massive unsustainable logging in primary forest
                                  Note the major earth movements in the larger picture


                             PROTECT PRIMARY FORESTS IN WATERSHEDS


                                                       WHY ?


                    •	    Forest	trees,	together	with	the	soil,	act	like	a	sponge	 a water
                          reservoir.
                    •	    An	intact	forest	cover	will	assure	a	reliable	water	supply,	even	during	
                          the dry season.
                    •	    Forests	protect	the	watershed	from	erosion	and	the	downstream	
                          rivers from sedimentation.
                    •	    Primary	forests	are	a	valuable	natural	resource,	yielding	many	non-
                          forest products.




42        Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                     Chapter 5
                                                                                                    Water Supply
   ABC of Water Testing




                 BEFORE USING A NEW WATER
                 SOURCE TAKE A
                 SAMPLE FOR TESTING
                                                                                             A


                                              B
                               MINIMUM KEY PARAMETERS
                                     FOR WATER TESTING

                   TESTING DONE BY COMMUNITY /                                 Have the water
                            FACILITATOR                                        tested – it’s for
                                                                               YOUR HEALTH
                   PARAMETER                      REMARKS
                      TASTE           salty, bad, other
                     ODOUR            foul, rotten, other
                    COLOUR            visual test                          C
                    TURBIDITY         visual test (or <1.0 NTU by
                                      lab) – proxy for TSS test
                 TEMPERATURE using thermometer


                          Notes:                      TESTING TO BE DONE BY DEPKES
                                                         KABUBATEN LABORATORY
                   If high turbidity then
                 sandfilter should be used        PARAMETER              REMARKS

                   Nitrates may indicate
                                                   TOTAL   <10 MPN (or use H2S strip as
                  other pollution such as         COLIFORM indicator)
                 bacteria, animal waste or
                          fertilizer
                                                      pH      between 6.5 and 8.5
                                                    ARSENIC   <0.01mh/L (only in groundwater
                  Also test for bacteria at                   in some region)
                  regular intervals, say 6
                          months                    NITRATE   <10 mg/L in groundwater – health
                                                              risk for babies




Chapter 5                                                            Picture Book - Environmental Management       43
     Water Supply
                                                                                                       Water Source




                                                             Leaves and fruits from this tree are




                    This water source is protected against entry by animals and unauthorized persons



                                      PROTECT WATER SOURCES
                                 FROM POLLUTION AND CONTAMINATION



                                                        HOW ?

              •	    The	fence	around	this	spring	capture	shows	how	the	valuable	water	source	
                    can be protected from potential pollution and contamination.
              •	    Make	sure	that	the	gate	is	locked	and	only	authorized	persons	get	the	key.
              •	    The	stability	of	the	fence	has	to	be	checked	periodically.


              Note:
              The capture basin should be covered to prevent dead leaves and fruit from
              falling into it.




44        Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                          Chapter 5
                                                                                                      Water Supply
   Sharing of Source




                                             Spring capture




                       Existing irrigation
                         water supply




                  Nearby
                 Household
                                    Water Supply        Water Supply
                                     Village 2             Village 1
                           A good example of sharing a water source between a number of users


                 SHARE A SCARCE WATER SOURCE BETWEEN DIFFERENT USERS


                                                          WHY ?

            •	      Water	supply	is	a	basic	human	right	and	water	is	a	public	resource.
            •	      Especially	in	water-scarce	areas	water	must	be	shared	equitably	between	
                    different users.
            •	      Prior	users	of	a	source	must	be	respected	and	their	rights	preserved.


                                                          HOW ?

            •	      Negotiate	an	agreement	between	the	different	users	to	share	the	common	
                    source equitably.
            •	      Seasonal	use,	such	as	for	irrigation,	must	be	considered.
            •	      If	necessary,	use	an	independent	outside	mediator	to	reach	agreement.
            •	      All	parties	sign	the	agreement	and	stick	to	it.




Chapter 5                                                              Picture Book - Environmental Management       45
     Water Supply
                                                                                                               Water Source




                            Distance between well and septic tank




                    This schematic section shows the right way to site a dug well in relation to septic tank


                       LOCATE DUG WELL A SAFE DISTANCE FROM SEPTIC TANK

                                                           WHY ?

              •	     The	minimum	distance	must	be	10	meters,	but	more	is	better.
              •	     Partially	treated	effluent	from	septic	tank	can	easily	pollute	the	
                     groundwater in the dug well – even after many years.
              •	     Septic	tank	may	leak	and	raw	wastewater	may	slowly	pollute	the	
                     groundwater.
              •	     Surface	water	pollution	from	around	the	septic	tank	may	percolate	into	the	
                     groundwater.

                                                           HOW ?

              •	     Respect	minimum	distance	of	10	meters.
              •	     Check	the	likely	direction	of	groundwater	flow	and	locate	septic	tank	
                     DOWNSTREAM from dug well.

              Note:
              The direction of groundwater flow can be determined from the overall
              slope of the ground surface, or if near a river , from the flow direction of the
              watercourse.




46        Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                                  Chapter 5
                                                                                              Water Supply
    Household Level Water Treatment




                                                                  Clean
                                                                  water




                 USE HOUSEHOLD LEVEL WATER TREATMENT WHERE NEEDED

                                                WHY ?

            •	    The	public	water	supply	is	not	always	clean	enough	and	free	from	
                  (bacteriological) contamination.

                                                HOW ?

            •	    Small	and	simple	household	level	treatment	is	available	such	as:
                  o Sand filters (as shown above).
                  o Ceramic filters.
                  o Solar disinfection reduces bacteria significantly.
                  o Carbon filters remove colour, such as from peat water.
                  o Boiling of water is the traditional household level treatment but it uses
                     more energy.

            Notes:
            1. Bio-sand filters are better, they need a specially built container.
            2. Solar disinfection needs only clear water bottles left in the sun for a day.



Chapter 5                                                      Picture Book - Environmental Management       47
     Water Supply
                                                                                                     Drainage




                                                                                   Standpipe - but
                           Pipe support
                                                                                     NO shutoff




                         What a mess !                HEALTH RISK


                                  There is clean water supply in the yard BUT a big mess
                                   because there is NO shutoff faucet and NO drainage


                    ALWAYS PROVIDE GOOD DRAINAGE AT PUBLIC AND YARD TAPS

                                                        WHY ?

              •	     An	open	or	missing	faucet	can	spill	a	lot	of	water	in	a	day.
              •	     Valuable	water	that	other	users	may	need	is	wasted.
              •	     If	there	is	no	proper	drain	for	the	wastewater	it	will	create	a	muddy	mess	
                     around the tap or in the yard.
              •	     Standing	water	will	become	a	mosquito	breeding	ground.
              •	     Standing	water	is	a	big	inconvenience	for	all	users.

                                                        HOW ?

              •	     Make	sure	there	is	a	WORKING	faucet	installed	and	that	it	is	turned	off	
                     when water is not needed.
              •	     Build	a	concrete	pad	with	a	curb	around	the	tap	to	contain	and	collect	
                     wastewater and drain away to a ditch, garden, field or soak away pit.

              Note: Wastewater can be recycled and used for nearby garden or field.




48        Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                    Chapter 5
             Chapter 6




Sanitation
                                                                                                   Sanitation
   Septic Tank




                              Schematic diagram of a complete septic tank system


                 BUILD A COMPLETE SEPTIC TANK SYSTEM AND MAKE SURE
                   ALL PARTS OF THE SYSTEM ARE WORKING PROPERLY


                                              WHY & HOW ?

            •	   Untreated	wastewater	can	spread	infection	and	disease	-->	HEALTH	RISK.
            •	   Septic	tank	effluent	can	pollute	the	groundwater	or	surface	water.
            •	   Effluent	from	the	septic	tank	is	only	partially	treated	and	must	be	piped	to	
                 a leachfield (drainfield), a vegetated leachfield or at least to a soak away pit.
            •	   Finally,	the	septic	tank	must	be	inspected	periodically	and	the	accumulated	
                 sludge must be emptied every few years.




Chapter 6                                                          Picture Book - Environmental Management      49
     Sanitation
                                                                                                     Septic Tanks




                        Septic tank with two
                        separate chambers




                                                                                             Inlet for
                                                                                            wastewater


                        Oulet for
                                                                              Septic tank under
                        effluent
                                                                                construction


                               Vacuum tanker truck
                                  pumping out
                                  a septic tank

               Inlet for
             wastewater
             from toilets
                                                                     Oulet for effluent -
                                                                     to leachfield or pit
                     Sludge


           Desludging has to be done when sludge level has built up more than halfway in the first chamber


                  USE SEPTIC TANKS FOR WASTEWATER TREATMENT DISPOSE OF
                  EFFLUENT PROPERLY PUMP OUT SEPTIC SLUDGE PERIODICALLY

                                                      WHY ?

             •	    Untreated	wastewater	can	spread	infection	and	disease	 HEALTH RISK.
             •	    Partially	treated	effluent	is	still	a	threat	to	health	and	environment	and	pipe	
                   effluent to a leachfield or pit - NOT to an open drain or surface water body.

                                                      HOW ?

             •	    A	septic	tank	with	two	chambers	will	generally	clean	wastewater	better.
             •	    Septic	tanks	must	be	inspected	regularly	through	the	access	manhole.
             •	    Sludge	settles	in	septic	tank	and	must	be	pumped	out	by	a	vacuum	tanker	
                   periodically the sludge must be disposed at a designated dump site.



50     Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                           Chapter 6
                                                                                                        Sanitation
   Vegetated Leachfield




                                              Septic Tank      Leachfield        Drain




                          Water Quality




                           Example of septic tank effluent treatment by vegetated leachfield


                      TREAT SEPTIC TANK EFFLUENT BEFORE FINAL DISPOSAL

                                                         WHY ?

            •	    Partially	treated	effluent	from	septic	tanks	is	still	a	threat	to	health	and	the	
                  environment.
            •	    Septic	tank	effluent	will	pollute	groundwater	or	surface	water,	especially	if	
                  piped to an open drain.

                                                       HOW ?

            •	    Pipe	the	septic	tank	effluent	to:
                   o An underground leachfield.
                   o A vegetated leachfield (as shown above).
                   o A pit (for soaking away).
                   o Do not discharge septic tank effluent to an open drain or other
                       surface water.




Chapter 6                                                               Picture Book - Environmental Management      51
     Sanitation
                                                                                                        Toilet




                               Scoop for
                                bathing                                         Brush and cleaning
                                                                                       agent




                                                                                     Clean toilet
                                                                                        bowl




                   Clean and full
                    water basin



                                    A neat looking, clean and well equipped toilet


                                             KEEP TOILETS CLEAN



                                                        WHY ?

             •	   Hygiene	is	much	improved	if	toilets	are	regularly	cleaned.
             •	   The	community	likes	to	use	a	clean	&	attractive	toilet.
             •	   If	a	toilet	is	found	clean,	the	next	user	is	more	likely	to	keep	it	clean.


             Notes:
             1. A properly working water supply is essential for keeping toilets clean.
             2. Cleanliness is assured if clean up after themselves and / or if a paid attendant
                has been assigned to cleaning the toilets.




52     Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                       Chapter 6
              Chapter 7




Solid Waste
Management
                                                                                                   Solid Waste
    Container                                                                                      Management




                                   A suitable container for waste collection
                        Waste disposal at a designated dump site must also be arranged


                                COLLECT GARBAGE               Do not litter


                                                  WHY ?

            •	   Scattered	garbage	attracts	insects	(flies	,	mosquitos),	vermin	and	stray	
                 animals -->	HEALTH	RISK.
            •	   Garbage,	if	not	properly	disposed,	smells	bad	and	is	big	nuisance.
            •	   Roads,	public	areas	and	the	natural	environment	are	NOT	dumping	areas.

                                                  HOW ?

            •	   A	well	built	&	conveniently	located	waste	container	gives	the	community	
                 the opportunity for proper waste disposal.
            •	   Educate	the	community	how	and	where	to	dispose	their	garbage.
            •	   Also	educate	the	community	about	the	damage	to	the	environment	
                 caused by uncontrolled waste disposal.
            •	   Arrange	for	or	organize	a	pick-up	a	service	to	remove	garbage	when	the	
                 container is full.
            •	   Alternatively,	designate	a	dumping	area	for	the	garbage	that	has	been	
                 collected.




Chapter 7                                                          Picture Book - Environmental Management       53
      Solid Waste
     Management                                                                                         Waste Separation




                            Paper



                          Organic



                           Plastic

                    Waste separation at the household level allows recycling and also saves valuable resources



                                 SEPARATE WASTE AT SOURCE FOR RECYCLING

                                                     WHY AND HOW ?

               •	      Waste,	not	separated	and	collected,	will		be	an	environmental	problem.	
               •	      Recyclable	waste	is	a	resource	and	potential	source	of	income.
               •	      Collect	the	waste	in	separate	containers	 WET & DRY for recycling.
               •	      Train	and	assign	people	to	be	responsible	for	waste	collection	&	disposal	
                          WET waste (organic) for composting,
                          DRY waste (paper, glass & metal) for recycling,
                          OTHER waste for disposal.
               •	      Recycling	has	economic	potential.




54        Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                                Chapter 7
                                                                                                             Solid Waste
   Recycling                                                                                                 Management




                                                                                             You must
                                                                                           separate your
                                                                                             garbage !




                        Solid waste separation
                         makes my job easier
                         and I can make some
                          additional income



                    Waste separation at the household level allows recycling and also saves valuable resources


                                 SEPARATE WASTE AT SOURCE FOR RECYCLING


                                                     WHY AND HOW ?

               •	      Waste,	not	separated	and	collected	will		be	an	environmental	problem.	
               •	      Recyclable	waste	is	a	resource	and	potential	source	of	income.
               •	      Collect	the	waste	in	separate	containers	 WET & DRY for recycling.
               •	      Train	and	assign	people	to	be	responsible	for	waste	collection	&	disposal	
                          WET waste (organic) for composting,
                          DRY waste (paper, glass & metal) for recycling,
                          OTHER waste for disposal.




Chapter 7                                                                    Picture Book - Environmental Management       55
          Chapter 8




Markets
                                                                                                    Markets
   Hygiene




                                                                                   Garbage




                   Fruit for sale




                                                                         Fresh meat is
                                                                        exposed to flies




             Fresh	food	close	to	garbage	and	meat	exposed	to	flies		–->	a	serious	lack	of	hygiene



                                    KEEP MARKETS VERY CLEAN


                                                  WHY ?

              •	      Fresh	food,	especially	raw	meat,	must	not	be	exposed	to	flies	and	dirt.
              •	      Infection	can	easily	be	spread	by	flies.
              •	      Uncollected	garbage	attracts	vermin	and	stray	animals	that	could	
                      carry diseases.
              •	      Garbage	at	a	market	is	unsightly	and	unattractive	–	a	big	nuisance.




Chapter 8                                                          Picture Book - Environmental Management    57
     Markets
                                                                                         Hygiene




                            An example of lots of flies and poor hygiene at a market


           CONTROL FLIES AND OTHER VECTORS, ESPECIALLY AT MARKETS


                                                   WHY ?

               •	    Flies	are	vectors	that	carry	diseases,	such	as	diarrhea.	
               •	    Flies	are	an	indicator	of	poor	hygiene.
               •	    Flies	are	a	nuisance,	especially	at	markets.



                                                   HOW ?

               •	    Cover	food,	especially	fresh	food	like	meat.	
               •	    Remove	or	cover	fly	breeding	spots	like	vegetable	garbage	piles,	and	
                     animal and human waste.
               •	    Educate	traders	and	the	community	about	effective	vector	control.




58   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                            Chapter 8
                                                                                                              Markets
   Composting




                                                        Collect organic /
                                                        vegetable waste

                                                                                                   Pile




                                                                                  Back to the field as soil
                                                                                  conditioner and to add
                                                                                    valuable nutrients




            The lack of good drainage is not only a health risk but also a real nuisance to traders and customers


                           RECYCLE MARKET WASTE THROUGH COMPOSTING


                                                          WHY ?

                    •	    A	lot	of	vegetable	waste	is	generated	at	markets.
                    •	    Organic	(vegetable)	waste	is	a	valuable	resource.
                    •	    Composting	can	turn	organic	waste	into	a	good	soil	conditioner	with	
                          valuable nutrients, such as for gardens.
                    •	    Composting	is	a	simple	process	that	needs	only	air,	moisture	and	
                          periodic turning over.
                    •	    The	sale	of	high	quality	compost	can	generate	income	 economic
                          activities.
                    •	    The	volume	of	garbage	to	be	dumped	can	be	reduced	a	lot.




Chapter 8                                                                   Picture Book - Environmental Management     59
     Markets
                                                                                              Drainage




                             Ponding water




                                                                                      Mud
                      Chicken
                      for sale


                     A very clean toilet block – maybe because a user fee is being charged?


                                    KEEP MARKETS VERY CLEAN

                                                   WHY ?

               •	    Ponding	water	breeds	mosquitoes	that	could	carry	malaria	or	dengue	
                     fever.
               •	    Ponding	water	may	be	polluted	from	the	market	products.
               •	    Ponding	water	may	also	contain	untreated	wastewater.
               •	    Ponding	water	is	a	great	nuisance	and	inconvenience	for	all	market	
                     users.
               •	    Ponding	water	gives	the	market	a	poor	image	 people may not
                     come back.

                                                   HOW ?

               •	    Pave	the	market	place.
               •	    Build	covered	drains	along	the	lanes.
               •	    Slope	floor	for	drainage.
               •	    Drainage	channels	must	lead	to	safe	discharge.

               Note:
               Provision of drains may not be enough in the above example, it may be
               necessary to pave the market aisles.



60   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                  Chapter 8
                                                                                                      Markets
   Toilets




                                                                  Sign how to
                                                                   use toilet


                                                                           Tiled walls


                                                                                         Wash basin




                  Tiled floor


                          Composting of organic waste can be done easily in Indonesia


                                KEEP MARKET TOILETS VERY CLEAN


                                                   WHY ?

             •	      Cleanliness	is	especially	important	at	public	markets	because	many	
                     people meet and a lot of food is being handled.
             •	      Toilets	are	very	important	at	markets	so	that	there	is	NO	open	
                     defecation.
             •	      Market	toilets	must	have	a	functioning	water	supply	so	that	people	
                     can wash their hands before handling food.


                                                   HOW ?

             •	      A	user	fee	should	be	charged	for	the	toilets	to	employ	an	attendant	
                     who can keep the toilets clean all the time.




Chapter 8                                                          Picture Book - Environmental Management      61
         Chapter 9




Rivers
                                                                                                       Rivers
   Eroding Banks




                             Upper edge of
                           bank before erosion

                                                                                        Force
                  Toe of river                                                         of water
               bank before erosion




                   Cross section

                                                                               Bank lost
                                                                           through erosion


                         Erosion of bank of a small river – note the outside bend of the river



                               DO NOT BUILD CLOSE TO RIVER BANKS


                                                       WHY ?


                   •	   Even	smaller	rivers	have	great	erosive	force	and	can	wash	out	their	
                        banks – always on the outside bend of the bank.
                   •	   River	bank	protection	measures	are	difficult	and	costly	and	often	are	
                        not effective in any case.
                   •	   It	is	better	to	respect	the	force	of	the	river	and	build	infrastructure	
                        away from the river banks, especially the outside bend.




Chapter 9                                                               Picture Book - Environmental Management   63
      Rivers
                                                                                           River Bank Protection




                       Bamboo for
                      channel bank
                       protection




          Bamboo staves and slats can also be used for bank protection on small streams or irrigation
                                                  channels


                           PROTECT STREAM BANKS FROM EROSION


                                                   WHY ?

               •	    Earth	banks	of	streams	are	easily	eroded	by	the	erosive	force	of	
                     flowing water.
               •	    Erosion	is	worse	in	the	outside	bends	of	rivers.
               •	    Bank	erosion	also	increases	during	flood	events.
               •	    Valuable	agricultural	land	or	even	infrastructure	can	be	lost	to	stream	
                     bank erosion.


                                                   HOW ?

               •	    On	smaller	streams	and	on	earth	irrigation	channels	natural	materials	
                     such as locally available bamboo staves and slats can be used for bank
                     protection with lower costs.




64   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                            Chapter 9
                                                                                                      Rivers
   River Bank Protection




               Gabions for river
               bank protection




                              Two good examples of gabions used for river bank protection


                ALWAYS PROTECT STREAM AND RIVER BANKS FROM EROSION


                                                       WHY ?

                   •	      Unprotected	earth	banks	will	easily	be	eroded	by	flowing	water	(or	
                           sometimes by wave action if along a beach).
                   •	      Banks	are	more	likely	eroded	in	the	outside	bends	of	rivers	and	during	
                           high flows.
                   •	      Valuable	agricultural	land	and	infrastructure	could	be	lost	due	to	
                           erosion.


                                                       HOW ?

                   •	      Use	gabion	wire	baskets.
                   •	      Gabions	are	very	flexible,	and	they	can	be	stacked	in	several	layers.
                   •	      Gabions	use	mostly	local	material	and	can	be	built	by	local	labor.
                   •	      Gabions	can	be	further	strengthened	by	planting	vegetation	in	them.
                   •	      Gabion	must	extend	below	the	base	of	water	flow.




Chapter 9                                                              Picture Book - Environmental Management   65
      Rivers
                                                                                             River Bank Protection




                                             Gabions as river bank
                                           protection toppled over
                                                                                Protected area




                     River



                             A partially collapsed gabion wall along a steep river bank



                         MAKE SURE THAT RIVER BANKS ARE STABLE


                                                     WHY ?

               •	    River	bank	slopes	must	also	be	protected	against	erosion	by	flowing	
                     water.



                                                     HOW ?

               •	    Build	a	gabion	wall	BUT	make	sure	that:
                     o It is built on a good foundation that will not be washed our or
                        scoured by river.
                     o It is not to steep because it could topple over if force of soil
                        material behind the gabion wall is too strong.




66   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                             Chapter 9
                                                                                                          Rivers
   River Bank Protection




                            Gabions as river bank
                           protection toppled over




                   Gabion material
                                             A stable foundation is
                                               necessary, such as
                                             stacked-up river rocks




                                  A partially collapsed gabion wall along a steep river bank


                                 PROTECT RIVER BANKS AGAINST EROSION


                                                          WHY ?

                   •	      River	bank	slopes	must	be	protected	against	erosion	by	the	force	of		
                           flowing water.
                   •	      Especially	the	outside	bends	of	rivers	are	subject	to	bank	erosion.
                   •	      Erosion	is	worse	during	high	water	and	flood	flows	in	the	river.
                   •	      If	left	unprotected,	bank	erosion	can	progress	inland	and	agricultural	
                           land or infrastructure may be lost.

                                                          HOW ?

                   •	      Build	a	gabion	wall	BUT	make	sure	that:
                           o It is built on a good foundation below the base of water flow that
                              will not be washed out or scoured by the river.
                           o The wall is not too steep because it could topple over if the force of
                              soil material behind the gabion wall is too strong.




Chapter 9                                                                  Picture Book - Environmental Management   67
      Rivers
                                                                                       Sand / Gravel / Rocks from River




                       NEVER take the
                    protective rocks from
                     around bridge piers
                       and abutments




                                 River rocks to be sold for use in road construction



                           DO NOT EXTRACT SAND, GRAVEL OR ROCKS
                                    FROM RIVERS THE SEA


                                                      WHY ?

               •	     Extraction	of	sand,	gravel	and	stones	from	the	river	bed	and	banks	can	
                      seriously affect the flow pattern of the river.
               •	     The	river	may	erode	other	sections	of	its	bed	banks	and	thereby	cause	
                      serious problems elsewhere.
               •	     The	river	may	scour	around	bridge	piers	and	abutments	and	
                      endanger their stability.
               •	     The	river	may	even	change	its	course	and	bed,	potentially	causing	
                      serious problems to human infrastructure or productive areas.

               Note:
               Sand and gravel extraction from old, dry river beds is not a problem if the
               necessary permission from the land owner(s) has been obtained.




68   Picture Book - Environmental Management                                                                  Chapter 9
