INDONESIA SOCIAL
ASSISTANCE REFORM
PROGRAM

Technical Assessment




                       i
                                                               Table of Contents
I.      Program Description........................................................................................................................... 3
II. Program Strategic Relevance and Technical Soundness.................................................................... 6
     a. Strategic Relevance ............................................................................................................................. 6
     b. Technical Soundness........................................................................................................................... 7
     c. PKH Targeting .................................................................................................................................... 7
     d. PKH Human Resources Management ............................................................................................ 10
     e. Capacity development for PKH facilitators, operators, and coordinators .................................. 12
     f. PKH Program Management Information System .......................................................................... 14
     g. Payment systems ............................................................................................................................... 18
     h. Grievance management .................................................................................................................... 22
     i. Family Development Sessions (FDS) ................................................................................................ 23
     j. Transition and Graduation ............................................................................................................... 25
     k. Institutional Arrangements for PKH Implementation .................................................................. 26
     l. Institutional Arrangements for PKH Implementation: National level ......................................... 26
     m. Institutional Arrangements for PKH Implementation: Subnational level ................................. 30
     n. Collaboration with Local Government ........................................................................................... 31
     o. Supply Side Readiness for Health and Education Service Delivery ............................................. 33
     p. Institutional Arrangements for inter- sectoral coordination ........................................................ 34
III. Description and Assessment of Program Expenditure Framework .............................................. 36
     a. PKH Budget....................................................................................................................................... 36
     b. Budgeting Process ............................................................................................................................. 38
IV. Description and Assessment of Program Results Framework and M&E ..................................... 39
V. Program Economic Evaluation ......................................................................................................... 41
     a. Rationale for Public Provision and Financing ............................................................................... 41
     b. Program’s Economic Impact ........................................................................................................... 42
     c. World Bank’s Value-Added ............................................................................................................. 43
     d. Results of Economic Evaluation ...................................................................................................... 43
VI. Technical Risk Rating ........................................................................................................................ 44




                                                                                                                                                          2
I.   Program Description

1.       The Government of Indonesia had begun investing comprehensively in social assistance (SA)
programs in 2005 because of the creation of fiscal space through the phasing out of a regressive fuel
subsidy. In 2010, a redesign of Indonesian SA programs was initiated to accelerate poverty reduction and
improve access to and quality of basic social services. As stated in the country’s national development plan
RPJMN (2015–2019), the Government has determined to establish a comprehensive social protection
system for all citizens and improve targeting accuracy of the SA programs for the poor. Its policy direction
also discusses the need to (a) integrate several family-based SA schemes for poor and vulnerable families
that have children, disabled, and elderly, in the form of CCT and/or through in-kind assistance to support
nutrition; (b) transform the rice subsidy for the poor in a phased manner so that it becomes a more nutrition-
focused program; and (c) structure temporary SA at the central and local level by raising the coordination
and sharing of authority between ministries/institutions that implement temporary SA.

                  Figure 1. The Implementation Roadmap of Government program




         Source: Bappenas 2015, Ministry of Social Affairs Rentra (2015-2019)

2.       The implementation of the vision of this comprehensive SA system laid out in RPJMN entails
a number of actions taken on data, information system, citizen interface, program performance
monitoring and evaluation, and cross-sector coordination (Figure 1). For example, the targeting
database containing the bottom 40% population was updated in 2015. Furthermore, the Ministry of Social
Affairs (MoSA) and the National Team for Acceleration of Poverty Reduction (TNP2K) have subsequently
started a pilot of on-demand application in 12 cities/districts to allow updates and new entries so as to
provide more inclusive and updated targeting information to user programs. A citizen interface pilot for
service and information integration (SLRT) has been initiated in 50 districts by the Ministry of Planning
(Bappenas) and MoSA. This shared citizen interface is a key building block of the envisioned
comprehensive system by enabling more standard access to information and government programs by
citizens and supporting timely capturing of beneficiary situation change and complaints for all programs.
At program level, there are also multiple initiatives that have been put in place to strengthen their delivery
systems for enhanced performance. The CCT program named Program Keluarga Harapan (PKH) has been
progressively expanding its coverage from “very poor” families to “poor” families and also to addition al
remote districts. An e-voucher pilot for Rastra, recently launched in a number of cities, aims to bring 1.4


                                                                                                            3
million beneficiary families onto a digital delivery platform. Various reforms and initiatives are also
planned in a sequential way, with 2016 and 2017 focusing on consolidation and integration while 2018 and
2019 focusing on acceleration and expansion.

3.       PKH plays a major role in the comprehensive SA system for family-based support. It was
initiated in 2007 as a pilot in seven provinces to just 382,000 beneficiary families and has been expanding
its coverage as a part of a larger effort to build up this comprehensive social protection system to improve
poor and vulnerable families’ welfare and opportunity. PKH aims not only to help increase the beneficiaries’
current consumption so as to alleviate poverty in the short run, but also to ensure their investment in the
human capital of their children through education and health conditionalities (also sometimes called ‘co -
responsibilities’). As PKH will encourage the beneficiary families to access and use basic health, nutrition,
and education services, it is expected to promote future generations’ opportunity and productivity in the
long run.1

                                          Figure 2 PKH Coverage, Budgetary Support, 2007-2016
                               10000                                                                6.0      7
                                          Budget (IDR billion nominal)     Beneficiary households
                                                                                                             6




                                                                                                                   Beneficiary households
                                8000
        Budget (IDR billion)




                                                                                            3.5              5
                                                                                      2.8




                                                                                                                          (millions)
                                6000                                                                         4
                                                                               2.4                           3
                                4000
                                                                                                             2
                                                                         1.5
                                2000                              1.1
                                              0.7   0.7     0.8                                              1
                                        0.4
                                   0                                                                         0
                                       2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
    Source: MoSA (2014-2015-2016) and Ministry of Finance (2008-2013)
    Note: 2011-2013 data are realized budget; 2014, 2015 and 2016 data are budgeted totals.

4.       Soon after taking office in 2015, the new administration had decided to review the design,
process and systems of PKH, implemented by MoSA, and later to scale up its coverage, from 3.5
million families (5 percent of the population) in 2015 to 6 million families (9 percent of the population)
by the end of 2016. The expansion aimed to cover all districts in Indonesia, including those of Papua, with
the highest poverty rates in the country but previously not covered by PKH. As the new areas often have
implementation challenges, the program needs to modify and adapt its implementation guidelines and
arrangements according to the local context. While the coverage after expansion is still lower than that of
similar large CCT programs in other countries (in Mexico, Brazil, and the Philippines CCTs cover between
20 percent and 30 percent of the population), the program has come a long way from when it was first
introduced in July 2007.

5.       PKH eligibility depends on both family poverty status and demographic composition. To be
eligible, a family must be included in the country’s targeting database called the UDB, and ranked below a
certain cutoff point, which is determined by the program coverage target. They must meet at least one of
the following conditions: one family member is pregnant or lactating; one child below age 6 years; one
child age 7 to 21 years attending primary or secondary school; or one child age 16 to 21 years who has not
yet completed basic education but is enrolling in an education program. Furthermore, PKH beneficiary

1
    World Bank, 2012, PKH Conditional Cash Transfer – Social Assistance Program and Public Expenditure Review 6.

                                                                                                                                            4
families must be in compliance with the relevant health and education conditionalities to receive the cash
transfers, which are conditional on compliance with the conditionalities. Mothers are the main recipient in
the majority of cases. Also starting in November 2016, eligible families that have a severely disabled or an
elderly person (70 years and older) living with them will also be receiving additional transfers as long as
they have not yet been covered by other old age or disability programs. The implementation rules for these
two new components have been put into operation but are expected to be refined in 2017.

                               Table 1 PKH Operation Scale, 2007-2016
                   Number       Number
                                            Number of                                Regional
          Year         of          of                        Field Staff
                                           Sub-Districts                           Coordinators
                   Provinces    Districts
          2007         7          48            337            1,556                       2
          2008        13          70            637            2,738                       7
          .2009       13          70            781            3,370                      11
          2010        20          88            946            4,565                      18
          2011        25         119          1,387            5,446                      28
          2012        33         169          2,001            7,450                      37
          2013        33         336          3,417           10,590                      54
          2014        34         430          4,870           14,068                      46
          2015        34         472          6,080           16,665                      43
          2016        34         504          6,435           26,168                      57
          Source: MoSA (2016) “PKH General Guidelines”.

6.        Verifying beneficiary families’ compliance with utilizing respective health and education
services is done jointly with service providers. PKH facilitators will visit nearby schools and health
facilities every month to confirm that mothers and children from PKH beneficiary families have presented
themselves and are acquiring or attending the services required. At some facilities and in some regions,
PKH facilitators will join local service provider staff to verify attendance. Verification forms are then
submitted to the district/provincial offices to be entered in the PKH program management information
system (PMIS).

7.       PKH benefits represented a small share of beneficiaries’ average expenditures. In 2013, the
average PKH benefit was about approximately 10 percent of beneficiaries’ average expenditure. Then PKH
benefit levels were raised in early 2015 and again in 2016, with the maximum (minimum) annual transfer
per household at IDR 3.7 million (IDR 800,000) or approximately $284 ($61). For a PKH beneficiary
family with four members (a couple, one under-five child, and one child attending primary school), the total
annual PKH benefit is IDR 2.2 million in 2016, which is equivalent to 12.6 percent and 13.3 percent of the
official urban and rural poverty lines respectively. In comparison the average PKH transfer is about five
times the average out-of-pocket costs of a regular outpatient visit or one and a quarter times the average
cost of one year of schooling expenses. In other words, the average PKH transfer can finance multiple
health facility visits or only one year of education.

8.       Beneficiary families would receive PKH transfers for 6 years as long as they comply with
conditionality and do not become ineligible. In addition to the required education and healthcare services
utilization, PKH mothers attend monthly meetings organized by program facilitators and receive guidance
on fulfilling PKH conditionality. If any beneficiary families are determined to be poor at the end of 6-years
cycle, additional 3 years can be granted and complemented by other livelihood support programs such as
KUBE-PKH as well as training with Family Development Sessions (FDS) modules, which are designed to
raise beneficiary families’ knowledge and life skills.



                                                                                                           5
                             Table 2 PKH Eligibility and Conditionality
   Households with…          ...must accomplish at least these conditionalities to continue
                             receiving PKH
   pregnant or lactating     1. Complete four antenatal care visits and take iron tablets during
   women                     pregnancy.
                             2. Be assisted by a trained professional during the birth.
                             3. Lactating mothers must complete two post-natal care visits.
   children aged 0-6         4. Ensure that the children have complete childhood immunization and
   years (also including     take Vitamin A capsules twice a year.
   7 years old who are       5. Take children for growth monitoring check-ups (monthly for infants
   not enrolling in          0-11 months, and quarterly for children 1-6 years).
   schools yet)
   children aged 7 - 21      6. Enroll their children in primary school, or junior secondary school,
   years (also including     or senior secondary school and ensure attendance for at least 85% of
   5-6 who are already       school days.
   enrolling in schools)
   elderly member (70        7. Receive health care as needed and health checks by health workers
   years old or more)        through home visits or by visiting elderly friendly health facility (if
                             available).
                             8. Join social activities if possible or participate in the activities
                             through home care with assistance
   member with severe        9. Receive health care as needed and health checks by health workers
   disability                through home visits
   Source: Adapted from MoSA (2016) “PKH General Guidelines”.

II. Program Strategic Relevance and Technical Soundness

a. Strategic Relevance

9.      The proposed operation is strategically relevant to the government’s development objectives.
The National Development Plan (RPJMN) recognizes the need to support special programs for the poor
such as PKH CCT and integrate family based social assistance schemes for poor and vulnerable families
that have children, disabled or elderly members. The proposed Program-for-Results (PforR) operation
responds to a request by MoSA, and its proposed development objective aligns with improving the
effectiveness of fiscal spending in poverty and inequality reduction in Indonesia, as stated in RPJMN (2015-
2019).

10.      The Program is also well aligned with the World Bank’s twin goals of eliminating extreme
poverty and increasing shared prosperity. It supports the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
Indonesia FY16-FY20, in particular under the Engagement Area (EA) 4: Delivery of Social Services and
Infrastructure; EA 6: Collecting More and Spending Better; and the Supporting Beam (SB) II: Shared
Prosperity, Equality, and Inclusion. The task is also contributing to the achievement of the CPF objective
indicators on: (i) Percentage of mothers and children receiving maternal and child health and nutrition
services in community health center and its network in targeted areas (EA4); (ii) Central government
spending on health, capital expenditure and social assistance (EA6); (iii) Number of households benefiting
from PKH, disaggregated by gender (SB II); and (iv) Increase in the number of social assistance
beneficiaries receiving payments digitally (SB II). Finally, with a strategic focus on delivery systems
strengthening, promoting human capital, and increasing coordination across social assistance interventions,
the Program is aligned with the Bank’s Social Protection and Labor Strategy 2012-2022.



                                                                                                          6
b. Technical Soundness

11.     The proposed Program is technically sound and is expected to have positive impacts on the
government’s effectiveness in delivering the CCT as one of the core pillars of Indonesia’s social safety
nets to protect and enable those who otherwise do not have the capability to participate in the
economic growth process. The Program builds on MoSA’s past nine years of experience in implementing
PKH. Much capacity has been built over that time, and evidence suggests that the program has had
important impacts. In addition to the coverage expansion, MoSA has also been continuously reviewing the
program’s implementation, business processes, and delivery systems and has been making necessary
adjustments to improve implementation performance. Three key principles guide this review and revision
process: simplicity, clarity, and accountability. As a program scales up in size, those three principles
become exponentially more important than with smaller programs.

                                        Figure 3 PKH Workflow




                                   E


   Source: MoSA (2016c).

12.      PKH implementation workflow has five broad steps: (A) determine where and whom the
expansion may cover; (B) recruit additional facilitators and operators required for the additional
beneficiaries; (C) train the newly recruited facilitators and operators before they start; (D) implement PKH
program; and (E) determine if the beneficiaries are ready to “graduate” from the program and provide
additional support if needed. In addition, the PKH program also has strived to put in place a monitoring and
evaluation system and a community grievance system to ensure feedback and learning.

c. PKH Targeting




                                                                                                          7
13.     Indonesia’s targeting system is based on the Unified Database 2 (UDB), which has been
developed since 2005 in response to the emerging need to scale up social assistance programs. In 2005,
to establish a list of poor and vulnerable households for a new unconditional cash transfer program
introduced to mitigate the effects of universal fuel subsidy reforms, the Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS)
conducted a survey called Socioeconomic Data Collection for Socioeconomic Trends (Pendataan Sosial
Ekonomi, PSE). The final output of PSE-2005 was a database with basic information of 19 million
households, which belonged to the three bottom deciles of income distribution in Indonesia. In 2008, a new
survey of poor households known as Data Collection for Social Protection Programs (Pendataan Program
Perlindungan Sosial, PPLS) was conducted and covered approximately the same number of poor
households as the PSE-2005.3

14.      In 2011 the newly established TNP2K under the Vice President’s Office coordinated the third
round of data collection known as PPLS-2011. This survey of 24.7 million households contains a set of
socioeconomic information and was the basis to build a database (UDB) of the poorest 40 percent of the
population (about 96.4 million individuals). From June to July 2015, BPS surveyed over 28 million
households in all districts of Indonesia, aiming to cover the 40% poorest population in order to update the
2011 UDB records to incorporate new information coming from the field for the existing households as
well as from additional 1.3 million households. The new poor or vulnerable households were added through
public consultation forums that consisted of a group of around 20 villagers and community leaders or
representatives. Using the 2011 UDB list this group would debate who was not on the list and should be
surveyed by BPS. They could also flag households on the list that were deemed ineligible for SA programs;
these households would still be resurveyed and ranked.

15.      The methodology of ranking poor and vulnerable households has also improved over time.
While the 2005 PSE used 14 non-monetary variables and calculated a weighted welfare index, all three
later rounds used a Proxy Means Testing (PMT) methodology to score each and every household included
in the registry. The most recent PMT methodology applied to 2015 UDB was deemed more accurate due
to two key changes made in comparison to the 2012 methodology. The 2015 PMT used a much larger
sample to predict consumption by pooling Susenas data between 2011 and 2014 and splitting data into
calibration and prediction samples. While many models were tested, simple OLS was found to be the most
effective model. In addition, the new methodology expanded the set of variables used to predict
consumption, including more information in particular about household members that are not the household
head. These changes led to a 60 percent larger sample size and an expanded set of variables, and improved
targeting outcomes. The out-of-sample R-squared increased from 0.40 to 0.46 and the error rate was
lowered 4.4 % when simulating with low coverage targeting. Because the PPLS survey covers a proportion
of the population approximately equal to the size of the largest program that will use it (JKN-PBI had 92
million individuals targeted in 2016), re-ranking and subsequent ineligibility as a result of the adoption of
the new model will affect mainly the narrowly targeted programs such as PKH. This implies that the
accuracy of large programs like JKN-PBI largely depends on to what extent the PPLS-2015 survey
approach had successfully included the intended bottom 40% population.4

16.     Since 2012 all major social assistance programs have adopted UDB as their targeting system,
including many local government institutions that have requested UDB data to facilitate the
implementation of local poverty reduction programs5. The subsidized rice program Rastra and PKH
began using the UDB in 2012 and Jamkesmas (now PIS or JKN-PBI), the health insurance fee waiver
component of the national health insurance system JKN, and the poor student scholarship program, PIP,

2
  TNP2K (2015) Indonesia’s Unified Database for Social Protection Programmes. Management Standards.
3
  World Bank (2012). Indonesia Social Assistance Public Expenditure Review. Note: The same households surveyed in 2005 were resurveyed in
2008.
4
  Lange, S. Klasen, S. Hadiwijaja, G, Pinxten, J. Wirapati, B.A. (2016) Evaluation of PMT-based targeting in Indonesia. Project report.
5
  TNP2K (2014) An Evaluation Of The Use Of The Unified Database For Social Protection Programmes By Local Governments In Indonesia.

                                                                                                                                       8
joined in 2013. However, only PKH has fully adopted the UDB standard for use in quota generation,
eligibility determination, and beneficiary identification, and only PKH has implemented a bidirectional
updating procedure that works in concert with the UDB. Due in part to its low coverage and use of
bidirectional updating, out of all the main household targeted SA programs, PKH shows the best targeting
performance in the years after adopting the UDB. The latest available Susenas survey data estimated that
over 70 percent of the total program beneficiaries are found in the poorest 40 percent of the population.6

17.     Currently, TNP2K and MoSA are piloting an on-demand application (ODA) approach in 12
selected cities/districts to include new potential beneficiaries and update information of existing ones.
The ODA pilot and another ongoing Integrated Service and Referral System (SLRT) initiative led by MoSA
and Bappenas would coordinate to harmonize information flow processes to assure better outreach to
potentially eligible households and reducing exclusion errors.

18.      In 2016, the Government initiated a plan to transfer the responsibility of UDB management
from TNP2K to MoSA7. In early 2016, MoSA launched a nationwide data-matching exercise with all 514
district governments and social affairs offices. The purpose was to agree upon a single version of targeting
database to be used for the targeting of social protection programs at the central, provincial and district
levels. The matching was done between the 2015 UDB, the 2011 UDB and the district level data (mostly
emanating from the 2011 UDB as well). The initiative also included district governments signing an
agreement with MoSA to use this validated and verified data. It was also decided that in the transition phase,
the UDB would be managed jointly by TNP2K and MoSA through a task force. In early 2017, MoSA has
been developing a social registry information system called Siskada, which has also included existing SA
program beneficiaries and will eventually allow local government update and certify targeting data.

19.      Prior to the 2016 expansion, MoSA had selected districts based on essentially three factors –
district government’s commitment, supply side readiness, and national priority. In addition to having
adequate educational facilities and health facilities to support the PKH program, district governments must
provide district and sub-district PKH program management units (UPPKH) secretariats and through local
budgets contribute funds, at least 5% of the total annual transfers. Among the districts meeting the first two
factors, priority was given to disadvantaged districts, disaster-affected districts (social and natural) and
border districts.

20.      The selection of 2.5 million new eligible families when the PKH program was scaled up in
2016 from previous 3.5 to 6 million families was handled by the Directorate of Family Social Security
(JSK). First, province- and district-level quotas were generated and agreed upon. The quotas were
calculated as the latest district-level number of poor households estimated using the most recent BPS
Susenas data minus the total number of existing PKH beneficiary families in those districts. As a result, the
district quotas vary significantly. For example, some districts received zero quota for new eligible families
due to a combination of a fall in the poverty rate and a sufficiently high number of existing PKH
beneficiaries. Second, of the new 2.5 million eligible families, around 2.1 million would be allocated in the
districts with PKH operating already and the remaining 400,000 would be allocated to the new districts in
Papua and Maluku. Among the existing districts, it was also decided not to add new villages but rather
‘saturate’ the existing villages with additional beneficiaries.

21.     After the quotas for new eligible beneficiary families were decided, the lists of new eligible
families at province, district and village levels were created using the validated and verified data. The
JSK office then distributed the lists to the corresponding provincial UPPKH offices and then to the district

6
  World Bank (2017 forthcoming) Indonesia Social Assistance Expenditure Review Update.
7
  According Law Number 13 (2011) on Handling of the Poor and Needy, the Minister of Social Affairs is responsible for verifying and validating
the targeting data.

                                                                                                                                             9
UPPKH offices. Lastly, PKH facilitators are assigned to carry out initial validation of the new eligible
families to ensure their eligibility. Upon validation, the families deemed eligible are registered into the PKH
beneficiary master database. In practice, about 3.4 million potential beneficiaries’ data wa s sent out to
districts for facilitators to verify. The additional 800,000 plus families were added because of the
expectation that some potential beneficiary families would be found to be ineligible upon verification by
facilitators.

                                 Figure 4 PKH Targeting Performance
                    (share of total beneficiaries by consumption expenditure decile)
                                     35%
                                     30%
                                     25%
                         Incidence




                                     20%
                                     15%
                                     10%
                                      5%
                                      0%
                                              1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                                  Expenditure Decile

                    Source: Susenas, 2014

d. PKH Human Resources Management

22.     Since its inception, thousands of PKH facilitators have been at the forefront of delivering the
cash transfer and monitoring beneficiaries’ compliance to PKH conditionality. PKH facilitators are
recruited nation-wide through a competitive selection. Their minimum educational background is 3 years
of higher education, preferably with experience in social work. The ratio of facilitators to PKH families is
usually 1:200-250, but this ratio is lower for islands or areas that are difficult to reach.
                                             Table 3 Ratio of PKH Staff by Location
                                                 Location of PKH Participants
            Occupation                                               Very                  Remarks
                                           Easy       Difficult                 Remote
                                                                   Difficult
                                                                                         Minimum 1
                                      Average       Average      Average      Average
           Facilitator                                                                   person for each
                                      300           225          150          100
                                                                                         sub-district
                                                                                         Minimum 2
           District/City              Average       Average      Average      Average
                                                                                         persons for
           Operator                   3,000         3,000        3,000        3,000
                                                                                         each district
           Provincial                                                                    Minimum 2
                                      Average       Average      Average      Average
           Level                                                                         persons for
                                      30,000        30,000       30,000       30,000
           Operator                                                                      each province
           Source: PKH Implementation Guidelines (2015)




                                                                                                            10
23.      In addition to facilitators, PKH program also has a strong team of operators and coordinators
responsible for supporting program implementation and reporting at both provincial and
district/city levels. In total, more than 26,000 staff are expected to work for the program in 2017.

                                        Table 4 HR requirements
                               No           Type of HR          Total
                                1     Specialist                      21
                                2     Operator - Central              28
                                3     Coordinator - Provincial        57
                                4     Coordinator - District         394
                                5     Operator - Province             95
                                6     Facilitator                 23,804
                                7     Operator - District          1,875


24.     Facilitators carry out myriad core and supporting functions, ranging from conducting
socialization (i.e., outreach, communication, and awareness raising) and advocacy, running initial meetings
and validations; assisting beneficiaries in withdrawing cash quarterly at a nearby post office; updating,
verifying and entering data; organizing and leading FDS; handling complaints and case management;
recording and reporting beneficiaries’ utilization of health and education services and compliance with
PKH conditionality; reporting on payment reconciliations; distributing PKH cards to participants; preparing
weekly activity reports, etc.. In other words, the facilitators are the all-purpose “foot soldiers” of the PKH
implementation model currently in place. They carry the bulk of the day-to-day responsibilities to ensure
the program is run as designed on the ground.

25.      The high workload of facilitator has prevented them from focusing more on assisting families
and monitoring conditionality. Firstly, based on the analysis of the implementation guidelines reviewed
together and the end-to-end implementation planning, current workload appears to unevenly distributed,
with too many hours of work required to complete all duties assigned to the facilitators, and importantly
without clear separation of duties between beneficiary management (determining enrolment/eligibility) and
disbursement (authentication and manual payments reconciliation). The excessive involvement of the
facilitators, present possible pressure points along the delivery chain, and pose internal control risks that
could result in error and fraud occurring going undetected. Secondly, overloading the facilitators with an
array of manual tasks may hamper the timely achievement of the end-to-end implementation. For instance,
some facilitators are taking 1–2 weeks to provide operators with updated beneficiary information, done
manually using a large MS Excel data entry (as compared to PT Pos which reconciles electronically directly
with JSK), thus lengthening the reconciliation process and delaying payments by several weeks.

26.      Despite the extensive and heavy workload, facilitators have relatively poor employment
conditions and receive little financial or administrative support. They, like other PKH field staff, are
hired on renewable annual contracts with a relatively low pay (not more than IDR 3 million/month) and a
minimum benefit coverage (e.g., no health insurance coverage). For some areas the offered wage is below
some of the regional minimum wage standards set by government. No additional allowances are provided
and this is a problematic feature of the current remuneration design, especially in the more difficult areas
(where high transportation costs are very burdensome on the salary of the facilitator). According to a
number of anecdotes, PKH field staff often have to cover work-related expenses such as the cost of
transportation for field visits, maintenance of the office utilities (e.g., electricity, internet) and
stationary/printing out of their own pockets. Originally, it was envisioned that the operational costs, around
IDR 400,000 per month, could be paid by local governments as part of the cost-sharing initiative (5% of
total benefit value in the district) to actively contribute to the implementation of PKH. The perceived lack

                                                                                                           11
of long-term job stability, the low pay, and the difficult working environment leads to a relatively serious
challenge of high turnover (around 20 percent a year).

27.      The need to manage thousands of field-based contracted employees (more than 20,000) all
over the very large country from a relatively small central unit continues to be a difficult structural
challenge in PKH management. The 2015 reorganization of JSK was limited to rearranging the
organizational structure at the central level and has therefore left the arrangement for managing the field
staff untouched. As the recent wave of expansion into 6 million beneficiary families has been completed,
the number of PKH field staff has surpassed 25,000, deployed in 34 provinces and 514 districts. How to
manage this contingent of centrally-recruited field staff is one of the greatest institutional challenges of
PKH management.

28.      The current performance management and monitoring of facilitators is functioning sub
optimally and would benefit from a redesigning and strengthening, pending further analysis . At the
moment, performance monitoring for facilitators is conducted in October, without the use of operational
performance indicators but only a type of competency evaluation. Performance monitoring and evaluation
is done at the national level which places a heavy burden on the program given the extensive number of
facilitators and operators. It is mainly done by observing data entry and progress in the ICT Dashboard
which informs on business processes. Every year in November, the local social affairs office will announce
whether the facilitators’ contract is continued or not and relays these decisions to the central authorities of
PKH. Throughout the year however, MoSA faces a significant limitation in monitoring all facilitators’
activities on a weekly basis leading to less than adequate program oversight

29.       Lastly, given the many government agencies that employ facilitation systems to deliver results
at the village and household, a key opportunity to enhance PKH results is linking these systems
together. Indeed, a key policy priority espoused by MoSA leadership is accelerating social protection
program coverage convergence for poor families at the national Level and the local level. Linking
facilitation systems at multiple levels would present a key opportunity to help achieve this policy priority.
The Ministry of Villages, Disadvantaged Areas and Transmigration (MoV) has a facilitation system that
differentiates roles8 between different levels (village, sub-district and district). In particular, while this
position is still under development, at the district level there will be an Expert on Service Delivery which
could open up possibilities to link with other technical agencies, including local social affairs offices.
Through its facilitators, MoV is able to reach the villages and the village based organizations and as such
there is potential for PKH to build on this system in the long run.

e. Capacity development for PKH facilitators, operators, and coordinators

30.       MoSA and central PKH management team established a standard training mechanism to
ensure that PKH facilitators, operators and coordinators can perform according to their respective
job descriptions. This mechanism stipulates a series of regular trainings and ad hoc technical workshops
(called “BimTek”, i.e. technical guidance). PKH facilitators and operators are obliged to participate in the
BimTek. These BimTek are supposed to be conducted at national as well as subnational (province and/or
district) level. According to the standard mechanism, which was developed in 2012, the BimTek are not
stand-alone trainings but embedded in the cycle of conditionality verification, payments, payment
reconciliations, and regular coordination meetings of PKH field staff with representatives of administrations
and social service providers at district, province and national level (called Rakor). By design, various
BimTek focus on different content. The 1st BimTek is supposed to address the issues of a) how to facilitate

8
 Improvement in the system as well as in its implementation mechanisms is certainly possible as The Ministry of Villages is working to get
everything in place to provide the necessary support to the 73,000 villages especially in the light of optimizing the opportunities emerging from the
implementation of the UU6/2014 Village Law.

                                                                                                                                                 12
and conduct the initial meeting with PKH beneficiary candidates for the validation process, and b) how to
conduct the verification process of education and health components (e.g. filling out forms and reporting
documents). The 2nd and 3rd BimTek are supposed to refresh, provide more detail to the procedures and
more importantly – since PKH guidelines continuously evolve – update on recent changes (e.g. new
calculation of PKH transfer per family composition). Additional to this, facilitators, operators and
coordinators would likely receive irregular training, which are provided in collaboration with MoSA’s
internal training unit BADIKLIT. Irregular trainings are conducted to equip facilitators with knowledge to
implement the FDS as well in case of significant technical or methodological changes. For example, when
the Digital Mark Reader (DMR) technology was introduced to process the conditionality verification forms,
operators were required to attend the DMR trainings.

                                                    Figure 5 Consolidated PKH yearly agenda
Assumed normal condition (not restructuring or budget cut year)
    No.                                                       Events                                                 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
    1     Additional Location (districts/cities/subdistrict etc) & Number of Beneficiary for current year, concluded
          by a DG decree letter
    2     Additional Quota Number of Coordinator, Facilitator & Operator for current year, concluded by a DG
    3     decree letter documents (TOR etc ) for current year, released
          Procurement
    4     Procurement Process (MIS, Uniform, Guideline Books, etc)
    5     Preparation of PKH General and Technical Guideline Books
    6     Verification for 1st, 2nd, 3rd, & 4th payments of existing eligible beneficiaries of the current year    1st               2nd               3rd               4th
    7     1st, 2nd, 3rd, & 4th payments of current year beneficiaries (not additional beneficiaries)                     1st               2nd               3rd               4th
                                                                                                                                                                               4th&
    8     Reconciliation and Settlement Processes with Payment Service Provider (PT POS)
                                                                                                                               1st               2nd               3rd         1st
    9     Recruitment Coordinators, Facilitators, & Operators for current year
    10    1st regular bimtek: for the new recruited coordinators, operators, and operators: as a preparation of                      1st BimTek
    11    validation and initial
          2nd/ 3rd regular       meeting
                            bimtek:      with
                                    for the   beneficiary
                                            existing      candidates
                                                     (not new recruited) coordinators, operators, and operators                            2nd/3rd BimTek
    12    Irregular bimtek (if any): Family Dev. Session/ DMR/ New Format Forms/ New Payment Mechanism etc                                     Irreg. BimTek
    13    District/ Citi, Provincial, Regional, and Central Coordination Meeting                                                           Rakors (national & local)
    14    Releasing the Eligible beneficiary candidates (additional beneficiary) that needs to be validated
    15    Validation process & Initial Meeting of additional beneficiary of current year
    16    1st payment of current year additional beneficiaries                                                                                                                 1st


31.     There are several implementation issues related to this standard mechanism. First, the
content needs to be enriched further. The BimTek focuses on the “nuts & bolts” of PKH, i.e. its broad
objectives, basic program facts like calculation of benefits and UPPKH structure, its guidelines, procedures
and processes. Given the ambition of PKH and its main target group (i.e. very poor and marginalized
households), the facilitators themselves experience and articulate the need for additional capacity
development, especially in communication skills, basic knowledge of social protection as well as
knowledge of other national and sub-national social programs, which are of relevance for their clients.9

32.      Second, the above mentioned defined standard mechanism, however, has not been fully
implemented due to budget constraint. For instance, in 2016, only the initial training (1st regular BimTek)
for PKH facilitators, operators and coordinators was conducted and was also belated (after the June
payment), while the 2nd and 3rd BimTek were not (yet) implemented.10 The main reason for this is related
to budgeting. Since PKH is a non-permanent program, its budget is planned on an annual basis, budget
allocations to the program depend on the overall availability of government finance. Therefore, due to two
cross-board budget cuts in 201611, MoSA had to maintain PKH benefit payment levels by reducing the
allocations to other lower priority tasks. Hence, payment and training cycles for PKH were altered to cope

9
  GIZ, in 2013, developed and conducted a pilot communication skills development training for PKH facilitators, aiming at improving their
communication with their clients. The pilot training was captured on video tapes and handed over to MoSA central UPPKH for further general
implementation as part of the BimTek. This, however, never materialized due to limited capacities and budget in central UPPKH.
10
   The implementation of the 2016 BimTek cycle moreover got disrupted by a) new MoSA leadership on the director and general director level,
new organizational structures as well as the upscaling of PKH. The later required as massive recruitment process, which absorbed substantial
working time of JSK staff at national level.
11
   Due to decreasing oil and gas revenues, the Government had to cut its budget allocations to all line ministries in 2016.

                                                                                                                                                                                13
with this situation. Given the standard one-year contract duration for facilitators and regular re-contracting
of the same facilitators the next year, many of them received trainings with identical or similar content (e.g.
content of 1st BimTek repeated in 2nd and 3rd BimTek) several times, but are less often – if at all – exposed
to additional or new content and therefore stagnate on the same level of capacity.

33.     Third, as PKH is encouraged to utilize MoSA’s internal training unit BADIKLIT, the
training quality is subject to BADIKLIT’s operational and technical capacity. There have been times
that when BADIKLIT could not actually provide the trainings in the expected quantity and quality due to
capacity constraint despite budget availability. Going forward, BADIKLIT needs to substantially
strengthen its capacity in terms of both staffing and training program development (content and training
methods) and MoSA needs to search for multiple channels to carry out trainings.

34.      To improve the standard mechanism and its implementation, a thorough assessment of PKH
facilitators’, operators’ and coordinators’ respective skills needs is critical to inform the development
of more comprehensive training curricula. Additional to the “nuts & bolts” of the PKH program itself,
these capacity needs are likely to include soft skills like communication, a basic understanding of social
protection as well as knowledge of other relevant national, provincial and district level social (protection)
programs. Moreover, since one important reason for inadequate capacity of PKH field staff is a lack of
trainings due to limited overall budget availability, ensuring sufficient and predictable allocations of
national budget to MoSA would go a long way to increase the capacity of PKH implementation staff.
Moreover, given the frequent changes to the PKH guidelines as well as the huge costs involved in bringing
all PKH-field staff regularly to Jakarta, more cost efficient solutions for their capacity development could
be envisioned and developed, e.g. ensure a consequent decentralization of trainings (to be conducted either
by the provincial Social Affairs Offices and/or by MoSA’s seven regional training facilities) and/or stepping
up MoSA’s ongoing efforts to develop and implement e-learning modules for their social workers.

35.      In addition to capacity building, PKH human resource management policy needs to be
reviewed with regard to other fundamental issues. The unfavorable employment conditions (which
probably lead to weakening of the pool of applicants) and a high rate of turnover also result in weak capacity
of the field staff as collectivity. Also of relevance is the fact that facilitators’ work load may not be
sustainable, hence a more sustainable solution is to reduce their responsibilities and leverage IT to enhance
their productive. The facilitators’ one-year contract period should be considered to be prolonged in order
to keep experienced facilitators and operators and reduce their high turn-over rate and thereby expose
facilitators to more and different trainings sessions.

f. PKH Program Management Information System

36.     The PKH PMIS is composed of multiple software applications, which are used at different
stages of the program implementation cycle for the purpose of data collection, data validation, data
processing, data update, eligibility determination, beneficiary selection, payment calculation,
payment list generation, grievance redressal, and reconciliation. The core PMIS application is the
Online SIM Application, which is web-based and was designed and developed using JAVA in 2007. It runs
on the PKH main database hosted on Oracle 11g. The application has been modified with some minor
revisions, but the required major modification to accommodate recent program changes could not proceed
due to lack of application architecture documentation. To support data entry of an improved validation
process, a new application called Offline Validation Application was built using VB.NET and MS Access
Database and introduced in 2015. The UPPKH/JSK IT team has been able to modify this application several
times. All other tasks of data extraction, data sharing, data upload are done either manually using scripts or
through custom built small applications in VB.NET.



                                                                                                            14
                                    Figure 6 PKH Information Flowchart




      Source: PKH Implementation Guidelines.


37.       The five main business processes supported by the PKH PMIS are:

         Validation. Before any selected poor family can become a PKH beneficiary, the responsible
          facilitator needs to validate eligibility by checking the family’s actual situation against the targeting
          data. The facilitators use a validation form to collect this information and then update the
          information in the Offline Validation Application. The initial targeting data for each district is
          extracted from the PKH database and is placed in the form of text files on FTP Servers. The data
          is then downloaded and loaded into the Offline Validation Application. The facilitators using a
          laptop, make any changes in this data based the validation forms, on which data has been captured.
          The validated data is brought to district operators who further export and merge this data into a
          CSV file. The file is then shared with UPPKH/SJK through email for its further loading into the
          PKH database.

         Verification. All PKH families must comply with their responsibilities and their receipt of program
          benefits is contingent on the verified compliance of their conditionality. The facilitators use the
          verification forms to collect school attendance and health facility visit data of PKH beneficiary
          families. There are two types of verification forms – one is like a typical data collection instrument
          and verification data is manually provided on the form; and another is a DMR form, which uses
          machine readable marks to represent information. As non-compliance is of small percentage,
          facilitators only collect data for PKH beneficiary family members that did not attend school or did
          not make the required visits to health facilities. After the Verification Forms are signed and stamped
          by the providers, the forms are brought back to district operators who either enter data using the
          verification module of the Online SIM Application, or scan the DMR forms using the dedicated
          DMR scanners and send the resultant CSV files to the UPPKH/SJK team for further processing.
          Among 514 district offices, 113 use the manual verification form and the rest use the DMR forms.



                                                                                                                15
      Final Closing and Payment List Generation. For each payment cycle after verification data is
       entered, district operators must use the Final Closing module of the Online SIM Application to
       review the beneficiary data and “close” the database in order to proceed to the next step that
       involves payment calculation and payment list generation. Internally, the process calculates
       payment based on verified conditionality compliance for each PKH family and the rules in case of
       not meeting the threshold of conditionality. The UPPKH Payment Team uses the Payment module
       of the Online SIM Application to extract payment related information into a CSV file and share
       with the payment service providers (PT Pos and partner banks) for their processing. The payment
       team in parallel also calculates the total funds to be distributed to each district and the report is
       submitted to the treasure team.

      Data Updating. PKH beneficiary families’ situations often change over time. As some of these
       changes are relevant for determination of their benefits and responsibilities under the program, it is
       important to update beneficiary data in an accurate and timely manner. For example, both a new
       birth and a new pregnancy would very likely lead to increased need for health and nutrition services
       as well as increased benefit level. Other important changes to be updated relate to name and address,
       children’s school enrollment status (e.g. graduation or drop-out), marriage status of PKH mothers,
       and receipt of other complementary services. The recorded change data would be input into the
       Online SIM Application.

      Recertification. After five years of consecutively receiving program benefits, PKH families would
       be recertified during the sixth year if they are still eligible for the program. Those that are still
       deemed poor would be given another three years of transition period before cash benefit would
       cease. Others who have managed to change their situation out of poverty would graduate from the
       program and the cash benefits would stop immediately. This module also deals with complaints
       received from the families who are supposed to graduate. Some of them may consider they are still
       poor and should continue to receive cash benefit. Complaints will be clarified by local community
       leaders before it is approved.

38.      From a process perspective, there are several places that additional automation of data
collection, entry, and transmission could improve both efficiency and quality. From an IT perspective,
the PKH PMIS needs to be enhanced to address the following system performance, information security,
communication technology, and capacity issues:

      Application. The Online SIM Application slows down and responds abnormally during the peak
       load, likely due to sub-optimal application design. For example, the Final Closing module computes
       payment amount for each PKH participants using their verification data of each month. As it is a
       user-driven process, the Final Closing module often is stuck when multiple operators
       simultaneously execute the same module, consequently affecting application performance with
       severe database deadlocks. In addition, the Online SIM PKH application exchanges data in plain
       text using a protocol without encryption. Furthermore, the Offline Validation Application and
       DMR application are both standalone applications and yet to be fully integrated with the Online
       application.

      Infrastructure. UPPKH/JSK has a server room with its infrastructure built in 2007. The server
       room keeps 5 x Sun Sparc Application Servers with 8 GB Ram and 1 x Sun Sparc Database Server
       with 16 GB RAM. The Sun Storage has 7 TB of space which is connected through a SAN Switch
       with the Database Server. The Server room also contains a BI Server from Sun. There is a Disaster
       recovery site in Batam but it's not functional at the present. The physical load balancer from



                                                                                                          16
        Brocade is also non-functional at present. All the hardware and infrastructure are not under active
        support and maintenance contract at present.

       Database. The current size of the PKH Master Database is 60 GB and contains only textual data.
        The largest table in the database is the table of payments that contains total 37,338,948 rows and
        has a size of 7.97 GB. There is no regular data archiving in place and the historical data remains in
        the main tables. The database often receives deadlocks during the Final Closing process as there is
        large payment computation involved in the process and is dependent on payments table. The
        database backup is not a regular feature and there is no database backup policy and protocol in
        place. The tape libraries in the server room are not usable as there are no trained resources to take
        backups using tape libraries.

       Network. All sub-national PKH offices use the Online SIM PKH application and exchange data
        with UPPKH using a dedicated connectivity. 470 offices use a dedicated VPN over a fixed line
        connectivity to access the PMIS, while 34 offices use National Telecom VSAT service to access
        the PMIS. Each year PKH hires a service provider to provide support, maintenance, and dedicated
        connectivity with sub-national offices. A large extent of the IT budget is spent on supporting the
        dedicated VPN and VSAT connectivity. More importantly due to lack of appropriate network
        segmentation, users can make unauthorized access to other computers on the network, which is a
        serious system security concern.

       In-house IT Team. The IT team has technical specialists, including (i) IT manager, (ii) database
        administrator/Developer, (iii) network administrator. The capacity is far below what is required to
        support the operation needs of the program as well as to manage the system development process.

                                 Table 5 PKH IMS Gap Analysis
               Issue                                Solution Options                             Urgency
 Application performance           Database tuning and separation of payment                    Short
 degradation                       calculation and payment list generation                      Term
 Database archiving and backup     Developing geographical codes mapping and                    Short
                                   transforming                                                 Term
 Mismatched location coding        Automating mapping of location codes between                 Short
                                   BPS and Ministry of Home Affairs                             Term
 Lack of IT development strategy   Developing a PKH IT strategic plan                           Medium
                                                                                                Term
 Inadequate IT technical capacity       Building in-house capacity based on skill needs         Medium
                                        assessment and exploring partnership options            Term
 Disconnection between software         Develop/update business requirements in                 Medium
 application design and business        consultation of all users                               Term
 requirements
 Fragmented database design             Develop an integrated and coherent data model           Medium
                                                                                                Term
 Lack of Information System             Develop data, application, and technology               Medium
 architecture                           architecture                                            Term
 Low reliability of IT infrastructure   Utilize MoSA Data Center infrastructure as well as      Long
                                        its platform for Disaster Recovery, network and         Term
                                        inter-operability arrangements

39.    Furthermore, the current PKH PMIS could have potentially supported three additional
functionalities. First, the existing HR recruitment and training systems do not connect with the existing

                                                                                                          17
applications that mainly serve the beneficiary families. However, lack of integration or interoperability
clearly has been detrimental to the program’s HR management, including performance management.
Second, PKH operational data has not been used adequately for monitoring purpose in a transparent manner.
For example, very little operational information has been disclosed regularly to the public on the MoSA
website. It is important to build a business intelligence tool to assist the management with information
analytics and support information disclosure for the transparency purpose. Third, the current PKH PMIS
does not have a regular data exchange mechanism or protocol with other government systems. For example,
PKH implementation can benefit from utilizing the existing national ID system’s authentication service via
API.

40.      A comprehensive gap analysis in reference to business requirements is required for
developing a strategic IT plan for the PKH PMIS. However, in the short term, certain stopgap measures
need to be taken to address the most immediate needs, in particular supporting the coverage expansion to 6
million beneficiaries by the end of 2016. In the medium and long term, the PKH Information System needs
to be redesigned afresh to support the future scale-up of the program, as well as better integration with other
social assistance programs.

g. Payment systems12

41.     Indonesia’s overall payment systems have continued to evolve in the past decades. More
recently, Bank Indonesia (BI), the Central Bank, has intensified its efforts to promote the use of electronic
payment instruments. In 2015, BI upgraded its systemically important payment and settlement systems (BI-
RTGS and BI-SSSS) as well as its clearing house (SKNBI). In addition, a series of regulatory reforms have
accelerated introductions of new payment services and agent banking. Key regulatory reforms include BI’s
regulation on electronic money (2009) as well as its revisions (2014 and 2016), and the Financial Services
Authority’s (OJK) regulation on branchless banking (Laku Pandai) in 2014.

42.     BI’s regulation on electronic money or e-money establishes a regulatory framework for e-
money, including licensing for e-money issuers (banks and non-banks) and their agents. Under this
regulation, commercial banks with e-money licenses can have both individual and corporate agents while
non-banks can have corporate agents only. On the other hand, OJK’s regulation on Laku Pandai establishes
a regulatory framework for basic savings account (BSA) and bank agents. BSA does not have any minimum
fee or minimum balance to open and maintain, but has a maximum account balance at IDR 20,000,000. A
bank can offer such products using agents once it obtains the Laku Pandai license from OJK. The bank can
issue debit cards.

43.       While both banks and post offices have been involved in the delivery of PKH cash transfers,
PT Pos is the longest running and largest payment service providers (PSP) for the program as of now.
It is delivering payments through 4,261 post offices (almost all online) and community-based delivery for
those beneficiaries too far from the nearest branch (offline mechanism). But delivery of payments by PT
Pos is in cash, not digital. Because PT Pos has a wider nationwide network of branches in comparison to
commercial banks in Indonesia, it is uniquely positioned in the delivery of social assistance payments.
When PKH was launched in 2007, PT Pos delivered payments to 388,000 beneficiaries in urban areas
through its national remittance service Wesel Pos. In 2013 PT Pos switched from Wesel Pos to Giro Pos,
an account-based money transfer system, because it is the cheaper option of its two payment mechanisms.
PT Pos plans to launch a simple savings product (SimpulPOS) after modernizing its disbursement channel.




12
     The payment section is mainly taken from ISPA Social Protection Payments - Payment mechanism assessment: PKH.

                                                                                                                     18
                               Table 6 PT Pos Payment Mechanisms
       Product                        Giro-Pos                    Community payments
       Payment instrument             Cash                        Manual - Cash
       Account                        Virtual account             None
       Payment Point13                Post office branch          Community pay point
       Payment point administrator14 PT Pos staff
       Authentication approach15      Manual – PKH program ID or, Manual –PKH program ID
                                      Electronic – 1 factor
       Cost to program                IDR 9,000 per transfer16


44.      PT Pos has created a Giro Pos system to enable benefit amounts to be credited into the
recipient’s Giro account. For each quarterly PKH payment, the central UPPKH/JSK payment team
generates a payroll and then sends both a soft copy file and a hard copy summary to the Head Office of PT
Pos in Bandung. The unique identifier for the beneficiaries on the payroll is the PKH program ID number
while the National ID number does not appear on the payroll. Recipients have to show their PKH program
ID cards to the PT Pos cashier to get paid. The PKH program ID card has no photo and hence identity
authentication at the time of payment relies on PKH facilitators verifying the identity of each recipient. This
manual authentication predominates, although one factor electronic authentication is possible in some cases,
where barcode readers are used to read PKH program ID card. 17 When payments are made in the
community, an offline (paper-based) system is used. These records are then processed in batch at local post
offices.

45.     The Government undertook several pilots on modern payment models. As early as in 2011 the
state-owned Bank Rakyat Indonesia (BRI) started delivering PKH payments through BRI basic savings
accounts to 100,000 beneficiaries18. In the following year BRI served 500,000 beneficiaries (one third of
all PKH beneficiaries) through 15 BRI branches and 120 bank units in the covered areas. However, BRI’s
contract was cancelled in 2013, due to complaints on long queuing lines and poor customer service. In 2014,
BRI and another state-owned bank Mandiri were invited to join a payment pilot using e-money delivered
through individual payment agents of two banks.

46.      During this pilot, BRI and Mandiri delivered two rounds of PKH payments using their e-
money products (called Tbank and eCash respectively). Both products need beneficiaries own mobile
phone and hence SIM cards were issued to all participating beneficiaries free of charge. Tbank transactions
rely on SMS - beneficiary fills out a withdrawal slip, types the 6-digit Personal Identification Number (PIN)
into the T-Bank application on her phone; the T-bank system responds by sending a 6-digit One Time
Password (OTP) to her phone; she types the OTP and the amount to be withdrawn on the agent’s POS/EDC;
the agent produces a receipt with date, time and amount of money withdrawn written in Bahasa Indonesia
using the POS/EDC. For eCash, the agent uses their own laptop or tablet to enter the beneficiaries’ mobile
phone number; the beneficiary then receives a 6-digit OTP via SMS on her phone; the agent types that OTP
into the system; both the agent and the beneficiary will receive a transaction confirmation SMS.



13
   May be more than one type
14
   May be more than one type involved in payment distribution at the pay point
15
   Verification of the identity of the recipient at the point of payment
16
   This is composed of a transaction fee of 7,000 charged for delivering funds to the account and an additional 2,000 charge to cash out the
benefit.
17
   Authentication refers to the verification of the identity of person claiming to be the rightful recipient of a payment. Strong systems use two
factors of authentication to verify someone’s identity for example a card used with a PIN or a card with a biometric fingerpr int.
18
   Oxford Policy Management (2012) - Disbursement of Social Assistance Cash Transfers Through Bank Accounts: A Study of PKH Payment
mechanisms and options for social assistance cash transfers.

                                                                                                                                                    19
                                                  Table 7 e-money Payment Pilot
     PSP                                         BRI                                             Mandiri
     Size of pilot                               517 families using 10 agents                    1343 families using 10 agents
     Product Name                                Tbank                                           eCash
     Account                                     Limited purpose account19                       Limited purpose account
     Payment Point                               Bank agent                                      Bank agent
     Authentication approach20                   Electronic – two factor (PIN &                  Electronic – two factors (PIN &
                                                 OTP)                                            OTP)
     Transaction Device                          POS (EDC) (provided by BRI)                     Laptop computer (owned by
     (electronic)21                                                                              agent)
     Total Cost to program:                      IDR 7,500                                       IDR 7,500
      Agent commission                            IDR 5,000                                       IDR 6,000
      Bank fee                                    IDR 1,000                                       IDR 1,000
      Communication cost                          IDR 1,500                                       IDR 500

47.      The pilot revealed several implementation challenges. Connectivity was not as reliable as
required for smooth transaction experience. On average three USSD22 sessions were needed to successfully
complete one registration. Secondly the need for beneficiary education was significant. Some beneficiaries
were having difficulty remembering their PIN and not all beneficiaries were familiar with SMS functions
on their phones. As a result, the pilot did not improve payment delivery from the beneficiary point of view.
At a focus group discussion with participating beneficiaries, the majority expressed preferences for PT Pos
delivery mechanism over the BRI agent model because of the relatively straightforward process for
collecting transfers from PT Pos. Neither test model appeared to be commercially viable or scalable.

48.     In November 2016, President Joko Widodo launched the National Strategy for Financial
Inclusion together with a presidential regulation on financial inclusion. Government-to-Person (G2P)
payments are considered instrumental to the ambitious financial inclusion agenda. Since G2P
payments such as PKH cash transfer would significantly contribute to an increase of access to transaction
accounts, the government has committed to fully shifting social transfer payments from paper-based (cash)
to digital accounts (e.g. bank accounts, e-money accounts) by 2019, which certainly requires further
development of payment systems infrastructure in Indonesia. Meanwhile, PT Pos’ role as PSP for PKH is
expected to be reduced significantly.

49.    To ensure effective PKH benefit payment delivery while switching to cashless payment
modalities, MOSA needs to ensure the following minimum requirements to be followed by all PSPs:

          Accessibility:
              1. The cost, both financial and non-financial costs (e.g., distance traveled by a beneficiary to
                  reach a pay point) should be minimized; and
              2. The method of payment is appropriate to the needs and the capacity of the beneficiary
                  (e.g., it may not be appropriate to require use of a password to an illiterate beneficiary);
                  among other considerations.



19
   May be issued by a bank or non-bank and may have restrictions regarding transaction types e.g. e-money account or virtual account.
20
   Verification of the identity of the recipient at the point of payment.
21
   Only in cases where the payment instrument is electronic.
22
   USSD (protocol known as unstructured supplementary service data) create secure, verifiable channels for transactions including those for
mobile banking. These mobile phone entries require the use of special characters and start with an asterisks *.

                                                                                                                                              20
          Robustness:
              1. The payment delivery should be reliable and secure in terms of the timing, the amount
                 delivered, etc.; and
              2. The process should be properly monitored, controlled and reported on so that there is
                 clear traceability of money flow and accountability for the entire transactions.

50.    There are multiple payment models for PKH to leverage when moving from cash to electronic
payment. Access points for financial services are key to success for non-cash delivery of social assistance
payments. In Indonesia networks of both Laku Pandai bank agents and LKD e-money agents are rapidly
expanding.

          Laku Pandai is an agent banking program under OJK’s financial inclusion efforts, which allows
           banks to use agents, both corporate and individual23. This was expanded to Sharia (Islamic finance)
           bank in December 2015. The bank accounts that are opened under this program will bring access
           to services such as savings, microloans and micro-insurance policies.

          LKD (digital financial services) is one of several types of registered e-money that are provided
           for under BI regulation. Those licensed as e-money issuers are allowed to recruit corporate entities
           as agents. The 2014 amendments to the e-money regulation expands the type of agents from only
           businesses with a money remittance license to both fund transfer businesses or incorporated
           businesses and individuals. The 2016 regulation only allow commercial banks to recruit individual
           agents in addition to corporate entities. This means that e-money issuers that are commercial banks
           and non-banks are only allowed to operate fund transfer businesses and to use incorporated
           businesses as their agents, not individuals. Thus agency rules in Indonesia allow only commercial
           banks more options for service delivery.

51.      The transition of PKH payments to cashless methods depends on the spatial distribution of
Laku Pandai and LKD networks. MoSA has been working with the Association of State-owned Banks
(Himbara) since early 2016 to plan the transition. Himbara currently consists of four banks – Bank Mandiri,
Bank Negara Indonesia (BNI), Bank Rakyat Indonesia (BRI), and Bank Tabungan Negara (BTN) – and it
is currently using the Link network. PKH’s transition to cashless payment started in 2016 in 69 cities and
districts where the Himbara’s ATM/POS network and PKH beneficiary families are most overlapping. For
2017 and beyond, further expansion of PKH cashless payment would follow the expansion of the Himbara’s
payment network infrastructure. For each sub-district to be considered for switching to cashless payment
methods, there must be at least two agents already in service and their capacity to serve the existing PKH
families is deemed adequate.

52.      In addition, the Government will also introduce a “Combo card” to facilitate disbursement
of social assistance cash and in-kind benefits. This Combo Card combines both functions of a program
card for social assistance programs (called “Family Welfare Card” or KKS) and a payment card (a debit
card and an e-money instrument). All social assistance benefits, including subsidies, will use electronic
money. Such subsidies will be credited to e-money accounts. The beneficiaries would need only one card
to receive cash benefit payments from different programs and make payments for goods (at times limited
goods) and services. Currently, BNI is the only acquirer of merchants and all four banks are issuers of
Combo Cards. PKH beneficiaries can receive and make payments for purchases with the Combo Cards
with the debit card function.


23
  Branchless banking services and/or other financial services that are not conducted through physical office but through networking with other
parties and should be supported by information technology. OJK issues the license for LAKU-PANDAI (OJK Number19/POJK.03/ 2014, SE
OJK Number6, 6 Feb 2015).

                                                                                                                                             21
53.     Another innovation is a shared delivery platform called e-Warong for cash and in-kind
benefits. It actually has two types – KUBE-PKH and market vendor – with different genesis. While KUBE-
PKH24 is a graduation strategy for PKH beneficiaries to own and learn to operate a new business via a
cooperative structure, market vendors are tapped to disburse in-kind Rastra benefits under the e-voucher
pilot on top of their existing operation. From a financial sector regulators’ point of view, e-Warong is a
merchant acquired by banks for card payments. Laku Pandai banks and bank e-money issuers may have e-
Warong as their agents. Since this is a new way of disbursing social assistance payments, a proper
assessment and adjustments are required before implementing the model at a full scale.

54.      The Government has started an e-voucher pilot (non-cash food assistance or BPNT) with 44
cities in 2017, although a full conversion of social assistance payments into non-cash payments
requires further development of payment systems infrastructure, acceptance of new payment
instruments, and awareness among beneficiaries among other things. Further, in order to make non-
cash payments sustainable for financial inclusion, beneficiaries should continue to use the accounts for
multiple purposes, not only one particular purpose (e.g. PKH disbursements). The planned effort to
consolidate different social assistance program cards into one “Combo card” is a step in the right direction.

h. Grievance management

55.      PKH has established a Public Complaints System (SPM) as a mechanism both at central and
local levels to handle complaints from PKH beneficiaries, stakeholders, and the general public related
to PKH program implementation. The SPM is perceived as a way to increase community participation
and social interaction to channel both suggestions and complaints on performance of facilitators, abuse of
power, political interference, and other program related issues. By design, complaints can come from
multiple channels – in-person reporting, fax, letter, email, phone, SMS, MoSA website, or one online
application developed by the central UPPKH/JSK. Usually the complaints fall into four categories:

     (1)   Inquiry or clarification due to lack of information;
     (2)   Incorrect or to-be-updated beneficiary information;
     (3)   Behavior or performance issue of a facilitator or other staff;
     (4)   Benefit cut or termination.

                                              Figure 7: Complaints by Type (2016)
                                                         based on recorded data
                                   40%
                                   30%
                                   20%
                                   10%
                                    0%
                                               Inquiry       Beneficiary Corruption,            Payment
                                                                data     Fraud, and
                                                                          Neputism
                                 Source: MoSA “PKH Public Complaints System Report 2016”



24
  Currently it serves three roles: as a bank agent to disburse social assistance transfers cards and POS terminals, a distribution agent to disburse
subsidized rice and other in-kind food items, and as a trader to market local products made by community members. While it is assisted by the
government through initial seed money and management support, it is designed to be self-sustained in the long run.

                                                                                                                                                22
56.       In principle, all complaints must be responded to within one month. Depending on the nature
of complaints, there are two response options – administrative response and field investigation. Most
complaints can be handled administratively. If a complaint is related to a certain business process, it would
be handled by the nearest staff of the responsible team. If there is a complaint about a member of the PKH
implementation team, it would be handled by someone senior to that person. However, if the complaint
involves corruption or fraud or otherwise deems important and involving multiple parties, then a field
investigation is initiated and the facts and findings subsequently become the basis of decision or action. For
example, it may require holding a village meeting to discuss the issues and find a solution together with the
community. Sometimes a special meeting is needed even after a complaint is settled or the follow-up action
is taken. This meeting is to ensure a common understanding in the community that the solution is the most
appropriate and the process is transparent.25

57.      However, not all complaints have been recorded in one centralized system for analysis and
reporting purpose. It is estimated that in 2016, on average there are between 10 and 20 complaints received
by the PKH program every day via SMS, website, email and letter. Besides complaints either coming in via
digital media or deem important to trigger field investigation, most other complaints are likely not recorded.
Furthermore, it is not very clear if the complaints have been handled in a satisfactory manner to the people
who have raised them. Lack of potential impact may discourage people from raising complaints in the first
place. As this mechanism is critical to the expansion, which likely leads to an increase in complaints, it is
important that MoSA conducts an assessment to understand if the current SPM is serving the program as it
is designed to do and what changes can be made to improve its effectiveness. 26

i. Family Development Sessions (FDS)

58.      FDS originated from a group-based learning approach introduced in PKH in 2012. A group
of PKH mothers or grandmothers who live close by and if possible share similar education and health
characteristics would elect a leader among themselves. Then facilitators would organize monthly meetings
with group leaders and then with each group to disseminate new information on PKH, discuss day-to-day
problems faced by the beneficiaries, and provide a venue to share thoughts. Later the government wanted
to transform these monthly group-based learning meetings into FDS with structured training modules in
order to provide knowledge and training on life skills to PKH mothers and promote positive behaviors that
can help lift their families out of poverty. At the time FDS was designed as an instrument to prepare PKH
beneficiary families to graduate from the program at the end of their six-year cycle.

59.      With the technical support of the World Bank and the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), four modules and seventeen sessions were developed, building on consultations with PKH
beneficiaries, other key-informants in the community and lessons from other countries (e.g. the
approach taken in the Philippines’ CCT). The World Bank supported the development of the Education
and Economy modules, while UNICEF supported the development of Health and Child Protection modules.
Each module consists of step-by-step guides for activities and discussions on specific practices, delivered
in an interactive-participatory learning process:

       1. Education (4 sessions) and Economy (3 sessions) modules are equipped with Buku Pintar (smart
          book), brochures, flipcharts, films and posters. In addition, tutorial videos were made for FDS
          trainers and facilitators as training refreshment.
       2. Health (8 sessions) and Child Protection (2 sessions) modules are equipped with Buku Prestasi
          (handbook), films, and games tools.


25
     MoSA 2016 “PKH Public Complaints System Report.
26
     Ibid.

                                                                                                           23
     3. In 2016, following the introduction of two new components on elderly and severely disabled,
        MoSA Training Center has developed the respective FDS modules - Elderly (1 session) and
        Disability (1 session).

60.      From September to December 2014, MoSA implemented FDS training for 455 facilitators
who were responsible for the first cohort of PKH beneficiaries (those enrolled in 2007). Following the
training, the Education and Economy modules were piloted in 122 sub-districts located in 33 districts in
West Java, DKI Jakarta and East Java from November 2014 to December 2015. However, the originally
planned RCT evaluation was aborted due to implementation issues27. The Health module was piloted as
part of Prestasi Program II in Brebes, Central Java from April 2015 to June 2016. The Child Protection
module was also implemented in some areas.

61.     Both a FDS Qualitative Study28 and the observations from the field visits to 7 districts during
February to December 2015 revealed that FDS implementation often did not comply with the design.
In some areas there was lack of teaching and learning materials (Buku Pintar) and brochures. Furthermore,
most sessions were not implemented monthly and delivered less than the 120 minutes of training required
by design. The Prestasi pilot evaluation has not been able to identify strong impact of the PDS Health
module, likely due to implementation issues. Hence the FDS implementation process needs to be improved.

62.     Since 2014, MoSA has conducted 3 rounds of FDS trainings. Also in 2015, MoSA’s internal
Training Center, BADIKLIT, with technical support from GIZ developed FDS e-learning modules. MoSA
piloted e-learning on Education and Economy Modules to 26 facilitators in Banjar, South Kalimantan in
May 2015.

                                                   Table 8 Evolution of FDS
                                      2014                            2015                                 2016

                                Facilitators of           Facilitators of 2007 &                       Area &
         Participant
                                 2007 Cohort                  2008 Cohorts                      District Coordinators
         Number of                                                                              9 Area Coordinators
                                       455                           1,041
         trainee                                                                              30 District Coordinators
                                 BBPPKS and                     BBPPKS and
         Trainers                                                                              BBPPKS and Pusdiklat
                                  Pusdiklat                      Pusdiklat
         Training
                                        No                            Yes                                   No
         evaluation


63.     There are several areas that can be strengthened to improve FDS implementation and impact.
First, FDS implementation should be monitored much more closely at every PKH management level,
particularly when FDS is widely implemented. For example, in Lamongan district, there could be as many
as 200 FDS meetings for 7,429 beneficiaries in 7 sub-districts in one month. District coordinators should
work closely with sub-district teams to plan and monitor the FDS implementation. Information on how
sessions being conducted in the field, including session duration, contents, technical problems, the
challenges and suggested solutions, could be collected systemically to support the further development of
FDS.

27
   The pilot was supposed to be evaluated using RCT approach. However due to implementation issues, in October 2015, TNP2K, Bappenas, MoSA,
DFAT and WB decided to drop the RCT evaluation study.
28
   Akatiga Consulting Firm, conducted in Mar-Apr 2015 and Nov 2015.

                                                                                                                                       24
64.      Facilitators’ skills and knowledge are critical to the success of the FDS sessions. In addition
to the knowledge of the messages of each session, facilitators need to learn how to listen and how to
help PKH mothers who may feel uncomfortable to speak in public to talk. This type of facilitation skill
should be introduced as a core element of the FDS training of facilitators. Another useful skill is how to
plan each session – not only schedule it to fit into the mothers-group’s availability, but also clearly list what
should be said and done in sequence. Facilitators need to prepare related posters, flipcharts, and films and
make best use of the venue’s space, so that it is possible for both poster and flipcharts to be displayed.
Facilitators also need to manage the time efficiently to go through the listed activities.

65.      In addition to further adjustments to the FDS contents based on practical lessons and to the
delivery method, lack of financial support at provincial and district level needs to be addressed. The
5% fund contribution by districts should also include the FDS operational expenses in the field for CCT
facilitators. Alternatively, MoSA may consider a collaboration with other programs that employ similar
instruments. For example, it might be more efficient – and possibly also effective – to embed the FDS
Health module within the wider range of locally administrated health and nutrition services and thereby
share the implementation responsibility with local governments. This would require a more horizontally
integrated and owned implementation arrangement and may need some time to develop and stabilize.
MoSA has planned to strengthen FDS implementation in the future by: (1) developing FDS technical
guidelines, (2) providing FDS to PKH beneficiaries at an earlier time, from the second year onwards, (3)
developing a FDS monitoring and evaluation system and link with HR performance management system,
and (4) establishing a FDS operational fund.

j. Transition and Graduation

66.      Based on a recertification process, any PKH family determined to be poor after 6 years of the
program is granted an additional 3 years of transfers, complemented by additional livelihood and
income support from programs like KUBE. KUBE is a livelihood development and empowerment
program implemented by MoSA since 1983. It encourages the creation of group based micro businesses
through the provision of capital to groups of 7 to 10 people from poor households (a onetime grant of IDR
20 million or approximately US$ 2,000) as well as entrepreneurship and business trainings. It has been
linked to the PKH program since 2013 to encourage eligible PKH beneficiary families to set up a sustainable
business as a group and graduate from the PKH program. In 2013, 1,000 KUBE-PKH groups were formed,
across eight districts in five provinces, making use of existing PKH facilitators who received extra training
to manage PKH beneficiaries’ progress in receiving the KUBE grant. In 2015, around 20,000 KUBE-PKH
groups were formed and are to receive the KUBE grant. A new development to the existing KUBE program
is that PKH facilitators receive continued web-based trainings to better facilitate beneficiaries with the
creation of business proposals and are tasked with managing a KUBE-PKH business database and MIS to
monitor the development of KUBE-PKH businesses.

67.     Additional support to access sustainable livelihood development opportunities is critical for
PKH families to be “empowered” to emerge from a state of dependence and vulnerability to one of
independence and resilience. For example, within PKH families both secondary school graduates who are
ready to enter labor market and under-skilled individuals who are already working would benefit from labor
market activation programs or job centered skill training and enhancement programs. Bappenas launched
the Program Penghidupan Berkelanjutan (P2B) in 2015 in response to this un-met need by poor and
vulnerable population in general. PKH families can benefit from various P2B initiative and other livelihood
programs implemented by central and local governments as well as civil society organizations. In 2013 and
2014, 39% and 31% of PKH beneficiaries of the respective 2007 and 2008 cohorts graduated. The
graduation rate could be further improved in the future if PKH’s graduation strategy could be enriched.


                                                                                                              25
                                         Figure 8 PKH Transition and Graduation Cycle

                                                                             T
                                                                             R
                                                            Still poor       A
                                                           and eligible      N   PKH membership
                                                                             S   extended for a
                                                                             I   maximum of 3 years for
                                                                             T   those recertified as very
                                                            Still poor       I
                                                               but               poor and eligible.
                  PKH                RECERTIFI                               O
                                                            ineligible       N
                 MEMBER               CATION
                   S                                                         G   Exclusion from
                                                            Not poor         R   Membership of those
                                  Re-evaluate the           but still        A   recertified as not poor
                                  socioeconomic status      eligible         D
                                  of PKH families -                              and as either eligible or
                                                                             U
                                  implemented 1 year                             ineligible for PKH
                                                                             A
                                  before 6 years of         Not poor             membership so that
                                                                             T
                                  membership (5th           and not              they will no more
                                                                             I
                                                            eligible             receive conditional cash
                                  year).                                     O
                                                                             N   transfers.



k. Institutional Arrangements for PKH Implementation

68.      The institutional arrangements for PKH program involve three layers, all of which are
important for achieving the desired results of PKH program. First, as MoSA is responsible for planning,
setting operation rules, and managing overall implementation, the central management unit’s internal
organizational structure and institutional capacity are critical. Second, there are a large number of sub-
national implementation teams involved in carrying out various tasks and hence the adequacy of their
capacity and clarity of their roles and responsibilities affect the actual implementation on the ground. Lastly,
inter-sectoral coordination at both central and local levels is essential to ensure the program is smoothly
implemented and the beneficiaries have complementary access to basic services which are necessary for
achieving the program objectives.

l. Institutional Arrangements for PKH Implementation: National level

69.      MoSA through JSK under the Directorate-General of Social Security and Protection, is the
agency responsible for setting policies and implementing PKH. PKH program management structure
has been reformed recently. In October 2015, MoSA issued a ministerial decree 29 to reorganize the
institutional arrangement for PKH implementation and made the entire directorate of JSK fully in charge
of the program. In the structure that prevailed prior to the 2015 reorganization, a sub-directorate (Subdit)
within JSK oversaw PKH implementation with a lean administrative structure with most of the actual
program management delegated to a team of about several dozens of contracted “experts” under the central
UPPKH. It consisted of functional units handling management information system, data and disbursement,
implementation, monitoring and grievance handling, and administrative support. Other than the sub-
director and the two section heads, no civil servant was directly involved in managing PKH.

70.     While the UPPKH arrangement – essentially a parallel structure of a program management
unit – served its purpose while PKH’s scale was relatively limited, its steadily growing scale and
importance raised a concern about its institutional sustainability. Therefore, the restructuring approved
29
     Ministerial Decree, October 2015.

                                                                                                             26
in 2015 and implemented gradually throughout 2016 was intended to “mainstream” the responsibilities for
PKH implementation squarely into the core functions of the JSK with direct involvement of career civil
servants. The ministerial decree rearranged the configuration of these internal units into four Subdits and
one administrative support unit. The units are:

        1) Validation & Termination Sub-Directorate (Subdit 1) responsible for validating eligibility of
        potential PKH beneficiaries identified from the Unified Database (UDB) and program exit for those
        beneficiaries who no longer meet the eligibility criteria;
        2) Social Assistance Sub-Directorate (Subdit 2) responsible for benefit payment and monitoring
        of benefit use by the beneficiaries;
        3) Beneficiaries Sub-Directorate (Subdit 3) responsible for physically locating the beneficiaries,
        verifying their compliance with the conditionality, and providing “capacity building” for
        beneficiaries through activities such as family development sessions;
        4) Resources Sub-Directorate (Subdit 4) responsible for recruiting and training PKH field staff
        and coordinating with other agencies involved in PKH implementation; and
        5) Administration Sub-Division (TU) tasked with handling administrative affairs, staffing and
        budgeting for the Directorate – TU is headed by an officer one rank below the Subdit heads.


              Figure 9 Directorate of Social Security for Family Organizational Chart




        Source: MoSA
71.    Each sub-directorate has two sections under it to carry out the following in their respective
areas of responsibility: policy formulation and implementation; drafting norms, standards,
procedures, and criteria; providing technical guidance and supervision; and monitoring, evaluation

                                                                                                        27
and reporting. JSK is headed by a Director, each sub-directorate is headed by a sub-director and staffed
with two section heads (echelon 2-4) and around two civil servants in each section.

72.      MoSA has been managing PKH competently, steadily expanding its coverage from less than
half a million families in seven provinces in 2007, to 3.5 million by 2015, to about 6 million families
in virtually all provinces by end 2016. However, the relatively effective implementation in the past is not
necessarily an accurate indication of MoSA’s capacity to manage PKH going forward due to the following
recent changes: 1) the decision to overhaul the organizational arrangement for PKH management; 30 2) the
increase in PKH coverage from 3.5 million to 6 million families in 2016, including by entering into
challenging geographic areas such as Papua and West Papua where PKH had hitherto not reached; and 3)
the introduction of a range of enhancements to PKH’s design, such as the addition of elderly and disability
benefits, which adds complexity and taxes JSK’s capacity to manage the program.31

73.    On the surface, JSK’s current organizational design follows a relatively straightforward logic
based on a linear sequence of PKH implementation process from eligibility determination and
enrollment to benefit payments and other beneficiary interfaces (Figure 9).
                        Figure 10: JSK Subdits and PKH Business Process




Source: MoSA
74.     In practice, however, JSK is still going through a “growing pain” to hammer out some of the
finer details of role definitions across units or among individuals within each. For example, there
appears to be a residual level of ambiguity regarding the locus of responsibility for handling beneficiary
30
  Ministerial Decree, Oct. 2015.
31
  In addition to elderly and disability benefits, other enhancements include introduction of cashless payments and efforts to facilitate PKH
beneficiaries’ access to a set of complementary programs.

                                                                                                                                        28
data. The quality and timely availability of beneficiary data is essential for a range of PKH business
processes including eligibility determination and enrollment (Subdit 1), compliance verification (Subdit 3),
and benefit payments (Subdit 2). Multiple Subdits make use of the beneficiary data to do their jobs and yet
it is not clear whether any single unit is ultimately responsible for their completeness, veracity, timeliness,
etc. The new organizational design also does not clearly specify which unit would be responsible for cross-
cutting functions of M&E and grievance handling. The assignment of some of the contracted “experts” who
used to handle M&E and grievance handling in the old UPPKH to the Subdit 3 (Beneficiaries) in late 2016
appears to reflect JSK’s de facto decision in this regard. Apart from the question about the appropriateness
of assigning strategic cross-cutting functions like M&E and grievance handling to one Subdit, the
assignment of these roles to the Subdit 3 has not been formalized, unless these core functions are considered
to be aspects of “monitoring and evaluation of beneficiaries” which is one of the Subdit 3 sections. Another
ill-defined functional responsibility of JSK’s current structure is the day-to-day management of the field
staff. Subdit 4 (Resources) recruits and pays the field staff but the other three Subdits heavily rely on their
work to carry out their respective institutional roles. In the end, it is as though the field staff report to all
four Subdits. In contrast, the previous UPPKH structure operated with a centralized command structure
with three regional coordinators (also contracted “experts”) in the Implementation Division, sitting at the
top of the pyramidal structure of reporting lines to oversee a set of provincial coordinators within their
respective regions. For accountability, it is important that the new arrangement consolidates itself into an
efficient working model with clear definitions (and mutual understandings) of the roles and responsibilities
of each unit, roles and skill profiles of each individual within it, and working relationships between units.

75.     Some of the ambiguity might be because of the 2015 ministerial decree itself, which lacks
precision in defining exactly what is entailed in each Subdit’s key mandate. The decree merely lists a
range of common generic responsibilities (e.g., formulate policies, issue norms, etc.) in each Subdit’s
respective domain (e.g., validation and termination, social assistance, beneficiaries, resources) without
clearly specifying what the tasks of each domain actually entail. It is therefore ideal to prepare a more
detailed description of the core responsibilities of each Subdit, in light of the assessed business needs and
step-by-step identification of key tasks along the business processes for PKH implementation.

76.     The JSK leadership is in principle committed to prepare more detailed “job descriptions” to
guide more precise demarcation of organizational responsibilities across its internal units. It is
recommendable to complete this exercise as soon as possible. While an early resolution of the remaining
ambiguity is relatively urgent, it is also recommendable to take those definitions of Subdits’ “job
descriptions” as preliminary, conduct a mid-term review, say, after a year or so, to assess whether additional
adjustments would make sense, and consolidate the arrangement based on this review, at which time a new
ministerial decree, if necessary, might be issued to consolidate the new structure.

77.      Under this evolving context, the most critical consideration in assessing JSK’s capacity to
manage the expanded and more complex PKH is the fact that this is a unit on its learning curve
because of its recent (and still-unfolding) organizational change. In the previous arrangement, virtually
all the work on PKH implementation was handled by contracted “experts” at the center and the PKH field
staff on the ground. But since the 2015 restructuring formally dismantled the previous UPPKH structure,
the new structure has been put in place gradually and the entire JSK staff (of around 50 civil servants) have
been learning about specific aspects of PKH implementation and business processes through “learning by
doing.” In practice they continue to rely extensively on services rendered by around 50 contracted UPPKH
“experts” who have remained in JSK. Furthermore, the contracted “experts” are currently working under
the contracts that refer to the previous organizational structure (UPPKH) and are not in that sense formally
assigned to any of the current Subdits, although renewal of their contracts for 2017 may rectify this situation.

78.     On capacity, some of the civil servants assigned to specific Subdits are not necessarily
specialists in the subject matter. They are all learning by doing, with help from the contracted “experts”

                                                                                                              29
with longer experience in PKH implementation. They have not benefited from any formal training, even a
minimum orientation on the basics of a cash transfers operation or specific aspects of the business processes
they have been tasked to manage. Besides, some of the staff have been reassigned either within JSK or
within MoSA in less than one year since their initial appointments. Short tenures in posts, without formal
training/orientation, further limit the effects of learning by doing, and hence deter the whole Directorate’s
institutional capacity building. Both some form of minimum formal training/orientation and longer duration
in their assignments seem necessary to encourage gradual building of JSK’s institutional capacity.

79.      Another possible obstacle to building Subdits’ institutional capacity is the degree of
informality in PKH implementation. Facing tight deadlines to deliver on a variety of tasks to meet the
ambitious expansion target in 2016, JSK has at times operated with informal arrangements in assigning
specific tasks to staff/units. A case in point is the assignment of the task to oversee the recruitment of around
10,000 additional field staff to the sub-director who was initially appointed to head the Beneficiaries Subdit,
when on paper this was the responsibility of the Resources Subdit. While a particular circumstance may
have necessitated or even justified this decision, it appears to have generated a degree of confusion among
the staff. Such an informal arrangement should ideally be kept to a minimum as it would dilute unit-level
accountability and could also hamper capacity building by way of learning by doing.

80.      The rationale behind the change (to “mainstream” PKH management for the sake of ensuring
institutional sustainability) is justified and a degree of uncertainty is unavoidable in any
organizational change. However, unless this transition is managed well, it could have negative impacts on
JSK’s ability to deliver the ambitious goals by diluting accountability and stunting necessary development
of JSK’s institutional capacity, at least in a short to medium term.

m. Institutional Arrangements for PKH Implementation: Subnational level

81.     While PKH is a national government program, its implementation relies heavily on the
nationwide network of field staff. The institutional arrangement for PKH implementation at the sub-
national level has mirrored the original organizational arrangement at the central level of relying on a
program management unit (UPPKH). Previously at each sub-national level, a local UPPKH consisting of
contracted personnel carries out virtually all the program implementation functions, while formally being
supervised by the Social Affairs Office (Dinas Social) of each sub-national government. Going forward,
the Social Affairs Offices are responsible for PKH implementation with support of contracted personnel.
The number of field staff to be deployed follows pre-defined ratios and the geographic characteristics of
the areas to be served.

82.      At province level there are ‘Provincial Coordinators’ and ‘Provincial Operators’. Provincial
coordinators are recruited to coordinate PKH activities at the provincial level, supervise District/City
Coordinators and ensure local education and health services are available and functioning. Responsibilities
of provincial operators include: (i) scanning paper forms of beneficiary compliance with PKH
conditionality; and (ii) entering weekly activity reports of facilitators into the MIS. The provincial PKH
unit is formally led by eight members from the Social Affairs Office including the department head as
Advisor, the head of Social Division of the Social Affairs Office as Chairman, the head of the section
responsible for PKH at the Social Affairs Office as secretary. The other five members are staff from the
Social Affairs Office responsible for data, community grievance system, assistance distribution, verification,
monitoring and evaluation.

83.      Similarly at district/city level there are also Coordinators and Operators. Coordinators are
contracted to coordinate PKH implementation at the district/city level. They are required to supervise the
facilitators at the sub-district level, monitor and assist service facilities to ensure steady supply of services,


                                                                                                               30
oversee and assist sub-district-based administration and MIS teams. Operators are contracted to input data,
including uploading data of validated PKH families entered by the facilitators, to the National PKH MIS.
Each district is also supposed to constitute five PKH-dedicated working groups: the data team, the health
and education services team, the fund allocation team, the verification team and the M&E team. The district
PKH office is also responsible for supervising and liaising with the sub-district PKH implementation staff.

                               Figure 11 Structure of District/City UPPKH

                                                   DIRECTOR
                                          (Head of Social Affairs Office)


                                                 UPPKH CHIEF
                                            (Head of Social Division)


                                                 SECRETARY
                                            (Head of Social Section)



                  Data and MSS                Assistance Channeling                VERIFICATION
                  (Social Staff)                   (Social Staff)                   (Social Staff)


                     FACILITATORS’ COORDINATOR                                   OPERATOR


84.     The sub-district PKH unit is staffed with facilitators who interact directly with PKH
beneficiaries/families. If there is more than one facilitator in a sub-district, then one of them is assigned to
be a ‘Facilitator Coordinator’ for that sub-district.

85.      Adding to the ambiguity of responsibility over managing the field staff at the central level,
the supervisory structure connecting facilitators to JSK is also inefficient. Facilitators are connected to
JSK through a long reporting chain with a district and a province as “intermediaries” along the way (through
the coordinators at the respective levels, but sometimes requiring formal letters signed by the head of the
provincial/district social affairs office). As a result, certain managerial decisions regarding field staff can
take an inordinate amount of time. For example, months of delay are said to be common in simple HR
transactions like formally terminating the contract of a facilitator who has been let go. The inadequate use
of information technology for reporting on program activities (some of which require scanning of paper
reports by provincial operators) further increases the inefficiency in the supervisory and reporting
arrangement.

n. Collaboration with Local Government

86.      MoSA has hoped for, and formally requested, collaboration and support from the sub-
national governments. The Director-General of Social Security and Protection has issued annual letters
“requesting” local governments to allocate the equivalent of 5 percent of the PKH benefit budget allocated
for a particular local jurisdiction as administrative budget to support PKH implementation. The 5-percent
budget is meant to support activities such as “socialization” (communications & outreach activities),
secretarial and other office support for PKH field staff, field-level operational costs (e.g., cost of printing a
form for compliance verification, stationaries, facilitators’ travel costs to reach beneficiaries, etc.),
monitoring and supervision of PKH activities by local government staff, etc. While comprehensive statistics

                                                                                                              31
are unavailable, the extent of compliance with this request among the provinces and the districts seems
uneven, although almost all sub-national governments do provide at least a minimum level of support by
“housing” PKH field staff (however, there are cases where PKH field staff themselves are sho uldering the
cost of office rentals and other maintenance expenses).

87.     A 2015 study32 on the role of local governments in PKH implementation, found that local
PKH teams formally headed by the local social affairs office, were generally performing well in
implementing the program. It did, however, note that lack of personnel, both in terms of the number and
capabilities, could be a hindrance to more extensive and effective support for PKH implementation. The
study also noted weaknesses, especially with respect to the levels of ownership and understanding of the
program among various local institutional stakeholders, starting with the social affairs office but also health
and education offices. One of the reasons cited is ineffective communication and information sharing
between PKH and these departments.

88.      But the challenge of managing the extensive PKH implementation structure at the local level
may go beyond better information sharing, strengthened human resources in the local social affairs
offices, or even improved coordination among local sectoral agencies. It is clearly inefficient and
ineffective to manage such an extensive local-level bureaucracy as the local PKH teams from a small
central unit. But the way MoSA manages this situation, reflecting the overall institutional architecture of
the country’s inter-governmental relations, seems to represent an inefficient mix between a fully devolved
model and a deconcentrated model of decentralization. In a fully devolved model (e.g., Brazil’s Bolsa
Familia), local governments, through their own staff rather than through centrally recruited personnel, are
fully entrusted to handle a full range of tasks related to the program implementation. In a deconcentrated
model (e.g., Mexico’s Prospera, Peru’s Juntos, Philippines’ 4Ps), the central government directly manages
local-level implementation tasks through its regional offices.33

89.     The Indonesian situation appears to be in-between in that it is constitutionally a unitary state
in which sub-national governments are considered extensions of the national government – the Law
of Regional Autonomy includes a provision that assigns the role of representing the national
government to independently elected provincial governors – but is organizationally fully
decentralized. Unlike some other unitary states (e.g., Philippines which has retained relatively strong
presence of regional offices), the central government of Indonesia has relinquished much of its ground
presence at the regional/local level. Yet, perhaps given the relatively limited maturation of the decentralized
governance framework in Indonesia, which embarked on major decentralization only a little more than a
decade ago, modus operandi of inter-governmental coordination does not seem to be fully institutionalized.

90.     There is no easy, short-term fix to this situation but given the nature of inter-governmental
relations in Indonesia, a long-term solution may require an arrangement closer to Brazil’s fully
devolved model. One option would be to delegate the responsibility of operational supervision to provinces,
perhaps on the basis of the legal provision cited above that requires governors to act as central government
representatives.34 Irrespective of the applicability of such a legal basis, however, a fundamental question
remains with regard to the provinces’ incentives to play such a role. An anecdote from a field work
conducted for this institutional assessment suggests a possibility that even when a provincial government



32
   PKH Program Management: A Study in 6 PKH Implementing Areas, GIZ SPP Team, June 2015.
33
   Where the central government lacks sufficiently strong regional presence and is unable to rely on sub-national governments for supporting core
CCT implementation activities, such as in Pakistan, the government has relied on a contracted third party (e.g., compliance verification). But such
an arrangement is even more unsustainable than the arrangement in place for PKH. In recognition of the limitation inherent in the contracted-out
model of CCT implementation support, the Government of Pakistan is also preparing to transition away from this arrangement and strengthen the
regional/local presence of the implementing agency (Benazir Income Support Programme).
34
   Legal viability of this option would need to be reviewed by a competent expert.

                                                                                                                                               32
is fully capable of supporting PKH implementation, it has its own competing priorities that may dilute its
interest in devoting resources for PKH.

91.      For any arrangement that relies on more extensive roles of sub-national governments to work,
additional maturation in functional relationships between the national government and the sub-
national governments may be a prerequisite. Given the varying capacities and incentives among sub-
national governments, a logical approach would be to delegate some of the PKH implementation functions
to those that demonstrate both willingness and adequate capacity. But managing such a process of
asymmetric functional decentralization would be a complex task that is likely to be beyond JSK’s current
institutional capacity. Furthermore, asymmetric decentralization is typically a politically difficult
proposition and acceptability of the idea in general seems low in Indonesia as well.

92.      Mirroring the reorganization at the central level, MoSA has recently issued an instruction to
the provinces and the districts to eliminate the sub-national UPPKH and incorporate the
responsibilities of managing PKH implementation fully into their respective Social Affairs Offices.
But, it is unclear if this formal restructuring will result in tangible change in the ways in which the sub-
national social affairs offices will approach PKH implementation. Given the oft-reported lack of ownership
by provincial and district governments to fully support PKH and the staffing constraints at the provincial
and district social affairs offices, it is likely that actual implementation will continue to depend on the
contractual staff, whether they are nominally placed under the core structure of the social affairs offices or
in a separate program management unit.

93.      Short of a major overhaul in the inter-governmental arrangement for PKH implementation,
one option would be to explore administrative measures to elicit a minimum level of operational
support from the provinces and the districts. For example, MoSA could transfer a fixed amount as
estimated administrative and operational costs to sustain the PKH teams in each sub-national jurisdiction,
instead of asking the sub-national governments for financial and in-kind support. In any case, it would be
helpful to first collect relatively accurate information on the actual cost of delivering PKH at the local level.
The 5-percent contribution that MoSA requests is not based on any such estimation, and it is quite likely it
does not fully reflect the actual cost. In addition, portions of the costs are incurred privately by PKH field
staff, which are not captured in any available financial reporting.


o. Supply Side Readiness for Health and Education Service Delivery

94.     Like any conditional cash transfer, PKH also depends critically on the proper
implementation of health and education services. Although availability of these services is generally
considered quite reasonable in Indonesia, it is possible that certain services that PKH families require to
meet program conditionality might not be available in certain locations. Service gaps are more likely in
certain geographic (mostly rural and remote) areas. For example, while 62 percent of puskesmas 35
nationally report having stocks of Vitamin A, availability varies widely from above 80 percent in East Java
and DI Yogyakarta, to under 50% in nine provinces, including just 28% in Bengkulu.36

95.     This is true for education as well. Although Indonesia has made remarkable progress in improving
access to basic education in general, regional disparities between and within provinces remain. Substantial

35
   Health services for PKH families can be accessed at any public health facility which includes puskesmas and its network of posyandu, pustu,
polindes and puslinglity facilities. However, PKH beneficiaries are more likely to use front-line facilities, especially posyandu, which is a
community-managed integrated health service post. No health professional is permanently posted at posyandu. Services are offered on the basis of
regular visits by designated health professionals (midwives).
36
   Indonesia: National Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMN), 2015-2019, Health Sector Review: Service Delivery and Supply-side Readiness.
June, 2014.

                                                                                                                                            33
shares of the populations in sub-districts in Aceh (11 percent on average), West Papua (16 percent), and
Papua (41 percent) had no elementary school (SD) available within 1 km from the village in 2011. The
Minimum Service Standard (MSS) goal of a junior secondary school (SMP) facility within 6 km of villages
in remote areas, was also not fulfilled in 14 percent of Indonesia’s rural villages, with the largest gaps in
the Maluku provinces (20%), Kalimantan (26%), and Papua / West Papua (52%). In fact, there were 173
sub-districts in which no village had such access in 2011.37

96.     Inadequate funding and/or lack of staff are also issues of concern, as they hamper both service
availability and quality. World Bank (2013a) estimated that about 340,000 teachers, or 17 percent of the
teaching force, would need to be transferred to ensure all schools have the minimum number of teachers.
The problem of shortages is amplified by absenteeism. Surhati (2013) estimates an approximately 33.5%
and 43% of Indonesian teachers were absent on any given school day in Papua and remote schools
respectively, compared with 14% nationally. In fact, the average length of absence among a sample of
absent teachers in Papua was 70 days and some even a year.38 This could not only make it difficult for
beneficiaries to comply with conditionality but also prevent PKH families from achieving better human
development outcomes.

97.       In Indonesia’s decentralized service delivery arrangements, the primary responsibility for
ensuring availability of primary health care and primary education rests with the district level, while
secondary education is a provincial responsibility. The national ministries, however, retain formal
authority for policy and standard setting, as well as considerable financial leverage through discretionary
fiscal transfers. In case supply-side shortages make it impossible or difficult for PKH beneficiaries to access
the required services, there will be a need to coordinate between the social affairs and the health or the
education sectors.

98.      Logically, the only way to be certain that whatever commitments to address supply-side
constraints are fulfilled in practice is to track them systematically. Since JSK’s MIS has the capability
to track those data, and yet it does not seem these are regularly and systematically reported, it may be
worthwhile starting the practice of regular tracking of the supply-side readiness and service availability (if
not quality) as part of the routine program monitoring. Also PKH can learn from other CCT programs about
establishing different conditionality and/or frequency of compliance monitoring, taking into account supply
side issues as done elsewhere (Brazil in the Amazonia, Philippines in conflict Mindanao or indigenous
isolated areas).


p. Institutional Arrangements for inter- sectoral coordination

99.     Formal structures for inter-institutional coordination for PKH exist at both the national and
the subnational levels. At the national level, the PKH ‘National Coordination Team’, advised by the
Coordinating Ministry of Human Development and Culture and chaired by MoSA, has been set up for the
purpose of high-level policy coordination. It consists of Echelon 1 level (top rank civil servant) officers
from the following ministries/agencies: MoSA, Health, Education and Culture, Finance, Planning and
Development (Bappenas), Religious Affairs, Communication and Information Technology, Home Affairs,
Finance, Manpower and Transmigration, Under-developed Regions, Women’s Empowerment and Child
Protection, and Statistics Indonesia (BPS).

100.   PKH policies are operationalized by a ‘National Technical Coordination Team’, steered by
the Minister of Social Affairs, chaired by the Directorate General of Social Security and Protection,

37
     TNP2K 2011
38
     OECD 2015 citing Surhati (2013)

                                                                                                            34
with the Director of Family Social Security as Secretary. It consists of echelon 2 and/or echelon 3
(Director level) officers assigned by the member ministries and agencies of the National
Directive/Coordination Team. The technical team is supposed to act as a bridge between the National
Directive/Coordination Team, JSK and the field-level PKH implementation teams. Its responsibility is to
review operational plans, coordinate sectoral activities, establish an inter-sectoral team with the mandate to
select PKH participants and monitor program implementation progress. There is an equivalent PKH
Technical Coordination Team at provincial, district/city, and sub-district levels.

101.    The PKH Technical Coordination Team at the provincial level has the Governor as Advisor,
Provincial Secretary as Chairman of the Steering Team, Chairman of Provincial Bappenas as Chairman of
Technical Team and Head of Social Affair Department as the Secretary. Other members of the team are the
heads of the following offices/agencies: Education, Health, Provincial Statistics Indonesia (BPS), Regional
Office of the Ministry of Religious Affairs, Communication and Information Technology, Manpower,
Population and Civil Registry.

102.     The District/City PKH Technical Coordination Team consists of the Head of District as Chief
Advisor, Secretary to the Local Government as the Chairperson of Directive Team, Head of Bappeda at the
District/City level as the chairperson of Technical Coordination Team, Head of Local Office of Social
Institution as Secretary. Other members of the team are the heads of the local offices of the following
agencies: Education, health, BPS, Ministry of Religious Affairs, Communication and Informatics, Ministry
of Manpower, and Population and Civil Registry.

103.     The Sub-district PKH Technical Coordination Team consists of the Head of Bappeda as the
Chief of Advisor, Head of Local office of MoSA as the head of steering committee, Head of sub-district as
the chairperson of Technical Team, Coordinator of Facilitators as Secretary. The other members of the team
include the Heads of Local Units of Primary Education, Secondary Education and Healthcare; PKH
Facilitator; and Head of Village where PKH is provided.

104.    An additional mechanism for MoSA to promote inter-sectoral coordination is the national
coordination meeting.39 Led by senior MoSA officials, these meetings take place periodically in various
locations with participation of senior officials from the partner ministries as well as representatives of the
local sectoral departments. While topics apparently vary from one meeting to another, these meetings are
reportedly used as opportunities to highlight relevant issues such as gaps in supply of health or education
services that MoSA has identified and may entail relevant sectoral authorities formalizing a commitment
to address them. However, MoSA apparently does not follow up on the extent to which these commitments
have actually been fulfilled. It was also reported that these commitments are signed by ministry officials
rather than representatives of the local sectoral departments. It is not clear whether the ministry
commitments are transmitted to the relevant level that is responsible for addressing the gap and what
mechanism, if any, each sector uses to ensure compliance.

105.    It is difficult to ascertain how active the national-level coordinating bodies have been and how
central their roles have been in improving inter-sectoral coordination. At the local level, however,
available information40 all point to the high likelihood that they are not fully functioning. In order to improve
PKH beneficiary families’ access to complementary benefits and services, MoSA recently has issued a
Minister’s Decree to further require that all benefits and services targeting the poor and vulnerable should
use the integrated database for targeting purpose (MoSA has worked with Ministries of Education and
Health on PIP and JKN-PBI to synchronize the data or provide priority access to PKH beneficiaries)

39
   Coordination Meeting serves as a forum to disseminate information about PKH implementing policies, to identify problems in implementing
PKH, formulate solutions to issues faced by program, coordination and strengthening commitment from line ministries as well as to achieve synergy
and supports of PKH
40
   Including the 6-province study by GIZ.

                                                                                                                                             35
106.     Finally, recent changes in PKH program design to include elderly/disability benefits and
facilitate beneficiaries’ access to a set of complementary programs, will require greater clarity and
specification of institutional arrangements. In order to improve PKH beneficiary families’ access to
complementary benefits and services, MoSA has recently issued a Minister’s Decree to require that all
benefits and services targeting the poor and vulnerable should use the integrated database for targeting
purpose.

III. Description and Assessment of Program Expenditure Framework

107.    While the central government has been increasing social assistance spending since 2010, its
share of GDP has remained constant. The total expenditure on household/family based social assistance
is US$ 5.74 billion in 2016, or approximately 0.6% of GDP. The four largest programs in terms of
expenditure are JKN-PBI (health insurance for the poor), RASTRA (subsidized rice), PIP (scholarship for
poor students), and PKH. While these four programs account for more than 90 percent of the total spending
on the poor and vulnerable families, their combined spending is still dwarfed by the fiscal cost of untargeted
subsidies, which is over 12% of central government budget. Even with the latest expansion in 2016, PKH
expenditure is still the smallest among the four. Because the government will continue to reduce the
untargeted subsidies and move the saved budget to the more effective social assistance programs such as
PKH, its budget is expected to increase further.

                  Figure 12 Central Government Expenditures on Social Assistance




     Source: MoF and Bappenas
a. PKH Budget

108.      PKH budget has seen significant increase in recent years, from IDR 1.9 trillion in 2012 to IDR
8.7 trillion in 2016. Except in the first year of its inception, MoSA has been quite successful in executing
its PKH program budget, including when program coverage was expanded. In mid-2016 the Government
had to make a rather drastic budget cut across the board after the overly optimistic revenue growth did not
materialize. As a result, PKH’s revised budget was reduced by 13% in comparison to the initially approved



                                                                                                           36
budget. Its 2017 budget is increased by 59% relative to its revised budget and by 36% relative to its initial
budget in 2016, respectively. The increase mainly reflects its expanded coverage.

                             Figure 13. PKH Budget Execution (2007-2016)
         6,000,000
                                            Target Peserta PKH
         5,000,000                          Realisasi Peserta PKH
         4,000,000

         3,000,000

         2,000,000

         1,000,000

                  -
                       2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
        Source: Bappenas

109.      The administrative cost of PKH is relatively high, when compared to large CCT programs in
other countries, mainly due to its extensive program-specific facilitation process. Out of the 2016 initial
budget, 13% of the total PKH budget was required to implement the program. While the ratio is already
reduced from the previous years – 14% in 2009 with no expansion and 17% in 2010 with expansion – it is
supposed to fall further to 11% of the 2017 planned budget. Within the administrative cost, the top three
biggest elements are compensation for labor inputs by tens of thousands of field level staff (facilitators,
district operators and coordinators), fee to PT Pos for payment services (14%), and training cost for 19,000
facilitators to carry out FDS (10%). Moving forward, the fee to PT Pos is expected to be greatly reduced
due to transitioning to bank account centered cashless payment methods. Also the training on FDS is not
expected to be repeated. Furthermore, MoSA will continue to streamline PKH’s business processes and
further automate data entry, transmission, and information generation related tasks that are currently manual,
the program efficiency is expected to be gradually improved.

                                    Table 9 PKH Budget, 2015-2017
 PKH Budget (IDR 2015                 2015       2016         2016                2016          2017
 billion)             Planned         Realised   Planned      Revised             Realised      Planned
 Total                  6,385           6,266      9,998        8,683               8,964        12,748
  Benefit Transfer      5,580           5,580      8,708        7,621               7,965        11,340
    as % of Total       87%              89%       87%          88%                 89%           88%
  Administration Cost    805             686       1,290        1,011                999          1,408
    as % of Total       13%              11%       13%          12%                 11%           12%
 Source: MoSA DIPA (2016, 2017) and MoF Financial Note

             Table 10 Share of PKH Administration Cost by Main Categories, 2016-2017
        Administration Cost by Activity Type             2016 Realized     2017 Planned
        Compensation for contracted staff                    66%               64%
        Fee for payment services (PT Pos)                    15%               14%
        Training cost on FDS                                  0%               10%



                                                                                                          37
       Field implementation (IT, basic trainings for field
                                                                    19%                 12%
       staff, M&E, socialization, HRM, etc.)
       Source: MoSA DIPA (2016,2017)

b. Budgeting Process

110.    The budget preparation is based on two Laws – Number 17 of 2003 on the State Finances and
Number 1 of 2004 on the State Treasury. Indonesia follows a unified budgeting system that recognizes
no distinction between routine and development budgets. The single budget document, known as DIPA,
is produced for Echelon 1 officials (highest ranked civil servants, such as Directorate Generals) and for
each spending units (e.g. Directorates) in line ministries. A number of regulations have been issued since
to support the implementation of the two Laws on budget preparation, execution, and revision.

                                  Table 11 Government Budget Cycle

 Budget Activities and Agencies Responsible                                                   Time line
 Line Ministry/Agency reviews activity list prepared by its spending units and makes          January –
 adjustments                                                                                  February
 Line Ministry/Agency prepares annual work plan (Renja) for next fiscal year based on its     March –
 strategic plans (Rentra)                                                                     April
 MoF and Bappenas jointly issue program priorities for each Echelon 1 official, including     March –
 priority targets and an indicative budget; Line Ministry/Agency revise its Renja             April
 incorporating the specified program priorities.
 Bappenas prepares the government’s annual work plan (BKP) based on Renjas and                May – June
 presents it to the Parliament (DPR); Line Ministry/Agency has consultation sessions with
 the relevant commission counterparts in the DPR and introduce new activities if needed;
 An interim overall budget and budget ceilings are agreed upon.
 Line Ministry/Agency prepares a budget work plan (RKA-K/L) based on the budget               July –
 ceilings and submit to MoF. The Directorate General of the Budget of MoF, along with         September
 Bappenas review RKA-K/L to ensure its consistency with the prescribed priority
 programs and activities and appropriateness of detailed budget allocation.
 MoF prepares the Consolidated budget work plan and final budget ceilings (by unit,           October
 expenditure type, function, program, and activity) and submit to a full session of DPR for
 approval to become the Annual Budget Law (APBN)
 MoF issues definitive budget ceilings; Line Ministry/Agency accordingly prepares its         November
 definitive budget work plan and discuss with the Directorate General of the Budget of
 MoF
 Line Ministry/Agency prepares the budget authorization documents (DIPA) based on a           December
 Presidential Decree issued following APBN; Once DIPA is approved by MoF,
 Line/Ministry/Agency prepares internal operational guidelines (POK) for each working
 unit

111.    In July and August each year, the Government and DPR discuss the necessary changes to
APBN of current year in response to the adjustments needed to be made to the macroeconomic
framework. The revised national budget (APBN-P) may require line ministries to revise their work plan.
Examples include budget cuts, top-ups, and re-allocation. Individual revisions may be made throughout the
year, though the deadline date for revision may change. Either MoF or line ministries can initiate budget
revisions, but the process between the initial proposal and the approved revised budget may take as long as
12 weeks.



                                                                                                          38
IV. Description and Assessment of Program Results Framework and M&E

112.    PKH has two mechanisms to monitor and evaluate the program. (i) Routine monitoring activity
under PKH uses several types of data collection forms including the following, among others: family data
update form, student attendance verification form, health verification form, PKH beneficiary complaint
form, and non-beneficiary complaint form. This collected data becomes the input for the PKH MIS and is
carried out by field workers. Data analysis is conducted by JSK/national UPPKH and seeks to answer the
following questions:

     (1) Has the validation process been implemented to ensure that PKH helps the right persons?
     (2) Have PKH beneficiaries fulfilled their responsibilities?
     (3) Have PKH beneficiaries received benefits in accordance with the rules?
     (4) Have PKH beneficiaries’ data been updated to ensure that all components and responsibilities are
         correctly accounted?
     (5) Have PKH beneficiaries in the designated areas attended FDS?

The data so collected is used to establish a set of performance indicators, which span across input,
process and output aspects and the comparisons between the target values and actual achievements
measuring the program implementation progress. The data are regularly collected (monthly, quarterly,
and yearly) and reported hierarchically upwards. (ii) The second mechanism is evaluation, which is
selectively carried out to identify causes of either success or failure in achieving results and to provide
lessons and options, often specific to certain business processes. The 2015 PKH M&E, for example, focused
exclusively on assessing three activities: verification of commitments, cash transfer distribution and data
updating. Also, it is unclear how useful such an exercise is, in large part due to study design including
sampling (purposive sampling method41 with a sample size of maximum 15 poor beneficiary households
per selected location). The goal is to carry out such evaluations (previously done by TNP2K) annually,
although it was not done in 2016.

113.   Thus, in PKH’s context M&E mainly covers its business process, but do not to assess impacts
or outcomes. Evaluation of these other dimensions would also be required at regular intervals. The
program guidelines envisage other forms of M&E, including monitoring by community and local
government, but these are yet to be operationalized.

114.     Although some program monitoring data is produced upon request, more regular
standardized reporting needs to take place for the PKH management and be made available to other
stakeholders and eventually to the public. While JSK has a dedicated M&E Wing, the new organizational
design does not clearly specify which unit would be responsible for M&E. However, the assignment of
some of the contracted “experts” who used to handle M&E in the old UPPKH to the Subdit 3 (Beneficiaries)
in late 2016, appears to reflect JSK’s de facto decision in this regard. In the immediate run, it would be
beneficial to formalize this arrangement so as to clarify roles, responsibilities and accountability for this
crucial function. However, assigning the M&E role to the same unit that is involved in key aspects of
program implementation runs counter to a good practice worldwide, which has been to elevate the
hierarchical status of these functions and keep them independent of implementation. JSK may want to
revisit this arrangement over the medium term as a necessary part of reviewing its organizational
arrangement based on actual experience on the ground.



41
  The criteria for selecting districts differed with the objective. In the case of verification of commitments, districts/cities selected were a mix of
those with a high level of verification (above 95%) and a low level (under 3.5%). To evaluate cash transfer distribution, districts/cities selected
were those with high levels of “dormant accounts”. And finally evaluation of data updating was carried out in districts/cities with unchanged data
over time on household members and change of address as well as continually changing data on beneficiary caretakers. (PKH M&E Report 2015)

                                                                                                                                                   39
115.     The Results Framework will be monitored using PKH program’s own M&E capacity. In
particular, the PMIS will be an important instrument to assess quantitative indicators at the level of the
families receiving the program such as compliance to conditionality, receipt of transfer, complementarity
of PKH with other social assistance programs. The indicators on FDS implementation, complete training
of facilitators and the roll out of the GRS are best to be tracked also by the M&E team supported by three
regional coordinators and 514 district coordinators. The remaining indicators which are measured via
outputs or deliverables (completion of a communication strategy and HR competency and performance
monitoring system implemented) are to be monitored by JSK and other stakeholders jointly.

V. Error, Fraud, and Corruption

116.    As PKH channels a large amount of public resources to eligible poor families, error, fraud,
and corruption (EFC) would not only reduce the economic efficiency of the program by decreasing
the amount of money that goes to the intended beneficiaries, but more importantly erode political
and public support for the program. Like most CCT program, PKH faces particular implementation
challenges from a governance and anti-corruption perspective, because it is large in scope, with 6 million
beneficiaries and a high volume of financial transactions. It is politically high-profile and engages multiple
government actors at the national and sub-national levels. And by targeting the poorest of the poor, project
locations are often in remote and inaccessible areas, exacerbating implementation challenges and increasing
risk.

117.    While PKH does not have an explicit strategy, the program contains some features that could
be consolidated into a clear and practical EFC strategy. Availability of data from PMIS, spot checks,
and a SPM likely have already reduced the potential for EFC. A strong EFC strategy built on various
existing mechanisms can be institutionalized within the M&E framework. As detailed below, the potential
major vulnerabilities of PKH are a mixture of technical, governance, and political risks, and can be
addressed with potential mitigation measures:

       Interference or errors in the process of targeting and registering beneficiaries: Unintentional
        survey or enumeration errors could exclude eligible beneficiaries. Beneficiaries could provide false
        information to bias eligibility decisions. Politicians or government officials could register
        supporters or exclude opponents for political purposes. Updating the status of beneficiaries is also
        another area of potential fraud or corruption. When beneficiaries move to non-Program areas, an
        eligible recipient passes away or other status changes occur, there are few incentives for
        beneficiaries to report such changes in circumstances.

       Interference or errors in the process of monitoring compliance with program conditions:
        Compliance monitoring is a complex process, demanding significant capacity to collect and
        manage data. Failure to effectively manage this data can either delay payment or effectively create
        an unconditional cash transfer program, which would not only undermine project outcomes but be
        politically untenable in the Philippines context. Compliance monitoring must be made as simple
        as possible.

       Interference or errors in the payment process: PKH has two main exposures on fraud and
        corruption payment risks, especially at the lowest level. The first risk is illegal deduction of the
        payment from the Post payment officer. Beside internal control procedures in the PT Pos Indonesia,
        PKH has set up complain handling mechanism that recipients can report and submit any issue on
        the payment process. The PT Pos Indonesia includes regular staff rotation and supervision to the
        post payment unit into PT Pos Indonesia internal control procedures.



                                                                                                           40
      Political risks: Political abuse of power could take several forms: (i) politicians or officials seeking
       to expand the program into new areas without following poverty criteria; (ii) registration of
       supporters or exclusion of opponents from PKH’s beneficiary list; or (iii) local officials imposing
       additional conditions or “taxes” on beneficiaries.

118.    Some degree of fraud, error and corruption is inevitable. However, many of the possible risks
can be prevented, and are related to the strengthening of the implementation system that MoSA is
undertaking and this proposed Program is supporting through the activities and DLIs in Results Area 1:

      Objective targeting system: The main preventive strategy in CCTs is the establishment of an
       objective, scientific, poverty-based mechanism to select geographic areas and individual household
       beneficiaries. As mentioned before, in Indonesia, PKH uses a proxy-means test (PMT) to identify
       individual households based on the UDB that it is regularly updated.

      Improved oversight and monitoring: Aside from the regular Program audits mentioned before,
       preventive measures can be underpinned by a strong monitoring framework. While the PforR will
       support the revamp of the PMIS and the GRS, a recommendation is for the program to undertake
       regular spot checks. To be executed by an independent third party organization (NGO, university
       or private firm), the spot check methodology combines quantitative and qualitative assessments to
       assess the integrity of targeting, compliance monitoring and payment systems. In addition to
       generating valuable monitoring data, the threat of a spot check also acts as an incentive for officials
       to follow Program guidelines. In addition to its own GRS, PKH beneficiaries should be made better
       aware of additional complaint handling mechanisms operating in Indonesia, such as the
       Ombudsman, on-line community complaints (LAPOR), and the anti-corruption commission
       (KPK).

      Move to more secure and efficient payments: The recent move towards delivering payments
       through cash cards can help mitigate most of the concerns regarding payment disbursements to the
       correct beneficiaries and improve liquidation process, and mitigate the risk of facilitators “taxing”
       beneficiaries.

      Sanctions and remedies: The final element is a set of sanctions and remedies that back-stops the
       preventive and corrective measures detailed above. Program staff or officials are subject to
       prosecution if evidence exists of corruption. Protocols are articulated in the Program Operational
       Guidelines as to the process for addressing such cases, though need to be strengthened. Related to
       political risks, many other CCTs have frozen new registrations three months before elections to
       prevent possible perception of abuse. As a measure of last recourse, in cases of widespread or
       systemic abuse of power, entire Municipalities can be excluded from the project or the transfer of
       funds suspended or terminated.


V. Program Economic Evaluation

a. Rationale for Public Provision and Financing

119.    PKH is one of the key programs comprising Indonesia’s social safety net and warrants
sustained government intervention for several reasons. A comprehensive social safety net is an
important prerequisite for sustained and inclusive economic growth. Generally, it reduces poverty by
providing direct income support, through cash transfer such as PKH and PIP, and protects the poor and
vulnerable against economic shocks by fostering their access to social insurance through JKN-PBI (fee

                                                                                                            41
waiver to access Indonesia’s public health insurance scheme) . It also leads to increasing overall
employment and employability of poor and vulnerable households by providing skills training and so
promoting access to the labor market. Direct transfers to poor and vulnerable households through programs
such as PKH and PIP in particular, can make government-driven policy reform more palatable, thereby
encouraging robust economic growth.

120.    PKH directly encourages positive change in health and education behaviors of poor families
by tying cash disbursement to the fulfillment of conditionality. PKH can thus assist poor and vulnerable
households as they mitigate risks to their welfare by encouraging larger or more consistent investments in
family members’ human and financial capital as well as reducing reliance on negative coping behaviors
which can sacrifice those productive investments in the future for the sake of higher consumption now. This
helps households absorb and mitigate negative shocks flexibly so that welfare losses are less severe and do
not compound. Furthermore, the provision of cash transfers itself, have been proven to result in significant
micro economic effects at the individual level in the short to medium term, while also leading to longer
term human development outcomes. The microeconomic effects of PKH, proven in the two rounds of
impact evaluations, and the relatively higher efficiency in reducing poverty and inequality versus the other
main social assistance programs, shown in recent Bank publications detailed below, justify the programs
expansion in coverage, adequacy and complementarity with other social protection programs in Indonesia.

b. Program’s Economic Impact

121.     Evidence has shown that PKH has led to significant effects on household consumption,
reduced child labor, school enrollment and health behaviors. In Indonesia, both a mid-line and end-line
impact evaluation have been conducted; the former re-visited families after approximately three years of
experience with the program, while the latter re-visited families after more than six years of experience.
Results from these evaluations, indicate that the PKH program was directly responsible for greater
investments in education and health, while providing consumption budget support. The midline evaluation
demonstrated that PKH was responsible for statistically significant increases in pre-natal care. The
likelihood of attending at least four prenatal visits increased by 9 percentage points while newborn delivery
at a facility or attended by a professional increased by 5 percentage points. Post-natal care improved by
almost 10 percentage points while, immunizations, and growth monitoring check-ups increased by 3
percentage points and 22 percentage points respectively. Significant impacts were registered in the
likelihood of children receiving immunization (PKH households saw an increase of 7 percentage points),
while severe stunting (height for age) decreased 3 percentage points. PKH improved neonatal visits by 7.1
percentage points but it had no significant impact on outpatient visits or increased intake of iron tablets. In
terms of education, according to end-line results there were statistically significant increases of 2 percentage
points in the gross participation rate for elementary school and almost 10 percentage point increase in the
junior high school gross participation rate. The probability that a PKH child continuing to secondary school
increased by 8.8 percentage point but there was no significant impact on decreased child labor attributable
to PKH. 42

122.   At the macro level, the provision of cash transfers supports the costs of access to health and
education services, while also decreasing the poverty rate. Increased consumption leads to lower rates
of poverty while the steady provision of cash also reduces income uncertainty and so helps to protect
the beneficiaries against economic and social shocks. Concretely, the mid-line evaluation demonstrated
that PKH households experienced a statistically significant 10 percent increase in average monthly
expenditures. The increase was used mainly to buy high-protein foods and to cover health costs. The end-

42
  See World Bank (2011), “Program Keluarga Harapan: Main Findings from the Impact Evaluation of Indonesia’s Pilot Household Con ditional
Cash Transfer Program’, and TNP2K (2015), “Evalu ation Longer-Term Impact of Indonesia’s CCT Program: Evidence from a Randomized Control
Trial.” Final publication forthcoming.

                                                                                                                                    42
line evaluation showed that beneficiary expenditure increased by 3.3 percentage points while beneficiary
households’ expenditure on food was 3.4 percentage points higher than non-beneficiary households. For
protein consumption, the impact was considerably lower, at 1 percentage point.

c. World Bank’s Value-Added

123.     By supporting the implementation of the CCT, the Program is expected to benefit
approximately 6 million poor Indonesian families who will be receiving non-reimbursable contributions
aiming to increase household consumption and human capital investments and to increase beneficiaries’
health, education, and productivity.

124.     The World Bank is well placed to advise MoSA as it supports CCT programs in over 40
countries, and in 22 with lending operations, including in Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, Kenya, and the
Philippines. The World Bank in Indonesia has been supporting MoSA since 2010 when it supported among
others the development of the first generation information system. Since then, the bank has also developed
most of the FDS modules and advised in their implementation and operation design, including monitoring
and evaluation of its implementation as it was piloted in 2015. More recently, in response to the requests
from MoSA, the Bank team has been providing technical inputs across all of the programs operation. The
Bank team is made up of key international experts on CCT implementation from the Social Protection and
Labor GP and also includes experts from several other key GPs to provide advice on aspects of payments,
targeting, human resource development and the institutional set up.

d. Results of Economic Evaluation

125.    By providing cash to poor households, PKH contributes significantly to poverty reduction.
The observed reduction in the poverty headcount of about 0.3 percentage points in early 2016 has in part
(almost 30 percent) been attributed to expansion of PKH from 2.8 to 3.5 million households.43 In addition,
simulations of the expansion of PKH from 3.5 to 6 million households using the latest available Susenas
data (2014 September) predict a reduction in the poverty head count of about 0.8 percentage points, ceteris
paribus. Inequality was also simulated to fall slightly by 0.25 Gini points.44

126.     Moreover, recently completed World Bank fiscal incidence analysis based on 2012 survey and
expenditure data further support the claim that PKH is an effective tool to reduce poverty and
inequality in the short term. The analysis shows that PKH has the highest effectiveness in reducing
inequality and poverty of all main social assistance programs as well as compared to subsidies and in-kind
transfers on health and education.45 Yet, to date PKH has received lower budget than other, less effective,
programs; for instance Rastra, is expected to cost IDR 22.5 trillion in 2016, while PKH is expected to cost
IDR 9 trillion.46 In addition, based on the socio economic household survey, PKH has consistently revealed
high and improving targeting accuracy; in 2014, the poorest 10 percent of households received over one
third of the benefits available; the bottom 20 percent received over half of the benefits available; and the
bottom 30 percent received over two-thirds of the benefits available while exclusion errors are also the
lowest among the main social assistance programs. This puts PKH on par with similar programs such as
Brazils’ Bolsa Familia and Philippines’ Pantawid Pamilya which had CCT benefits accruing to 57 and 52
percent of the poorest 20% of households, respectively.47 While the poverty headcount rate fell by about
2 percentage points between 2010 and 2014, the share of PKH benefits accounted for by the poor group

43
   Indonesia Economic Quarterly October 2016. Pressures Easing. World Bank Indonesia.
44
   Susenas 2014 data & World bank staff calculations & internal documentation. World Bank Indonesia.
45
   Jellema, Wai-Poi and Afkar (2015) The Distributional Impact of Fiscal Policy in Indonesia and Ministry of Finance and World Bank (2015)
Taxes and Public Spending in Indonesia: Who pays and who benefits.
46
   MoF Financial Note 2016.
47
   World Bank Aspire Database 2016.

                                                                                                                                             43
increased by approximately 8 percentage points.48 This trajectory indicates that as the micro-level poverty
situation changes – many households exit poverty year to year, while fewer enter – PKH has continued to
add significant numbers of the poor households that remain.


VI. Technical Risk Rating

127.     The technical design related risk is Substantial. The Program supports an expansion of the CCT
that includes new geographic areas, including remote and hard to reach areas (e.g. Papua region) and
expansion to new components (elderly and disabled), at a time when its delivery systems (technological,
human resources, institutional) are in need of strengthening. The risk is mitigated by the fact that several
ongoing experiences in the country, as well as abroad, will provide lessons for the design.

128.    The implementation capacity risk is Substantial. MoSA has been implementing social assistance
interventions for a long time. However, PKH has been implemented by a program implementation unit
largely staffed by consultants and attached to one sub-directorate within MoSA. The current MoSA
leadership has begun to mainstream and transfer the responsibilities of PKH implementation to regular civil
servants of a whole directorate. This is a welcome change that, if successful and sustained, would enhance
sustainability of efficient PKH implementation over time. However, changes in institutional leadership may
jeopardize these efforts. The new design package within PKH which would increase implementation
workload, could also pose implementation risks by further overwhelming MoSA’s implementation capacity.
These risks will be mitigated by ensuring that staff are appropriately trained, IT support strengthened, GRS
and M&E systems are strengthened, and linkages with experienced partners in this area (other government
agencies and international development partners as well as local governments) fostered.




48
     Susenas 2014.

                                                                                                         44
