Agastya: Improving Critical
Thinking and Leadership Skills
		
This non-profit brings innovative science education
to the doorsteps of students in rural India to increase
the quality and impact of learning




                                                          1
    © Copyright April 2017
    The World Bank
    1818 H Street, NW
    Washington, D.C. 20433
    All rights reserved


    Acknowledgements
    This case study was prepared by Elaine Tinsley and Cristina Navarrete
    Moreno from the World Bank’s Social Enterprise Innovations team,
    with support from NRMC India, a management consulting firm in New
    Delhi, India.

    Special thanks to the Agastya team, Ravi Shankar, Vineetha Pai, and
    led by Ajith Basu.

    Sharon Fisher provided design and additional editing support.

    Contact Information
    Social Enterprise Innovations
    Leadership, Learning and Innovation at the World Bank Group
    Contact: Cristina Navarrete Moreno
    www.worldbank.org

    Agastya International Foundation
    Contact: Ajith Basu
    Web: www.agastya.org
    Facebook: www.facebook.com/Agastya.Foundation
    Twitter: @AgastyaSparks




2
Agastya: Improving Critical
Thinking and Leadership Skills


Contents
       ................................................................................................................................ 5
Summary.
Challenge............................................................................................................................... 6
          .............................................................................................................................. 8
Innovation.
Implementation................................................................................................................... 11
Impact................................................................................................................................... 16
Sustainability and Scale-Up................................................................................................ 18
Lessons Learned.................................................................................................................. 19


Appendices
             ..........................................................................................................................20
I. References.
II. Case Study Research.........................................................................................................20
III. Agastya Organizational Structure...................................................................................21
                                           ...................................................................22
IV. Geographic Spread of Agastya’s Programs.
V. Expenditures for Flagship Delivery Channels ................................................................23




                                                                                                                                               3
4
Summary
Many of India’s disadvantaged youth are apathetic about their education from the formal
schooling system, resulting in high dropout rates. A low percentage of children who graduate
from schools enter college, and those who do often do not understand core concepts in many
subjects. Moreover, a majority of the 15 million youth who enter the workforce every year in
India lack employable skills and thus decrease overall productivity.
    Lack of interest and perceived value of education often cause low retention and dismal
learning outcomes, which can perpetuate poverty and contribute to the socio-economic
divide. Developing students’ problem-solving, analytical and creative thinking skills through
dynamic education could motivate and empower them.
    In India, however, creative learning is a privilege of the rich few. To remedy this situation,
Agastya operates a hands-on science education program, equipping disadvantaged students
of government schools in rural areas with tools and learning that foster confidence, creativity,
teamwork and leadership. Their model is embedded in the existing formal education system;
it has based its products on the government syllabi to remain relevant and complement the
school curricula. Agastya involves all critical stakeholders in education—children, teachers,
parents, community and government.
    Agastya’s learning methods take the form of activity—project and demo-based learning,
peer-to-peer learning and learning from nature. Agastya uses a variety of delivery channels:
science centers serve as a hub for activities in a region, teacher trainings, science fairs and
summer camps; mobile science labs and lab-in-a-box programs deliver education to students’
doorsteps and classrooms; government schoolteachers receive training in creative learning
methods; and selected students obtain additional education on scientific concepts to become
peer instructors.
    To date, Agastya reports an outreach of more than eight million children and 200,000
teachers in 18 states across India. Independent third-party assessments show positive changes
in students’ attitudes toward science, increased concept retention and development, and
improvement in overall performance under the model. Agastya aims to reach 20 million
children and one million teachers by 2020.
    Agastya’s top-down approach has helped break systemic government inertia and their
high community engagement has received buy-in from rural communities. Factors to address
moving forward with regards to scale-up and sustainability include the narrow base of donors,
inadequate staffing, teacher apathy and a limited monitoring and evaluation system. As the
project moves on, it is in various stages of implementing diverse pilots geared toward ensuring
maximum reach to the bottom-of-the-pyramid population in a cost-efficient manner.




                                                                                                     5
    Challenge
    India Education Policy
    Since 2000, India has stepped up its efforts to provide basic education services to all. In
    2000–01, the government launched the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, one of the world’s largest and
    most sustained initiatives in elementary education. Encouraged by the results, the govern-
    ment launched the Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan in 2009 to universalize secondary
    education and improve its quality.
       In a significant move, the government passed the Right to Education Act in 2009, which
    made free and compulsory education a right for children 6–14 years old, and providing this
    education a moral obligation for the State. Over the years, this has led to an increase in enroll-
    ments and improvements in school infrastructure across rural India.

    Learning Methods and Outcomes
    Despite these measures, the level of learning achievement among children remains a major
    concern. ASER (Annual Status of Education Reports) maintains that learning outcomes, espe-
    cially in government schools in most states, are still poor (Figure 1).
        The Constitution of India has incorporated the pivotal idea that “diffusion of scientific
    temper” [a process of thinking that involves the scientific method and application of logic]
    among the uneducated masses was the answer to the challenge of broad-based develop-
    ment. However, the schooling system has done very little to induce creative thinking and
    problem-solving abilities among large numbers of students in government and rural schools.
    Student teacher participation in experiential learning is limited by infrastructure, teaching
    facilities and aids.
        India’s education system is traditional, with rote-based, didactic learning that is devoid of
    practical application. Government teachers are not trained in creative learning methods and
    instead measure student performance on the 3Rs of education (Reading, Writing, Arithmetic).
    Attempts have been made to instill activity-based learning concepts into the curriculum, but
    sustained initiatives for instilling creative thinking and leadership skills in education are not
    uniformly and routinely followed.
        Since creative learning is an expensive proposition, only a small number of students in elite
    urban schools are presently able to benefit from it. Some private schools employ creative,
    activity-based learning methods, but the cost is prohibitive.
        Non-state players have also primarily based their interventions on providing access to the
    3Rs. Learning outcomes are mostly measured by the students’ performance on these three
    components. Therefore, interventions revolve around delivering these parameters, resulting
    in few interventions focusing on other aspects of creative learning.

    Effect on Economy and Social Structure
    The Constitution of India envisioned that by instilling the spirit of enquiry and disseminating
    problem-solving, cause-effect, and creative thinking skills through education, poor communi-
    ties across India would rise to meet their social and economic challenges and create a pros-
    perous nation.



6
Figure 1. ASER 2013 Report on Reading Abilities of Class V Students




                                                                  INDIA Rural
                                                                Class V Reading
                                                    Statewide map showing percentage of
                                                  children in class V who can read class II text




                                                       Percentage of children in class V who
                                                               can read class II text
                                                                  0-30
                                                                 31-40
                                                                 41-50
                                                                 51-60
                                                                 61-70
                                                                 71-80




   Without access to creative learning methodologies, poor communities in India suffer from
low absorption capacity and thus have sustained low and sub-optimal development. Despite
the high overall enrollment rate for primary education among rural children of age 10, half
cannot read at a basic level, over 60 percent are unable to do division and half dropped out
by the age of 14 in 2008 (The Economist, 2008).
   Seeing little value or interest from their children in education, rural and disadvantaged
parents prefer to send their children to work. Low learning outcomes among youth can also lead
to an increase in crime. These poor learning outcomes and overall apathy toward education
can lead to a perpetuation of poverty, contributing to the socio-economic divide in India.




                                                                                                   7
    Innovation
    Agastya
    Under the leadership of Mr. Ramji Raghavan, Agastya International Foundation was established
    in 1999 as a non-profit educational trust to spark curiosity and nurture creativity and leader-
    ship among economically disadvantaged children and teachers, particularly in rural India.
    The idea of Agastya was conceived by a group of scientists, educators and executives who
    believed that instituting curiosity among children is the key to translate learning into goals.
        Agastya envisions an India of “creators, tinkerers and solution-seekers that are humane,
    anchored and connected.” It aims to propagate a creative temper among disadvantaged and
    vulnerable children and teachers, through hands-on, experiential learning; teacher education;
    and scalable, sustainable and environment-friendly methods.
        Toward this, Agastya derived inspiration from the Constitution of India’s ideas on diffusion
    of scientific temper. In addition, Agastya’s approach of experiential learning drew from the
    learning pyramid described in “How the Brain Learns,” which says that students retain five
    percent of a lecture, 10 percent of what they read, 50 percent of a discussion, 75 percent of
    what is personally experienced and 90 percent of what one teaches to others (Sousa, 2011).

    Transforming Students from Passive into Active Learners
    Agastya offers disadvantaged children in rural India access to dynamic, hands-on, science-
    based education by disseminating innovative learning tools and training government school-
    teachers in creative learning methods. By inspiring students with creative learning in a cost-
    effective way, Agastya believes their program will contribute to the productivity and prosperity
    of individuals, and in turn, country.
        The program targets disadvantaged students ages 6–18 in classes V to X in government
    schools across rural India. Parents of these students are often small marginal farmers, carpen-
    ters, stone cutters, construction workers or menial white-collar workers.
        Students entering the Agastya system go through step-wise learning methodologies to
    transform them from passive learners to leaders capable of initiating change in their immediate
    communities, leading to sustainable development (Figure 2). Since government schools have
    set syllabi that cannot be disrupted, Agastya has developed its learning tools based on the
    National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) prescribed curriculum in India.
        Learning methods take the form of the following:
        •	 Hands-on learning for the entry-level student, to emphasize observation, interaction
           with the instructor and questions;
        •	 Project-based learning to encourage deep discussions and promote critical and
           analytical thinking;
        •	 Demo-based learning to demonstrate scientific phenomena through simple models;
        •	 Peer-to-peer learning to boost confidence and improve the communication skills of
           young student leaders; and
        •	 Problem-solving-to find solutions for real-life problems that plague their villages for
           experiential learning.
        Learning is carried out through innovative service delivery channels, such as science
    centers for resource and training hubs and mobile science labs that visit village schools and

8
  Figure 2. Stages to Transform Students from Passive Learners to Leaders


                                                                    SELECTED                              Young
                                                                    STUDENTS                 Young        Instructor
                                                                                             Instructor   Leader
                                                                                             Leader       Program
                                                                           Science           Program
                                                                           Fairs
                                                                           (Demo-
                  Hands-on Learning                 Workshop Mode          based)                         Innovator
                  (Observation- and                 (Project-based)
                                                                                             Leader
                  interaction-based)
                                                                           Explorer
                                                    Keen        Tinkerer
                                      Active      Participant
                           Excited   Observer
               Passive     Learner
               Learner
ENTRY




  urban disadvantaged areas. In addition, lab-in-a-box sets are circulated among classrooms
  to conduct hands-on, follow-up programs. These delivery channels are detailed in the next
  section and an implementation map is available in Appendix IV. A Young Instructor Leader
  program recruits and educates selected students to become peer instructors and develop
  leadership and communications skills.

  Financing
  Agastya’s model uses a mix of private and public financial resources—grants are received
  from state governments, private philanthropic foundations, corporations and individuals.
  The annual budget was USD 1.67 million in FY 2011–12 and USD 1.82 million in FY 2012–13
  (Figure 3). The budget increased in the last two years to USD 3.72 million in FY 2014 and USD
  4.04 million in FY 2015.
     In 1999, the Andhra Pradesh government allotted land in the town of Kuppam to build a
  Creativity Lab. Personal financing by Mr. Ramji Raghavan and two non-resident Indians from
  London supported the operating costs. In 2000, the Oberoi Family Foundation gave a signifi-
  cant grant to Agastya. In 2003, Rakesh Jhunjhunwala Foundation started to provide funding. In
  2003–07, agreements were made with the governments of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka for


  Figure 3. Key Sources of Funding

        100
                   12.68               16.70                15.38
         80        20.58               14.41                17.85              n R.J. Foundation and Donor Funds

                                                                               n Government
         60
                                       32.49
                   37.36                                    32.51              n Corporate
         40
                                                                               n Others and Interest
         20
                   29.38               36.40                34.26
          0
                 FY 2010–11          FY 2011–12           FY 2012–13


                                                                                                                       9
                       funding. In 2006, Synopsys entered as a corporate funder. Starting in 2010, the state govern-
                       ments and Rakesh Jhunjhunwala Foundation emerged as Agastya’s key funders, contributing
                       on average 36 percent and 41 percent respectively of total funds received.
                          The grants support either capital expenses (science centers, equipment, mobile vans,
                       instruments, etc.) or operating expenses (salaries, rentals, research & development, promo-
                       tional expenses, etc.) depending on the nature of the agreement. The government of
                       Karnataka, for example, supports both capital and operational expenses for setting up an
                       integrated ecosystem model in the state.
                          See Appendix V for expenditures for flagship delivery channels. All projects costs are
                       measured and monitored on the basis of program budgets. The accounting system tracks
                       expenses on a cost accounting basis. Agastya developed a structured approval process
                       that is followed at the point of expenditure. They conduct regular monthly reviews to assess
                       variances in project expenses. Agastya reports a general and administration budget of less
                       than 10 percent with project costs supported by grants.

                       Results Chain

     Figure 4. Results Chain for Agastya Model

              Inputs                       Outputs                    Outcomes               Development Goal

      •	 Provide creative           •	 Establishment of         •	 Improved problem-        •	 Improve social
        learning methods              47 science centers,         solving and critical        and economic
        in science-based              129 mobile science          thinking skills of          outcomes for rural,
        education to fill             labs, and 89 labs-          schoolchildren              disadvantaged
        gaps in existing              in-a-box (numbers         •	 Increased motivation       children through
        government                    approximate)                of children to learn        high-quality,
        curriculum                                                and stay in school          creativity-based
                                    •	 Cadre of Young
                                                                                              education services
      •	 Implement innovative         Instructor Leaders        •	 Inspired and
        learning delivery             who can act as              confident cadre of
        channels (such as             agents of social            young leaders who
        mobile science labs,          change                      spread knowledge
        and science fairs)                                        in schools and
      •	 Select and train                                         community
        students to be peer                                     •	 Engaged community
        instructors/leaders                                       that supports student
      •	 Provide teacher                                          efforts
        trainings and
        workshops on
        creative learning
        methods




10
Implementation
Flagship Delivery Channels
Agastya employs varied channels to deliver their education services directly to their targeted
groups (Figure 5).

Figure 5. Overview of Delivery Channels

  Develop, test and                                               Creativity
  propagate new and                                                  Lab




                                              Science             HUBS                  Science
                                              Center 1                                  Center 1



 Disseminate to rural                       SPOKES                                  SPOKES Mobile
                                   Mobile                Mobile                Mobile
 students, teachers
                                   Van 1                 Van 1                 Van 1               Van 1



  Scale up through                Lab-in-a-           Lab-in-a-            Lab-in-a-           Lab-in-a-
  teacher engagement                box                 box                  box                 box



Creativity Lab, in Andhra Pradesh (HUB)
In 2000, Agastya set up a Creativity Lab in Kuppam, a town in Andhra Pradesh. The Creativity
Lab, a research and development center for Agastya, is an “idea factory” dedicated to devel-
oping content and tools for experiential learning. The lab also serves as a platform to train
Agastya instructors and impart training to government schoolteachers. Since 2010, it has
evolved into an ecology lab where nature-based experiments are conducted on campus.
Agastya disseminates the learning through its outreach channels.

Science Centers (HUB)
Agastya believed government schoolteachers and children should visit fixed resource centers
more often since they can facilitate deeper inquiry and learning. They house many more experi-
ments than the mobile science labs. As such, in 2006, with support from USAID for a project in
North Karnataka, Agastya expanded its dissemination with fixed science centers as the hubs
of activities in a particular region, with centers supported by mobile science labs and the lab-
in-a-box program as the spokes.




                                                                                                           11
        Science centers house special training activities, science fairs, summer camps and Young
     Instructor Leader programs. The centers accommodate multiple experiments in science, math,
     ecology and astronomy. Agastya has set up 46 science centers in various districts across India,
     as well as core science activity centers to provide many features and benefits of its Creativity
     Campus. They also serve as a resource center for the science centers in a region.

     Mobile Science Labs (SPOKE)	
     Agastya realized that by only getting students to the Creativity Lab, knowledge dissemination
     would happen at a much slower and limited pace than if the learning was brought directly
     to the students. To make hands-on education more accessible and disseminate the content
     created in the Creativity Lab, Agastya started mobile science labs in 2002. Traveling in brightly
     decorated vans, they reached out to government schools and children in remote locations.
         The mobile science lab is equipped with audio-visual aids and experiments. Each van
     travels to the doorstep of remote schools with more than 200 hands-on science models. The
     models cover a wide range of topics in physics, chemistry, biology and math for children in
     classes V through X. The vans also provide teacher training, and community night visits that
     allow parents, family, and community members to participate in learning sessions as well. To
     date, Agastya operates 127 mobile science labs.

     Lab-in-a-Box (SPOKE)
     Rural students and teachers exposed to Agastya’s science models—through mobile science
     labs or visits to science centers—wanted these models to be available for a fixed time period
     (rotational basis) in their schools to intensify experiential learning. In 2011, Agastya introduced
     the lab-in-a-box program to facilitate hands-on learning in the school over a period beyond
     the visit of the mobile science labs visit.
         They organized science models and experiments based on pre-designed learning modules
     and mapped it to the school syllabus by placing them in boxes left with the teacher for approxi-
     mately one week. Agastya follows a rotation scheme of distribution, whereby the 10 boxes in
     one set are available to 10 schools for one week in a three-month period. Currently 89 boxes
     are in circulation.

     Additional Outreach Methods
     Among children, Agastya’s science fairs are fairly popular. To reach the maximum number of
     children, Agastya convened “mega” science fairs that attracted thousands of participants
     since the first fair took place in Hubli in 2008. Other delivery vehicles are being piloted to
     assess their feasibility and effectiveness, which include lab-on-a-bike(with the lab fitted to a
     bike) and Techla bike (with a trained instructor who has a lab-in-a-box and a laptop). Agastya is
     also piloting an iMobile program on integrated learning through a digital science curriculum.

     Scaling Up the Integrated Approach
     Agastya promotes an integrated approach that combines various delivery channels. Agastya’s
     delivery model is modular and can be scaled to adapt to available levels of funding. For
     maximum and effective dissemination in a nationwide scale-up, Agastya recommends one
     Creativity Lab per state plus one science activity center, six science centers, 10 mobile science
     labs per district, one lab-in-a-box and one lab-on-a-bike. Figure 6 details the recommended
     ecosystem.




12
Figure 6. Recommended Nationwide Scale-up: Ecosystem Approach

                                      Creativity Labs

                                                                20
                     STATE                                      (1 per State)

                                      Science Activity
                                          Centers

                 DISTRICT                                       600
                                                                (1 per District)

                                     Science Centers

    TALUK (Sub-district)                                       3,600
                                                               (6 per District)

                                       Mobile Labs

                                                               6,000
                                                               (10 per District)


                          Lab-in-a-box           Lab-on-a-bike



Young Instructor Leader Program
Agastya believes concepts and information are better absorbed through peer instructors
without the fear of being reproached, thus eliminating the barriers that can exist between an
adult instructor and a student. In 2007, Agastya selected a group of students with the help of
teachers and provided special training on science models in addition to building their capacity
and skills in presentation and communication. The students explained scientific concepts to
other children at science fairs.
    In 2010, the program evolved into the Young Instructor Leader (YIL) program to encompass
experiential learning opportunities that go beyond science education and focus on the holistic
development of students. YILs are identified among children who show potential for leadership
and a willingness to engage in teaching other children and in conducting innovative community
projects with potential benefits to society (such as nature conservation, water issues, etc.). Each
YIL is tasked with training five young instructors for the Agastya mega science fairs.
    Agastya recruits students from classes VI–VIII to be YILs either from Agastya science centers/
labs or by approaching schools for help. On average, 10–15 percent of students are recruited
for the program. Once recruited, the students, teachers and parents receive an orientation.
Agastya organizes special training and opportunities for selected students, and they remain
in the program until class X. In addition to more exposure to experiential learning
in science, math, ecology and art, students study, for example, flora and fauna, nutrition and
health, computers and robotics, conversational English, broadcasting, story writing and local
industries.

Teacher Education and Volunteer Corps
Government schoolteachers receive training in creative learning methods through regular
workshops held at the science centers, attend education refreshers through the mobile science
labs, and remain engaged with labs-in-a-box. There is usually a group of 30 teachers for a

                                                                                                      13
     minimum two-day workshop. In addition, Agastya has also designed and currently executes
     four-day, experiential, hands-on science and math training sessions based on the construc-
     tivism theory for government schoolteachers of India. This program is gaining momentum.
         Currently, Agastya’s volunteer program has approximately 280 participants, and consists of:
         •	 Core resource volunteering scientists, educators, entrepreneurs, CEOs, retired
            government officials and the former President of India, Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam;
         •	 Program volunteers comprising corporate employees and individuals providing
            technical and other support; and
         •	 Student volunteers in various programs, such as when engineering students mentor
            schoolchildren.
         Training and capacity building is an important building block for Agastya programs to ensure
     the highest quality content. They created a dedicated team to ensure the training needs of
     employees are identified and appropriate re-skilling is provided. In 2012, Agastya launched
     the Instructor Master Trainer (IMT) program for continuous capacity enhancements for instruc-
     tors engaged in delivery of various programs. The program provides a forum for cross learning
     through interactive workshops. It is also a platform where persons from the corporate sector
     who have practical knowledge in science and teaching can engage with the instructors.

     Partnerships
     With financial and technical support from partners and stakeholders, Agastya has implemented
     its program across 16 states in India.

     Government
     State governments are significant partners for Agastya since its programs are run in govern-
     ment schools. This helps provide access to rural schoolchildren for easier implementation of
     Agastya programs. The government is also a source of financial support.
         For example, through funding support from the government of Karnataka, lab-in-a-box
     was piloted in 150 schools in North Karnataka covering more than 200,000 students. Based
     on feedback received from the schools, the government requested a scale-up in four districts,
     followed by a further scale-up across the state. In 2013, the government of Karnataka adopted
     Agastya’s proposal of implementing an ecosystem-based model to ensure reach and efficiency
     across government schools. In addition, the government of Punjab has provided grants to
     deploy 22 mobile labs in the state and is working with the government of Haryana.
         Going forward, Agastya hopes the central government will recognize Agastya’s programs
     and include them in its national education framework. This will help take Agastya’s programs
     to a wider, national scale and benefit a larger number of disadvantaged children.

     Financial Supporters
     Most of Agastya’s programs are run through financial grants and investments made by indi-
     viduals and corporate foundations, who become significant partners in the implementation of
     Agastya’s programs. Agastya also receives funding from individuals and corporate foundations.

     Community
     Agastya undertakes community engagement initiatives to reach out to parents and community
     members, whose acceptance provides Agastya with a license to operate and enables children
     to connect with the programs. For example, mobile science labs make nightly community
     visits that allow the child’s parents, family and community members to participate in learning
     sessions and witness the programs themselves. Traveling mega science fairs allow the commu-
     nities to become more engaged and supportive of students’ presentations.




14
Knowledge Experts
Agastya’s trustees and advisers include educators, teachers, scientists, CEOs, bankers, entre-
preneurs and philanthropists with significant knowledge and experience in science-based
education, as well as leading and managing Indian and global organizations. This brings
academic and technical proficiency into the program as well as helps with networking and
lobbying. Leading academic institutions (such as Azim Premji Foundation, London Business
School) and scientific institutions (such as Defence Research Development Organisation)
provide curriculum and pedagogical inputs.
    Agastya also works with other civil society organizations to reach the rural student popu-
lation through these organizations’ existing programs. The partnerships are presently at a
nascent stage. Examples include the Akshara Foundation (for a library program), IIMPACT
and SELCO Foundation (for ecology programs), and Deshpande Foundation and Nalandaway
Foundation (for YIL programs).




                                                                                                 15
                Impact
                Agastya’s model delivers creativity-based education services to a large number of disadvan-
                taged and at-risk children and teachers through innovative service delivery channels. To date,
                they have reached more than 8 million children and 200,000 teachers in 18 states across India.

                Motivated and Empowered Students
                The YIL program launched with three students and has grown to more than 6,000 active YILs. In
                the 2011–12 academic year, 85 percent of YIL alumni were inspired to choose science courses.
                The same year, two female leaders were selected to be part of the INTEL-IRIS science fair, for
                their project on growing oxygen on highways.
                   According to a Ministry of Human Resource Development study conducted on 2,048 children
                from 256 schools, over 70 percent of students and teachers welcomed Agastya and demanded
                an increase in interventions. In response, Agastya promoted student concept retention and
                development and provided professional development for teachers. According to a Best
                Practices Foundation study of 1,348 children in Karnataka, there was a significant increase in
                awareness of alternative learning methods, motivation to study science and leaps in curiosity.


                Table 1. Summary of Impact from Agastya Initiatives*
                An assessment of the Agastya business model based on an analytical framework.

                           MEASURABLE BENEFITS TO BOTTOM-OF-THE-PYRAMID USERS

     Reach/Access     •	 To date, Agastya operates 127 mobile science labs to reach more than one million students.
                      •	 Agastya has set up 46 science centers.
                      •	 Agastya reports that labs-in-a-box can generate up to 30,000 exposures per year, and that
                        these exposures are more intense and immersive in nature for interested students and
                        teachers. Currently 89 labs-in-a-box are in circulation, creating total 572,616 exposures.

     Effectiveness    •	 Agastya reports that 6,000 graduates from the YIL program have been transformed into
                        agents of social change.
                      •	 26 YILs have reached the finals of the national-level science award competition; 11 have
                        won awards for five years consecutively.
                      •	 30 YILs have received scholarships to colleges.

     Accountability   •	 Robust monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems and impact assessment studies are
                        needed. To date, the Agastya model assesses its outreach on few parameters, such as
                        number of students reached, number of teachers trained, etc. The result measurement
                        is qualitative and based on informal feedback from teachers, children, parents, and
                        communities. This year onwards Agastya is implementing an M&E tracking framework,
                        jointly developed by the Indian Institute of Management Bangalore (IIMB) and Agastya, to
                        cover areas across its operation.
                      •	 The accounting system tracks expense on a cost center approach to accounting. Agastya
                        has developed a structured approval process that is followed at the point of expenditure.
                        Regular monthly reviews are conducted to assess variances in project expenses.



16
  Cost-              •	 Agastya reports that the mobile vans do approximately 25,000 exposures per year at USD
  effectiveness         0.66/exposure (220 days per year).
  and                •	 Agastya reports that the science centers do approximately 12,000 exposures per year at
  Affordability         USD 1.25/exposure.

  Impact on          •	 Given that Agastya’s model is aimed at improving learning outcomes among students, it
  Development           needs to start measuring these and outreach numbers. The outcomes—and any trends
  Outcomes              monitored over the years—should be captured to build a strong body of evidence and
                        establish a link between its programs and national prosperity. Demonstrating these
                        outcomes will give Agastya a better chance of attracting donor and policy interest.
                     •	 As mentioned in the “Accountability” metric, this year onwards Agastya is implementing a
                        M&E tracking framework, jointly developed by IIMB and Agastya, to cover areas across its
                        operation.

  Potential for      •	 Agastya receives strong support from state governments, communities and implementing
  Sustainability        partners and stakeholders.
                     •	 Agastya is contemplating setting up a different entity to engage in commercial activities to
                        raise funds beyond a narrow funder base.
                     •	 Agastya is looking at ways to address building up high-quality, field-based staff and teacher
                        development.

  Potential for      •	 Agastya’s delivery model is modular and can be adapted to available funding levels. They
  Scalability           have recommend an ecosystem approach for nationwide scale-up.
                     •	 The government of Karnataka, in partnership with Agastya, is replicating the Creativity Lab
                        as part of its initiative to transform education.
                     •	 The governments of Bihar and Punjab have requested 100 mobile science labs (Bihar) and
                        22 mobile science labs and 22 science centers (Punjab).
                     •	 Agastya reports that the government’s Ministry of Education has requested Agastya to
                        consider scaling up its model nationwide.
* The correlation/measurement of learning outcomes or enhanced opportunities (such as jobs) has not yet been
conducted.




Student Stories
Rajeshwari Govindappa Bovi, a class VIII student, is a 13-year-old girl who wants to become
a science teacher. Her introduction to Agastya began with a science van, which made approxi-
mately 20 trips to her school. She liked the scientific models she saw and visited the Agastya
science center. Rajeshwari feels Agastya has not only helped her to improve her grasp of
science but has also developed her personality. She is more outgoing and confident and can
answer questions in class and provide explanations to her classmates.

Mayur Patil, a YIL and class VII student, built a low-cost science laboratory at his school. He
cleared a room and stocked it with models made from objects he found at school, home, and
around the neighborhood. He used the models to explain concepts to more than 60 students
at his school. Mayur’s sister and friends turn to him when they have a science-related query.

K. Revannavar, a class IX student, and five of his classmates embarked upon a project for better
hygiene in public areas. They demonstrated the preparation and uses of phenyl (a low-cost,
homemade disinfectant) at their own school, the Veer Bhadreshwar Youth Committee, Depart-
ment of Education, Doddeshwar Temple and several other public spaces in their village. They set
up a table, showed the manufacturing process, answered questions and handed out samples.




                                                                                                                        17
     Sustainability and Scale-Up
     Agastya’s model uses a combination of private and public financial resources. It aims to reach
     20 million children and one million teachers by 2020. Agastya is presently scaling up their
     program in Karnataka and Haryana and the governments of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh,
     Chhatisgarh, Punjab, Bihar and Odisha have expressed similar interests.

     Areas to consider moving forward with regard to scale and sustainability include:

     Financial Resources
     Agastya’s donor base consists of a few large donors with close to 45 percent of grants deriving
     from the Rakesh Jhunjhunwala Foundation and state governments. This narrow base of donors
     can be risky to the foundation’s financial sufficiency. Agastya faces the challenge of raising the
     desired funding to achieve its goal of reaching 20 million children by 2020. As a non-profit
     organization, regulatory and tax considerations restrict Agastya from generating revenues
     other than grants. To overcome this, Agastya is contemplating setting up a different entity
     through which it can sell its knowledge products and services to urban schools to generate
     revenues and underwrite costs.

     Human Resources
     Agastya reports that identifying and recruiting high-quality, field-based staff from local areas
     in new areas is a significant challenge. The organization estimates 4,500 additional staff will be
     needed by 2020. To overcome this, senior management is in the process of learning from large
     corporate players, such as Infosys, which recruit a high number of skilled field staff. They hope
     to establish professional systems and processes for recruiting that work for for-profit entities.

     Behavioral Challenges
     Agastya reports that despite teacher training workshops, when it comes to delivery in the
     classroom, teachers are not motivated to make learning creative. The lack of motivation is
     due to the various responsibilities placed on the teacher besides instruction. This last mile
     breakdown hampers the effectiveness of Agastya’s process for creative learning. To address
     this, Agastya is working on a “lab-on-a-tab” model, where experiments will be taught through
     a tab machine. In addition, they are developing and piloting a hands-on module to be
     delivered to schools.

     Systems and Processes
     As Agastya’s outreach expands, a significant amount of data and information will need to be
     aggregated. Setting up appropriate systems and processes for effective and efficient manage-
     ment of the project will become critical for efficient measurement, dissemination and scaling
     up of the program. Technology can be considered an option for better monitoring, compli-
     ance and review.
        Currently, Agastya is in partnership with the Indian Institute of Management to develop a
     nationwide impact assessment framework to evaluate the effectiveness of Agastya’s programs.



18
Lessons Learned
Complement Government Efforts to Maximize Reach
The government is a major provider of education, particularly in rural India. For any organi-
zation aiming to make quality learning accessible to a large number of rural children, linking
with government schools is an obvious choice. Agastya has based its products on the national
government school syllabi to remain relevant and complement the school curricula. It supports
the existing formal education system from the outside, which allows the organization the
required creative space and flexibility.

Incorporate Scale into Project Design
Business ideas can make an impact only when their original thinking includes reaching a
national-level scale, which almost always necessitates working with the government. Projects
that do not incorporate methods and processes intrinsic to working with the government are
likely to have strategies and operations that are not capable of delivering significant demon-
strable impact. Agastya incorporated this approach from inception and has been working
closely with the government.

Initiate Conversations at the Top to Break Systemic Inertia
Contrary to the general belief that working at a grassroots level yields better results, Agastya
followed a top-down approach at government, corporate and academic levels that helped it
to break systemic inertia and gain acceptance of its creative concepts. If a key decision maker
buys into the project, there is reasonable probability that those farther down the hierarchy will
follow suit. In addition, top-level executives can help facilitate contacts with other decision
makers at a parallel level in other departments and organizations for easier and faster adoption
of the initiative.

Take the Service Directly to Intended Groups for Buy-in
Agastya’s model of community science centers with mobile outreach has helped them reach
students at their doorstep, and it has engaged community members, sometimes as volun-
teers. Programs implemented in rural communities are more effective when they have buy-in
from the community as demonstrated in this model. Community members can promote the
cause and influence the opinions of people in their sphere of influence, and parents become
more involved and supportive of their children’s education.




                                                                                                    19
     APPENDIX I

     References
      	 Agastya Foundation materials available at http://www.agastya.org.
      	 “A special report on India: Creaking, groaning: Infrastructure is India’s biggest handicap”.
     The Economist. December 11, 2008.
      	 Best Practices Foundation. 2012. “Impact Assessment of the Agastya Ecosystem in Karna-
     taka-June 2012.”
      	 Constitution of India. 2014. Available at http://india.gov.in/my-government/constitution-
     india.
      	 Pratham Education Foundation. 2013. Annual Status of Education Report 2013. Available
     at http://www.asercentre.org.
      	 Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan. 2012. “An Evaluation Study of Mobile Science Labs and Science
     Centers in Karnataka State, 2012.”
      	 Sousa, David. 2011. How the Brain Learns. Sage Publications.




     APPENDIX II

     Case Study Research
     This case study was developed through an analysis of qualitative and quantitative studies,
     desk review, organizational-level data analysis and local consultations.
         The Ministry of Human Resource Development conducted their study to examine the variety
     and diversity of Agastya interventions and collect stakeholder feedback from students, teachers,
     parents, community, school management committees and government officials. The sample
     size was 2,048 children in 256 schools in 24 districts. They used desk research, focus groups,
     observations, primary data collection and interviews with government officials.
         The Best Practices Foundation conducted 39 focus group sessions with students at 33
     different schools, covering a total of 1,296 students. Other stakeholders interviewed included
     55 teachers, 5 Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan officials and 76 community members. They compared the
     responses of students who had three or less exposures to Agastya with those of non-Agastya
     exposed children (control groups) in Hubli and Bijapur for awareness and curiosity levels. They
     also studied the levels of awareness, curiosity and creativity among students across the three
     different exposure levels (less than 3, between 4 to 7 and 8 or more exposures to Agastya).
     Two characteristics—problem-solving and leadership—were measured among students in the
     4 to 7 and 8 or more exposures bracket.




20
APPENDIX III

Agastya Organizational Structure
Agastya has an active Board of Trustees and a globally experienced team of professional
managers. It also has a full-time team of 494 (as of March 2014) that includes 280 teachers and
150 volunteers. On the ground, in addition to implementation of various programs, specific
responsibilities to enhance outreach of these programs are assigned to the operations team.
This indicates the aim of the organization to reach scale. The mention of external resource




                                                                                                  21
     persons and an advisory council as a part of the organogram below indicates their importance
     within the organization.

     APPENDIX IV

     Geographic Spread of Agastya’s Programs




22
APPENDIX V

Expenditures for Flagship Delivery Channels

 Project            Physical        Capital Expenditure   Operating Expenditure
                  Requirements            (in USD)               (in USD)

 Science          1,000–3,000 sq          13,274               21,952–24,194
 Center           ft 200 science
                   experiments

 Mobile           Vehicle + 150           21,323                  23,016
 Science          experiments
 Lab

 Science         100–200 science      Not applicable           14,919–16,129
 Fairs             experiments

 Young           Not applicable       Not applicable              25,283
 Instructor
 Leader
 Program

 Lab-on-a-        Motorcycle +             4,032                   6,274
 Bike             lab-in-a-box

 TechLa Bike       Motorcycle +            5,516                   5,516
                  lab-in-a-box +
                      laptop

 Lab-in-a-        10 boxes with            2,758                   4,596
 Box              100+ science
                   experiments

 Teacher            Batch of 30       Not applicable      13 per day per teacher +
 Training          teachers for a                         transport, boarding and
                  minimum two-                                    lodging
                   day workshop
Note: 1 USD equals 62 INR




                                                                                     23
24
25
 Many of India’s disadvantaged youth are apathetic about their
 education from the formal schooling system, resulting in high dropout
 rates. Lack of interest and perceived value of education often cause
 low retention and dismal learning outcomes, which can increase crime,
 perpetuate poverty and contribute to the socio-economic divide.

 Agastya aims to transform disadvantaged rural children’s attitudes
 toward learning by moving away from lectures and textbooks to
 dynamic, experiential science education that can promote confidence,
 creative thinking, problem-solving and leadership. Agastya uses fixed
 community science centers with mobile delivery channels (science vans,
 fairs, labs-in-a-box) and teacher education to stimulate and inspire.

 The Agastya model complements the existing formal education system;
 it has based its products on the government syllabi to remain relevant
 and complement the school curricula. The model involves all critical
 stakeholders in education—children, teachers, parents, community and
 government. Agastya has already reached more than 5 million children
 and 200,000 teachers in 16 states across India.




26
