How Can a Medium-Sized Bank
Develop Its Own Asset/Liability
Risk Management System?
           MANUAL




           B ased on presentation of D r . J udit B urucs ,
           P roject M anager ,
           R ussia B anking A dvisory P roject
Acknowledgements




A number of people have contributed to this Manual.

I am especially grateful to Patrick Luternauer, Senior Operations Manager, IFC asked
me to write this Manual and Denis Bondarenko, Banking Advisor, IFC reviewed this
edition in detail and helped with a case study.

I appreciate to Yulia Afrakova, Project Assistant, IFC for help with this edition and
useful advices.

I would also like to thank the following who volunteered to read this Manual and all of
whom made valuable comments and suggestions:
Natalia Antonovna Ponomareva, Banking Advisor, IFC , Honorata Fialka, Associate
Operations Officer, IFC, Svetlana Pletneva, Communications Assistant, IFC, Laszlo
Terenyi.




                                                                      Dr. Judit Burucs
Contents

I. Purpose and Target Audience ........................................................................ 3

II. Overview of A/L Risk Management system development ........................... 5
II.1. Diagnostic phase and the best practice ......................................................... 5
II.2. Decision making phase ................................................................................. 7
II.3. Implementation phase ................................................................................... 8
II.4 Case Study..................................................................................................... 9

III. Dimensions of A/L Risk Management ........................................................ 10

III.1. Organisation and responsibilities ............................................................ 10
III.1.1. Organizational structure related to A/L Risk ............................................ 10
III.1.2. A/L Risk unit............................................................................................. 13
III.1.3. Decision Making Matrix ........................................................................... 14
III.1.4. Case study ................................................................................................. 15

III.2. Levels of A/L Risk Management Process ................................................ 17
III.2.1. Risk Management Policy – strategic level ................................................ 17
III.2.2. Guidelines – operational level................................................................... 19
III.2.3. Case study ................................................................................................. 19

III.3. Tools of liquidity risk management ......................................................... 20
III.3.1. Definition of liquidity risk ........................................................................ 20
III.3.2. Methods for Measuring Liquidity risk ...................................................... 21
III.3.2.1. Measuring Funding requirements ......................................................... 21
III.3.2.2. Measuring Asset Liquidity Exposure.................................................... 24
III.3.3. Scenario analysis, stress test and limit setting .......................................... 25
III.3.4. Contingency Plan ...................................................................................... 27
III.3.5. Case study ................................................................................................. 28

III.4. Tools of interest rate risk management................................................... 30
III.4.1. Definition of Interest rate risk ................................................................... 30
III.4.2. Methods for Measuring Interest rate risk .................................................. 31
III.4.3. Setting up limits and stress testing ............................................................ 39
III.4.4. Case Study................................................................................................. 40

III.5. Necessary IT support to ALM ................................................................. 42
III.5.1. Requirement on ALM software ................................................................ 42
III.5.2. Buying or developing ALM software ....................................................... 44

III.6. Reports ....................................................................................................... 46
III.6.1. Basic reports.............................................................................................. 46
III.6.2. Case study ................................................................................................. 47

IV. Conclusion ..................................................................................................... 50

References ........................................................................................................... 51



                                                               2
I. Purpose and Target Audience
“In banking, asset liability management is the practice of managing the risks that arise
due to mismatches between the assets and liabilities (debts and assets) of the bank.
Banks face several risks such as liquidity risk, interest rate risk, credit and operational
risk. Asset/Liability management (ALM) is a strategic management tool to manage
interest rate and liquidity risk faced by banks, other financial services companies and
              1
corporations .”

A number of widely differing views of risk management are held by executives,
regulators, and investors of financial institutions. The most commonly held view
characterizes risk management as a mean of preventing disastrous losses in times of
financial distress. In the past many executives believed that the lower the risk the lower
the return. Today‘s risk manager is a key member of senior executive team who helps
to define business opportunities from risk-return perspective. In spite of the fact that
Chief Executive Officers (CEO) admits the importance of asset/liability risk
management in theory, they do not regard it as a risk. When they speak about a risk
manager they consider only the credit risk manager.

The Manual on “How Can a Medium-Sized Bank Develop Its Own Asset/Liability Risk
Management System?” focuses on developing an Asset/Liability Risk (liquidity and
interest rate risk) Management System in a small and medium-sized bank. The reason
why we are now dealing with interest rate and liquidity risk management (from now on
A/L Risk) is that while there is a vast body of regulatory and academic literature about
credit risk, market and operational risks, relatively less attention has been given to the
daily practice of liquidity and interest rate risk management in the banking book.

Why is this subject not as popular as the others? It can be attributed to the lack of bank
managers’ knowledge about how interest rate and liquidity risk exposure can influence
the profitability of the bank under unfavorable economic circumstances. However some
crises, like the current one, have proved the importance of A/L Risk and more and more
banks are thinking about employing an advanced A/L Risk Management system. The
second explanation could be the difficulties of appropriate data collection, although
there are some well known IT companies which are developing very comprehensive,
smart and expensive Asset and Liability Management system. Unfortunately, most
small and medium-sized banks cannot afford this very costly software.

The purpose of this manual is to share our thoughts with the reader on “How can a
medium-sized bank develop its own Asset/Liability Risk Management system”.

The book gives some practical advice on how a small and medium-sized bank can start
to develop its own A/L Risk Management system by focusing on the interest rate risk
and liquidity risk management policy and the measurement of these risks. The book is
divided into two parts. In the first part of the book we are going to give an overview of
the main steps of the risk management system development process. In the second part
we will introduce the dimensions of risk management based on the liquidity and
interest rate risk management system, as well as the organization, process and tools. We



1Crockford Neil (1986). An Introduction to Risk Management (2.nd ed.) / Woodhead-Faulkner.
O85941-332-2 (Wikipedia Asset Liability Management)
                                               3
will give some examples through Medium Bank, a fictitious Moscow based small-sized
bank.

We are addressing this book to the senior management who are interested in developing
a policy of risk management. This book can help them to improve their interest rate and
liquidity risk management system in such a way that will enable them to meet the
requirements of the international rating agencies. International rating is very important
for a bank that wants to issue bonds, look for investors or deal in the international
market. Since FitchIBCA, S&P and Moody’s, considered to have expertise in credit
ratings, are regarded as unbiased evaluators, their ratings are widely accepted by market
participants and regulatory agencies. The rating process includes quantitative,
qualitative, and legal analysis. Quantitative analysis is mainly financial analysis based
on the firm’s financial reports. Qualitative analysis is concerned with the quality of
management, operating position, company structure, internal regulations (like risk
management regulations) and includes a thorough review of the firm’s competitiveness,
vulnerability to technological changes, regulatory changes and labour relations. We
also offer this manual to risk experts of banks as a general guidance to develop internal
regulations for A/L Risk management. This book can give an overview to the Treasury
management in order to corporate efficiently with A/L Risk management staff as well.

We do not recommend this book to those experts who want to get a very detailed
theoretical picture about the different methods of measuring interest rate and liquidity
risk exposure and techniques of hedging and managing exposure in the daily activity.
This book does not contain the Value at Risk (VaR) methodology for measuring
interest rate and liquidity risk exposure in the banking book, but aims to give practical
advice to managers of small and medium-sized banks so that they can develop a sound
A/L Risk management system. An appropriate VaR model for A/L Risk management
should be supported with advanced IT and specialized, high qualified staff and it could
be the next stage for the development of the A/L Risk management. Please note there
are a lot of handbooks about advanced models for ALM2.




2 Frank J. Fabozzi and Atsuo Konishi: The Handbook of Asset/Liability Management, Irvin, McGraw-
Hill, 1996 / Stavros A. Zenios, William Ziemba Handbook of Asset/ Liability Management, 2006 /
Alexander Adam:Handbook of Asset/ liability management from models to Optimal return Strategies,
John Wiley and Sons Ltd.

                                               4
II. Overview of A/L Risk Management system development
The typical steps of the system development are the following:
− Diagnostic, that is used to analyze and describe the gap between current
  performances and desired future goals, or the best practice.
− Decision, first of all the Board of Directors or the senior management must answer
  the question “Should the bank have the best practice in all dimensions?” and then
  they can decide between the alternatives.
− Implementation, when the bank should implement the accepted version.




II.1. Diagnostic phase and the best practice

       At the core of this phase there are two questions:
             1) Where are we? 2) Where do we want to be?


The purpose of diagnostic is to compare the current actual performance of an activity to
a target. The benefit is that it provides an objective basis for assessing the actual
performance of an activity. The following gap analysis techniques are used to examine
and describe the gap between current performances and desired future goals.

The gaps can include:
− the difference between the current operation of an activity and the activity vision,
  sometimes referred to as "C delta V" (current gap vision);
− the difference between actual and theoretical targets, sometimes referred to as "A
  delta T" (actual gap target); or
− the difference between actual performance measures and world class benchmarks.




                                               5
In the case of the liquidity and the interest rate risk management system, we should
compare the system used in the bank to the best practice. The tools used by a bank in
the diagnostic phase are the following:
− appropriate questionnaire,
− personal interview inside the bank and outside with partner banks,
− research and collection of material about the methodology,
− studying on potential IT support that can help the work.

What is the best practice in the international market?

Parallel with the development of the financial market the best practice of the asset/
                                                         3
liability risk management is changing. In the early 1970s , it started out in the form of
a simple gap model which analyzed risk in terms of cash inflows and outflows and the
gaps or mismatches in these cash flows. Later on, the cash flow gap models gave way
to duration gap models which look more at the attributes of cash flows rather than cash
flow themselves. In the 1990s the application of ALM technology spread to the other
types of risk with three main areas of development: currencies, equities and
commodities. This was the market risk management period. At that time ALM meant
market risk management, and everybody had to know the JP Morgan model. In the
2000s the advancement in the theory and the technology of risk analysis and IT
databases created advanced risk management in the banking book, which in turn is
advancing the state of the art in ALM field.

Related to development of financial market not only the risk management technique
was developed in the banking industry, but legal entities also started to measure the risk
and limit exposure. The first well-known international effort to deal with the growing
exposure of financial institutions to risk and volatilities and especially to the risk of off-
balance sheet claims such as derivative instruments happened in 1988. The Bank for
International Settlements (BIS)4 set the capital adequacy requirements for banking
worldwide to account for credit risk (The 1988 BIS Accord, the so-called Basel I). It
was followed by the 1996 BIS Amendment to the capital accord to incorporate market
risks in the trading book. BIS has published many documents in risk management since
1980. From ALM point of view the most important principles of the Basel Committee:
Supervision of banks' foreign exchange positions in 1980, the Principles for the
Management of Interest Rate Risk, in 1997 and 2004 and Sound Practices for
Managing Liquidity in Banking Organizations or in Financial Groups in 2000, 2006
and 2008. Since BIS serves as a central bank its principles and Accords act as
instructions to the Supervisors or to the institutions having legislative powers in the
banking sector.




3The Handbook of Asset /Liability Management (Frank J. Fabozzi and Atsuo Konishi (Irwin McGraw-
Hill 1991, 1996)
4 TheBank for International Settlements (BIS) is an international organization which fosters international
monetary and financial cooperation and serves as a bank for central banks

                                                    6
                            5
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision principles could be used, as the
Best practice (“Basel principle” in the further). The following are the most important
principles related to A/L Risk management:
− Amendment to the Capital Accord to incorporate market risk (2005)
− Principles for the Management and Supervision of Interest Rate Risk (2004)
− Management of Liquidity Risk in Financial Groups (2006)
− Sound Practices for Managing Liquidity in Banking Organizations (2000)
− Liquidity Risk: Management and Supervisory Challenges (2008)
− BASEL II


II.2. Decision making phase

        At decision making‘s core is the question:
                Should the bank have the best practice in all dimensions in the near future?

Normally the decision maker attempts to come up with as many alternatives as
possible. The alternatives are evaluated and the best one is selected. The process of
evaluating the alternatives usually starts by narrowing the choices down to two or three
and then choosing the best one. This step is usually the most difficult, because there are
often many variables to consider. The decision maker must attempt to select the
alternative that will be the most effective given the available amount of information, the
legal obstacles, the public relations issues, the financial implications, and the time
constraints on making the decision. Often the decision maker is faced with a problem
for which there is no apparent good solution at the moment. When this happens, the
decision maker must make the best choice available at the time but continue to look for
a better option in the future.

In the A/L Risk management case there is set of the best practice based on the Basel
principles and other methods. There are several books and consultant companies that
give detailed description in the theory and the advanced methodology. The main
question the decision maker has to answer: Should the bank need the best practice in
all dimensions in the near future?

The following questions can help the decision maker choose between alternatives:
− From where does the bank collect the data to measure the exposure?
− How often does the bank monitor the limit utilization?


5 The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision provides a forum for regular cooperation on banking
supervisory matters. Its objective is to enhance understanding of key supervisory issues and improve the
quality of banking supervision worldwide. It seeks to do so by exchanging information on national
supervisory issues, approaches and techniques, with a view to promoting common understanding. At
times, the Committee uses this common understanding to develop guidelines and supervisory standards
in areas where they are considered desirable. In this regard, the Committee is best known for its
international standards on capital adequacy; the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision; and
the Concordat on cross-border banking supervision.


                                                   7
− Does the bank need or want to develop the present system?
− How many human resources does the bank need for using this technique?
− How many technical resources does the bank need for using this technique?

When the decision maker(s) makes the best choice available at the time, they have to
make a plan for the future on how the bank can employ the advanced methodology if
they want to develop the activity in that direction when they need the advanced
techniques.

The final product of the diagnostic phase should be the Proposal that contains the
findings, namely what is the difference between the target and the current situation,
how the bank can reach the best practice, what is the cost of implementing the best
practice.

Who are the decision makers in the A/L Risk Management case? In the A/L Risk
Management case the Board of Directors and the Asset/Liability Committee are the
main decision making bodies. In Chapter III.1.1. you will be provided with more
detailed information about the functions of these organizations.

II.3. Implementation phase
Once the decision has been made, it should be performed. Implementation requires
some additional planning time as well as the understanding and cooperation of the
people involved. The bank has to found a project for the implementation. This project
should work according to a detailed working plan that is approved by the project
sponsors. The project sponsor should be a member of the Board or the chairman of
ALCO otherwise the project‘s credibility is not enough for a successful
implementation. The project manager could be the managing director who is
responsible for A/L Risk. The project has to operate according to the classic project
management principles.

ALM information system implementation would be the installation of new hardware,
software, new databases and application programs, and the adoption of new manual
procedures. Implementing new systems, whether they are package software or bespoke
developments, is a complex and risky attempt for
financial institutions and there are many horror
stories which indicate this. One of the key reasons
for this is that the implementation process brings
along with it radical changes and quite often will
touch almost every business process within the
bank. Change on such a scale can therefore be a
threat to persons, who fear for their places within
the organization, and who may have their own
agendas regarding to the proposed changes. Communication is very important in the
implementation step inside the bank, because most people are resistant to changes
simply because they do not understand why it is necessary. In order to ensure smooth
implementation of the decision, the decision maker should communicate the reasons
behind the decision to the people involved and support them with trainings and
workshops.

                                         8
What is the result of the A/L Risk management implementation? The result should
be a sound interest rate and liquidity risk management system, that contains the
reasonable organization, and responsibility structure, sound risk management policy
and internal regulation on measuring, monitoring and controlling process and
appropriate tools, such as methodology for measuring risk exposure, limit system,
report system and IT. In the following chapter we will introduce the system based on
the dimension of risk management.

Does the bank need external consultant in developing A/L Risk management
system? YES, because the external consultant could be useful in both the diagnostic
and the implementation phase, they can approach the problem in a different way. They
are not involved in the organization. Secondly, the consultants can give the bank know-
how. Thirdly they should keep to the deadline according to the contract, and this could
influence the behavior of the bank staff too.

After the decision has been implemented, the decision maker must follow-up on the
decision to see if it is working successfully. If the decision that was implemented has
corrected the difference between the actual and desired outcome, the decision is
considered successful. However, if the implemented decision has not produced the
desired result, once again a decision must be made. The decision maker can decide to
give the decision more time to work, choose another of the generated alternatives, or
start the whole process over from the beginning.

II.4. Case Study

Let me introduce Medium Bank, our fictitious bank.
Medium Bank was founded in Moscow, Russia in 1993. They were not very active until 1998 but
now they are close to the 150th place in Russian banks ranking. In the past few years the
macroeconomic environment has been favorable for the Russian banking system and banks have
benefited from the strong economic growth, political stability and funds inflow into the country. The
bank operates in 30 branches and outlets in St. Petersburg and Moscow and has plans to attract a
foreign strategic investor to enter its capital to get positive effect on the Bank’s international ratings,
level of corporate governance and funding costs.
The bank is a dynamically developing medium-sized commercial bank with total assets of
RUR 10 billion, shareholders equity of RUR 0.6 billion, loan portfolio of RUR 7 billion and total
customer deposits of RUR 6,5 billion as of December 31, 2006 based on audited financial statements
prepared in accordance with IFRS. The main products of the bank are mortgage and consumer loans.
Now the Bank’s strategy is focused on the retail sector and lending to small and medium-sized
enterprises. To better manage the balance-sheet the bank has decided to start developing a sound A/L
Risk management system. They have a basic ALM system, but they only send report to the CBR about
the maturity gap and liquidity ratios. They produce maturity and the repricing gap and calculate ratios
according to the IFRS requirements.
The global liquidity conditions have adversely affected the bank ability to tap the markets. The bank is
currently facing refinancing risk due to the bulky repayments. Overall, Russian banking sector liquidity
is very vulnerable and the situation is aggravated by the nature of retail term deposits, substantial
funding concentrations and generally low interbank and depositor confidence. Thus employing
quantitative models for managing ALM risks are well-timed and appropriate to the bank needs.




                                                     9
III. Dimensions of A/L Risk Management

When a bank starts to develop a sound A/L Risk management system, it should analyse
the present situation according to the dimensions of the risk management.




The first dimension is the organisation of the bank, namely how the bank structures its
activity. The second dimension is the process of the A/L Risk management in two
aspects. Strategic level encompasses risk management functions performed by senior
management and BoD. The strategic level is described in the Risk Management Policy.
The operational level includes risk management within a business area or across
business lines. It partly involves measuring, managing, monitoring and controlling
performed by middle management or units devoted to risk reviews. Also belonging
here is ‘On-the-line’ risk management; this is where risks actually emerge. These risk
management activities are performed by individuals who take risk on the organization’s
behalf in their front office and loan origination functions. Risk management in those
areas is confined to guidelines set by management. The third dimension is the tool-set,
which more or less belongs to the operational level, because it is contained in the
guidelines.

III.1 Organization and responsibilities

III.1.1 Organizational structure related to A/L Risk
Efficient asset/liability management cannot operate without appropriate organizational
structure. In this chapter we focus on those decision making bodies, decision makers
and organizational units that directly influence A/L Risk.




                                          10
The Basel Principles6 emphasizes the role of the management: “The board of directors
in a bank should approve strategies and policies with respect to risk management and
ensure that senior management takes the steps necessary to monitor and control these
risks consistent with the approved strategies and policies. The board of directors should
be informed regularly of the interest rate risk exposure of the bank in order to assess the
monitoring and controlling of such risk against the board’s guidance on the levels of
risk that are acceptable to the bank. Major hedging or risk management initiatives
should be approved in advance by the board or its appropriate delegated committee.
Senior management must ensure that the structure of the bank’s business and the level
of the risk it assumes are effectively managed, that appropriate policies and procedures
are established to control and limit these risks, and that resources are available for
evaluating and controlling interest risk”. The key elements of a medium- sized bank
organizational structure related to asset/liability management activities are discussed in
the following.




The Board of Directors (BoD)
The Board of Directors (BoD) is practically the main decision making body in a bank,
they should be responsible for managing the affairs and direction of the bank as a
whole. They set the strategic course and the objectives for the bank’s business while
identifying the corporate risk tolerance culture and overseeing the integrity of the
corporate policies and decision making. BoD has to approve the Risk management
policy and they are to receive a report about the risk exposure of the bank at least once
a year.

Risk Management Committee
It is generally a Board level subcommittee constituted to supervise the overall risk
management functions of the bank. The composition of the committee may vary in
banks depending upon the size and volume of the business. Generally it could include
the head of Credit Committee, ALCO and Operational Risk Management Committee.
Chief Executive Officer (CEO)

6Basel Committee on Banking Supervision: Principles for the Management and Supervision of Interest
Rate Risk (Basel 2004)

                                                11
The CEO is the main operative decision maker. Without his or her support the risk
management system could not be efficient. The CEO‘s support should be a clear
identification to all departments of the organization to cooperate with the A/L Risk
Manager in establishing and maintaining the A/L Risk management process.

Asset/Liability Committee (ALCO)
Asset/Liability Committee (ALCO) is a senior level committee with the decision-
making capacity and responsibility to review, discuss and direct the financial policy,
position, risk exposures. Asset/Liability Committee as the group of the senior
management is the most important decision making body from the asset and liability
point of view.

ALCO is typically responsible for establishing, documenting and enforcing all policies
that involve asset and liability management, such as liquidity, interest rate, foreign
exchange, commodity and equity risk. ALCO is also responsible for delegation of
market risk limits to the Chief Risk Officer (CRO) or Chief Financial Officer (CFO) of
the bank. ALCO may delegate to CFO or CRO the authority to make day to day
decisions on its behalf, including the authority to extend business unit mandates beyond
their annual date, to approve excess of limits provided that these do not breach overall
risk limits approved by the BoD.

Treasury and Trading Room
Treasury is responsible for the “front-office” functions of the Bank’s treasury and
funding activities, it contains the trading or dealing room. Treasury develops and
implements effective funding/borrowing, investment and hedging strategies to support
the Bank’s activities and establishes rates for Special Clients in accordance with the
policy approved by ALCO. Key responsibilities include:
•   the management of the Bank’s liquidity according to needs and requirements of
    prudence
•   the management of interest rate, liquidity and market risks according to the risk
    management policies and guidelines approved by the BoD and ALCO
•   management of the investment portfolios
•   management of trading books and trading activities within the limits approved by
    ALCO
•   immunization of risks and management of hedging instruments
•   management of funding sources and liabilities
•   proposing the borrowing and investment strategies to ALCO
•   coordinating and negotiating master counterparty agreements and associated
    documentation for derivative and repurchase/reverse repurchase transactions

Strategy and Finance Division headed by CFO
The division is in charge of finances functions, developing valuation and finance
policy, ensuring integrity of P&L, managing business planning process, and supporting
business needs. Controlling uses transfer prices system.




                                          12
Back and Middle Office
The office operates independently from the front-office and is responsible for settling,
reconciling and bookkeeping transactions, monitoring front and back office positions,
limits consumption and daily P&L. The office provides independent mark-to-market of
the bank’s position and supports business needs. There are some banks where the
middle office is responsible for market risk management.

III.1.2. A/L Risk Unit
According to the Basel principles, “Banks should clearly define the individuals and/or
committees responsible for managing risk and should ensure that there is adequate
separation of duties in key elements of the risk management process to avoid potential
conflicts of interest. Banks should have risk measurement, monitoring, and control
functions with clearly defined duties that are sufficiently independent from position-
taking functions of the bank and which report risk exposures directly to senior
management and the board of directors. Larger or more complex banks should have a
designated independent unit responsible for the design and administration of the bank's
measurement, monitoring, and control functions.”

A/L Risk unit should be responsible for the following:
•     developing and implementing appropriate risk management systems (incl. IT)
•     revising the part of the risk management policy related to the risk management and
      guidelines yearly and submitting to the ALCO and BoD
•     preparing scenario analysis and stress test
•     identifying, measuring and monitoring on Bank’s financial positions, risk exposures
      and performance for the funding, investment and hedging activities carried out by
      Treasury
•     preparing reports on risk exposure to the ALCO and BoD
•     deriving and recommending limits for interest rate, liquidity and market risks
      exposure
•     performing the secretariat of the ALCO

There is no consensus in the financial industry where A/L Risk unit should be inside
the bank: in Finance, in Risk Group or in Treasury. Namely CFO, CRO or the
Treasurer should be responsible for the A/L Risk. Generally choosing between them
depends more on the capacity and capability of the person managing either department
than on functional reasons. Delegating A/L Risk management to Finance department
will be the most appropriate but may stimulate focusing on the earnings. Otherwise if
Treasury is responsible for managing interest rate and liquidity management, it is
necessary to segregate control functions from risk taking. A/L Risk inside of Risk
Group is not prevalent. Unfortunately, in Russia in the medium-sized bank most of the
ALM team is based in Treasury (62%)7.




7   The results are based on IFC sampling observation.
                                                    13
The members of the A/L Risk Unit
Human resources are really a key factor in the success of A/L Risk. The following table
summarizes the main requirements. The bank cannot get a real picture about the interest
rate and liquidity risk exposure without qualified staff and appropriate IT. Number of
staff depends on the size of the bank and the level of IT system. A/L Risk unit staff
should number at least 3 persons, but in a small bank the market risk unit, the middle
office and the A/L Risk unit can be combined in one department. The staff being
responsible for the operational risk can also be part of this unit. The department could
be A/L Risk, Market and Operational Risk Management Department with 4-6 persons.
When the bank has undersized resources for this purpose, human resource management
is very difficult, especially in terms of fluctuation of the staff. For the efficient work,
the Department needs qualified junior and experienced staff. Experienced staff is
expensive and for new experienced staff it takes 2 or 3 months to adapt their skills to
local circumstances.
An entrant needs about 1 year to be able to work in an efficient way. However, after 1
or 2 years at least 50 percent of the junior staff leaves the bank, because they are not
satisfied with the salary and their position – they are not entrant any more.
Consequently, for using mainly junior staff the bank needs more employees, which may
result in increased expenses. It is worth for the bank to retain and support the staff if the
bank is satisfied with their work.




III.1.3. Decision Making Matrix

The Decision making matrix is a key part of the responsibilities. It contains a detailed
description of who has the right to make decisions or approve the issue. The more
detailed, the more efficient the matrix is. Everybody has to know who is responsible for

                                             14
what in the organization; otherwise the bank is unable to operate right, sound way. By
reducing uncertainty they promote actions.
The decision making matrix is used to describe Multi Criteria Decision Making. The
rows contain the subject of the decision; authorities and the columns contain
organizational units or the manager of the organizational units.




III.1.4. Case Study

Rules of procedure of Assets and Liabilities Committee (ALCO) at Medium Bank
I. Legal status and basic functions of ALCO
ALCO is a permanent committee created by the BoD of Medium Bank, and the main level managing
body of asset/liability management. It has decision rights concerning those issues which are delegated.
II.1. Members of ALCO:
The Chairman of ALCO is the CEO; Vice chairman is Chief Financial Officer (CFO). Members are the
CEO, CFO, Chief Risk Officer (CRO), Treasurer, ALM manager, who is also responsible for the
market and operational risk management, head of the business lines, head of the marketing and sale and
the head of the IT could be invited8. The key tasks of secretariat are performed by ALM Department
II.2. Competences and obligations of the members of ALCO
The chairman of the ALCO has the right to call or postpone the meetings of ALCO, and to set the items
on the agenda of the meetings. He chairs the meetings of the committee and approves the minutes of
the meetings. The deputy chairman takes up the ALCO chairman’s duties in case of his absence.
Members of the committee have voting power; carrying out the tasks adjunct to the ALCO membership
is an obligation resulting from their sphere of activity. Attending ALCO meetings is obligatory for
ALCO members or their designated deputies for some occasion. The secretariat of ALCO has to be
informed on the absence of the ALCO member, on the previous working day the latest. The secretariat
is responsible for preparing ALCO meetings, setting up the agenda, and for controlling the proposals’
formal requirements. Besides he/she is responsible for sending the invitation and proposals to the


8 According to the SunGard Bancware: Global ALM Practices Surveys 2005 Alexander Wolf, ALCO
members are CFO (97%), Treasurer (77%), ALM Manager (70%), CEO (66%), Business line managers
(61%), Controller (37%), CRO (6%).
                                             15
participants, for making and having approved by the chairman minutes and résumés of the meeting, for
posting the decisions to the authorized persons, and for the retention of ALCO documents. The
documents (yearly work-plans, proposals, and minutes) should be retained for a certain period (3
years). Invited persons could be recommended by the proponents for discussing each item on the
agenda. Invited persons do not have a voting power.
III. Competence of ALCO
ALCO makes decisions on individually unregulated issues related to the assets and liabilities
management of the bank. ALCO is supposed to control continuously tendencies on the money- and
capital markets, and relevant changes in the asset/liability structure of the bank. If needed, necessary
measures are to be taken. ALCO approves the liquidity plan, liquidity risk-, interest rate risk-, market
risk management methods of the bank, the value of maximum risk exposure and the strategy of
Treasury on the investment- and trading portfolio. The ALCO specifies the recent list of conditions, the
value of interest rate margin, the possibilities, principals and measure of deviation from the margin, the
method of setting internal settlement interest rate (FTP) and the stock limits for the banking clients’
securities and derivative deals. ALCO reviews and articulates the funding policy.
IV. Operation of ALCO
According to the yearly working plan the ALCO has its meeting on every month, on Monday and at
10.00 am. Calling extraordinary meetings, written voting, and postponing meetings is approved by the
chairman (vice-chairman) of ALCO. The responsible body of Medium Bank for arranging ALCO
meetings is ALM Department. The secretariat informs the chairman on the planned agenda of the
following meeting, and on the list of persons that should be invited in connection with the items on the
agenda. After the approval by the chairman the secretariat prepares the invitation cards, and by the
preceding 2 days earlier posts the invitations and the documents related to the items on the agenda to
the members of the ALCO. The invitation card contains information on the scene, date, approved
agenda and proposing bodies. The invitation card for invited persons should contain the scene and date
of the meeting, and the short description of the item on the agenda for which the invited person was
invited. Secretariat collects and posts the proposals and controls the compliance with the requirements
of the proposals. A proposal can appear on the agenda only in case it’s posted to Secretariat 2 days
before the meeting. Before appearing on the agenda the proposal has to comply with the requirements
on the content and form, and without considerable completion has to be suitable for making decisions,
and after the control of the Secretariat, in case of written voting the proposal has to be posted to the
ALCO secretariat by 12 o’clock on the day before the deadline of the decision making.
Responsible person for the authenticity, professional quality, for complying with the formal restrictions
and for completing the specified reconciling and coordinative tasks is the proposing body. The purpose
of proposals is to prepare draft resolutions on measures based on conclusions drawn from description
and analysis of facts, data and experiences. Requirement on draft resolutions is proper description,
going into details, and pointing out responsibilities. The possible surplus resources of each measure
have to be pointed out in the draft resolutions. The purpose of written reports is to present information
on and overview periodically or occasionally the processes of each subject. Suggestion for decision has
to be prepared only in justified cases.
The course of ALCO meetings
In case of absence of the ALCO chairman, the meeting is chaired by the deputy chairman of ALCO.
The meeting is started by setting quorum. If the majority of those persons who have a voting right are
present, the chairman declares the quorum. During the meeting the chairman introduces each item on
the agenda and asks the competent member or invitee to present or eventually verbally complete the
item on the agenda. The member or invitee can grant his/her right to present to another member or
invitee. The chairman chairs the dispute over the proposals, brings the proposal to a vote, and finally
makes the decision. Majority principle is applied to the decision-making process, using open-vote
method. After closing the dispute over a principal, the chairman puts the formulated draft resolution to
a vote. The resolution is valid if it’s supported by the majority of present persons having a voting right.
In case of equality of votes the vote of the chairman is decisive. The members of the committee do not
have a voting power in such cases, where he/she, his/her close relative or his/her company is interested.
In extraordinary cases – which need a quick decision – the chairman can order a voting process without
calling a meeting in order to decide in a certain question.
Minutes of the ALCO meetings have to be prepared on each ALCO meeting. The minutes are prepared
by secretariat. Minutes need to contain: persons present on the meeting (persons having right to vote
and invited persons), the approved agenda, and the exact text of approved proposals. In justified cases
the chairman can order to put down the substantial elements of the debate over an item on the agenda
                                                     16
into the minutes.
The secretariat of ALCO has to prepare and have the minutes signed by the chairman in 5 days, in
urgent cases in 1 day following the meeting. The secretariat has to post the approved minutes
immediately to the members of ALCO. The secretariat of ALCO keeps a record of the execution of
approved proposals, and follows the execution with attention.
Head of the organisational unit is responsible for executing decisions and proposals are obliged to
record the fact of execution and inform the record keeping body on it. The way of transferring
information is filling out with a short report in 5 working days after handing over the questionnaire sent
by the secretariat of ALCO. The Secretariat prepares a quarterly summery of the execution of proposals
for the chairman of ALCO.
Requirements on the content of proposals discussed by ALCO
Cover sheet of the proposal (complying with the formal requirement) has to contain who disagrees
partly or fundamentally. The substance of the differences in opinions has to be marked in the
management summary, and if necessary an alternative decision has to be outlined in the draft proposal.
 •     Reconciling sheet, the departments and the result of reconciliation has to be marked
 •     Management summary (if the length of the proposal makes it necessary)
 •     Detailed description: It’s a concise summary, which contains the substance of the issue and the
       proposal: (recommended points of view is Precedents, background, Overview of the tasks, main
       statements, the decision, etc., the changes and the effect on the yearly plan of the bank due to
       the decision have to be pointed out. And Detailed explanation (according to the points of view
       contained in the management summary) and Differences in opinions
 •     Detailed decision proposals (the responsible person for and the deadline of the realization), in
       case of differences in opinions alternative proposals on decision
 •     List of enclosures
 •     Enclosures


Medium Bank is planning to change the organizational chart related to the ALM risk that we described
above. The CFO will be responsible for the ALM. The name of the organization unit will be A/L,
Market and Operational Risk Management Department. The jobs and responsibilities of the
organizational unit will be the same as we described above. The headcount in the unit is 6. The unit
consists of 4 experienced and 2 junior staff.
There are 3 persons responsible for market and operational risk, 2 persons are in charge of liquidity and
interest rate risk management and 1 person is the head of the unit. The bank will organize a workshop
for the department or send them to a training course.


III.2. Levels of A/L Risk Management Process
III.2.1 Risk Management Policy – strategic level
Strategic level encompasses risk management functions performed by senior
management and the BoD. The strategic level is described in the Risk Management
Policy that contains risk definitions, ascertaining institutions risk appetite, formulating
strategy and policies for managing risks, establishing adequate systems and controls in
order to ensure that overall risk remains within acceptable level and return compensates
for risk taken. The success of policies and procedures depends upon the management.
Hundreds of pages of advanced procedures sitting on a shelf are useless if no one
employs them. However, even a simple set of procedures is more efficient if people
believe in them and take personal responsibility for upholding them.

The risk management policy should be based on the Basel Committee Principles and
clearly defined and consistent with the nature and complexity of their activities. It is the

                                                    17
basic document that must be approved by the Board of Directors. Interest rate and
liquidity risk management policy should be a part of the risk management policy.




The risk management policy should contain the following:
1. Objectives of risk management
2. Risk tolerance and required return on capital
   Banks should make a distinction between expected and unexpected losses.
   Expected losses are those that the bank knows with reasonable certainty will occur
   (e.g., the expected interest rate movement) and are typically reserved for in some
   manner. Unexpected losses are those associated with unforeseen events (e.g. losses
   due to a sudden downturn in economy or crisis that influences the interest rate
   movement). Banks rely on their capital as a buffer to absorb such losses.
3. A policy statement identifying the types of instruments and activities that the bank
   may employ or conduct is one mean. It should clearly identify permissible
   instruments, either specifically or by their characteristics, and should also describe
   the purposes or objectives for which they may be used. The statement should also
   define a clear set of institutional procedures for acquiring specific instruments,
   managing portfolios, and controlling the bank's aggregate risk exposure. The banks
   should identify the risks inherent in new products and activities and ensure these are
   subject to adequate procedures and controls before being introduced or undertaken.
4. Global description of each type of risk: definition, strategy, main methods of
   measuring the risk, limit structure, hedging strategy, reporting, monitoring
5. Risk management organization and responsibilities




                                           18
III.2.2 Guidelines – operational level
The operational level of the risk management is described in the guidelines. Effective
procedure and guidelines lay out specifically what people should do --what they should
not do-- in a given situation. It has to contain the definition of the risk, detailed
description of methods for measuring risk, description of limit structure and setting up
limits, list and template of the main reports, monitoring and the risk management
organization and responsibilities. The detailed description of the methods, limits and
reports can be found in the tools of the A/L Risk Management chapter.

III.2.3 Case Study

Medium Bank set out the Risk Management Policy of the Bank. The Liquidity and Interest rate Risk
Management Chapter of the Policy is the following:
1.   Asset/Liability Management risk (ALM risk) is the risk for unexpected economic outcomes
     resulting from market movements affecting the balance sheet structure in the banking book.
     The objectives of the ALM policy: undertaking an interest rate, liquidity, market risk exposure, in
     compliance of all legal provisions, by which the Bank does not incur a loss that would jeopardize
     its profitability, equity or its safe functioning, or one that provides an opportunity of realizing
     profit by exploiting the change of market condition. ALM Risk management of Medium Bank
     involves the application of four basic elements in the management of assets, liabilities, and Off
     Balance sheets (OBS) instruments:
         − Appropriate board and senior management oversight
         − Adequate risk management policies and procedures
         − Appropriate risk measurement, monitoring, and control functions
         − Comprehensive internal controls and independent audits.
     The bank manages risk that originates from the asset/liability structure of the banking book
     together with the trading position in condition that they manage trading book separately, but the
     bank has no trading book activity now. The bank gives the list of products that influence the ALM
     position in the Appendix of its Policy.
2.   The interest rate risk is the exposure of a bank’s financial condition to adverse movements in
     interest rates. Accepting this risk is a normal part of banking and can be an important source of
     profitability and shareholder value. However, excessive interest rate risk can pose a significant
     threat to a bank’s earning and capital base.
     Interest rate risk management policy: undertaking a risk exposure, by which the Bank does not
     incur a loss that would put at risk its profitability, equity or its safe functioning, or gives an
     opportunity of realizing profit by taking advantage of the movements of interest rates.
     The bank measures separately the exposure that comes from different sources of interest rate risk.
     The bank manages the risk by setting up limits based on the maximal acceptable loss, with stress
     testing, scenario analysis.
     The bank overall limit for the interest rate risk exposure is based on capital requirement measured
     by repricing gap with BIS weight. Limit is 25% of the core capital.
3.   Liquidity risk is the risk for the bank being unable to meet its obligations as they come due
     because of insufficient liquid assets, an inability to liquidate assets or to obtain adequate funding.
     Liquidity risk managing policy: the Bank should be able to fulfil its payments when due and able
     to carry out the necessary transactions, while maintaining the profitability of its operations.
     The Bank distinguishes between market liquidity risk and funding liquidity risk. Within funding
     liquidity risk, banks address their practices related to management of the following:
     •     Structural (over one year- long term, or strategic-gap, ratios and funding mix, cash capital,
           survival horizon)

                                                     19
    •   Tactical (similar concept as long term but for shorter term, operational, cash-flow), intraday
        (cash and collateral management)
    •   Contingency (Stress testing, sensitivity analysis and scenario testing, special liquidity asset
        pool, contingency plans, ratios and earmarked liquidity asset pool)
    The Bank measures its liquidity position in the major currencies (RUB, USD, EUR) in which it is
    active. In addition to assessing its aggregate foreign currency liquidity needs and the acceptable
    mismatch in combination with its domestic currency commitments, the bank also undertakes
    separate analysis of its strategy for each currency.
    The bank manages the risk by setting up limits based on partly the maximal acceptable loss and the
    capital requirement, by analysing stress testing, scenario analysis and prepare a contingency plan
    in place that addresses the strategy for handling liquidity crises and include procedures for making
    up cash flow shortfalls in emergency situation. The bank overall limit for the liquidity risk
    exposure is based on analysing the capacity of external funding, because it is more realistic than
    the capital requirement. The maximum limit of 0 for the 30 days, and RUB -500 for 31-90 days,
    RUB-1500 for the other categories.
    Regulatory and economic capital should not directly be tied to funding liquidity risk.
    The main decision making body of the Bank is the BoD in strategic questions, and the ALCO at
    operational level.
    The CFO is responsible for the daily activity.


III.3.Tools of liquidity risk management9
III.3.1. Definition of liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is the risk for a bank being unable to meet its obligations as they come
due because of insufficient liquid asset, an inability to liquidate assets or to obtain
adequate funding. Liquidity risk comprises both funding liquidity risk and market
liquidity risk though these two dimensions of liquidity are closely related.
Funding liquidity risk is the risk that the bank will not be able to meet efficiently both
expected and unexpected current and future cash flow.
Market liquidity risk is the risk that a firm cannot easily offset or eliminate a position
without significantly affecting the market price because of inadequate market depth or
market disruption. Within the market liquidity risk the bank should periodically review
its efforts to establish and maintain relationships with liability holders, to maintain the
diversification of liabilities, and aim to ensure the capacity to sell assets.

The concept of liquidity is complex and any suggestion that a single metric will
adequately reflect the true liquidity risk of a bank is misguided in order to the bank uses
a range of metrics being customized to meet the bank needs. The bank should manage
different strategies, including diversification of liabilities by types of depositors,
investors, products, marketplaces, currencies, relationships with investors, financing
and selling assets. The bank regularly assesses its secured and unsecured funding
capacity to better understand their current and prospective funding liquidity risk in
varying conditions. Liquidity risk arises from many sources, including a financial
firm’s business decision to provide liquidity to the markets, potential damage to a
firm’s reputation (even-driven sources), specific products and activities (transaction-
and product-driven sources), and potential changes in the macroeconomic environment


9 This chapter mostly based on the Principles of Liquidity Risk Management (institute of International
Finance, March 2007)
                                                  20
(market trend). The following list contains the sources of liquidity risk according to its
relatedness to the asset or liability side of the bank.

                   Asset-related                                        Liability-related

1.   Insufficient availability of collateral            1.   Accelerated withdrawal of relationship-based
                                                             and transactional deposits from bank and
2.   Disruption in payment/settlement system
                                                             dealers
3.   Increased collateral requirements due to
                                                        2.   Lack of competitive deposit strategy and
     market risk losses, ratings triggers or
                                                             products
     asymmetric documentation
                                                        3.   More rapid loan than deposit
4.   Inadequacy of a firm’s infrastructure to
     conduct securitization transaction                 4.   Loss of access to unsecured wholesale
                                                             funding or extreme increase in cost
5.   Reduced liquidity of outright market for
     securities                                         5.   Material dependence on wholesale short- and
                                                             long-term unsecured funding, including from
6.   Too large a trading position relative to market
                                                             higher-rated counterparties
     volume, open interest, and number of market
     makers                                             6.   Failure of major provider of unsecured funds
7.   Failure of specialist liquidity providers in       7.   Concentration of wholesale funding sources
     niche security markets
                                                        8.   Reduction in the availability of money
8.   Unwillingness of counterparties to take                 market lines available to the bank
     settlement risk on collateral transfer across
                                                        9.   Reduction in ability to raise term money
     time zones
                                                        10. Reliance on credit dependent sources of
9.   Spurious diversification, while portfolios
                                                            secured funding, correspondingly, availability
     might be diversified strategies may be
                                                            of committed irrevocable secured funding
     correlated across counterparties
                                                            lines
10. Lack of demonstrable liquidity due to
                                                        11. Restricted access to secured funding markets
    bespoke nature of transaction
                                                        12. Reliance on synthetic funding from better-
                                                            rated counterparties
                                                        13. Technology risk related to funding
                                                        14. Rating downgrade

Generic On or Off Balance Sheet
Currency mismatch between assets and liabilities, Change in regulatory or tax rules, Reduced internal
capital generation, OTC transaction (stock borrowing transaction)




III.3.2. Methods for Measuring Liquidity risk
III.3.2.1. Measuring funding requirements

Within funding liquidity risk, banks address their practices, using metrics related to
management of the following:
A. Tools for tactical -namely intraday and short term- liquidity management include
   the cash-flow, cash and collateral management.
B. Tools for structural -medium and long term- liquidity management are the
   following:
     •   Funding matrix based on contractual and expected cash-flow in total and in each
         currency,

                                                       21
   •   Funding matrix based on planned transactions in total and in each currency. The
       bank should forecast future cash flow of assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet.
   •   Liquidity indicators including measuring liquidity dependence on depositors,
       financial institutions, hedging of investments by equity, hedging credits by
       deposits, liquidity vulnerability and so on.
   •   Liquidity costs
C. Tools for Contingency management include stress testing, sensitivity analysis,
   special liquidity asset pool, ratios and earmarked liquidity asset pool

A) Metrics for short term liquidity risk exposure
The purpose of measuring daily liquidity level is to maintain the solvency of the bank
on a daily basis. For this purpose, the bank has to prepare a short term cash-flow report
for at least 8 days and calculate the following positions on daily basis:
       1. Positions of foreign exchange nostro accounts
       2. Position of the local currency nostro accounts (e.g.: the central bank account
          and the management of the compulsory reserve deposit)
       3. Position of the collateral (repo and etc.) by Treasury department
       4. Highly liquid securities
For the sound liquidity and cash management the bank should set out separate and
detailed policy guidelines for cash management, and develop a model for optimizing
the cash utilisation.

B) Metrics for medium and long term liquidity risk exposure
B. 1.) The bank measures liquidity risk exposure using the following funding matrixes based
on the cash-flow mismatch (liquidity) gap. Maturity ladder or Funding matrix based on
the contractual and expected cash-flow. The Bank should prepare monthly the funding
matrix in each currency (local currency, EUR, USD, CHF, other currencies) in a way
that assets placed at and liabilities withdrawn from Bank for the actual position of the
on- and off-balance sheet items. Receivables and payables with maturity must be sorted
into categories of overdue, 0-30 days (0-7 days, 8-14 days, 15-30 days), 31-90 days, 91-365
days, 1-2 years, 2-5 years, and over 5 years as set out in the completion guide.
Even though demand depositors can withdraw their funds immediately, in normal
circumstances they do not. On average demand deposits stay at banks for quite long
periods - often two years or more. Banks can use part of the retail deposits as a core
source of funds that, over time, can fund loans. The second step should be restructuring,
based on past observation. The item restructured could be the retail and other client
deposits in accordance with their expected maturity. Also the bank has to categorize the
utilization of credit lines assuming normal business activity. Eventually restructured
maturity ladder results in realistic maturity gap. The bank can analyze it, or calculate
the cumulative gap that is the gap of the previous period + actual gap.

Liquidity planning is a key component of forecasting liquidity problems. It allows
managers to make important borrowing decisions before relatively predictable events
occur. Such forward planning can lower the cost of funds by determining an optimal
funding mix and minimize the amount of excess reserves that the bank needs to hold.
Effect of planned transactions on mid-term liquidity in total and in each currency
                                            22
(domestic currency, EUR, other currencies) could be measured by the funding matrix
completed according to forecasts.

The cost of liquidity could be measured on at least six-monthly basis calculated with a
risk bonus curve. The cost of liquidity is the additional charge of the recent loan (risk
bonus) assuming a complete, maturity-matched refinancing (i.e. the cost of liquidity
depends on the bank’s specific and financial market assessment). The risk bonus curve
could be the difference between the yield curve of real financing possibilities and the
most liquid swap yield curve.
Liquidity costs are premiums the bank has to pay depending on its credit ratings.
These are costs that have to be charged to customers in the financing10.




                                                                   tt
                               Liquidity Cost = − ∑ Gapi ⋅ ri ⋅       ,
                                                                  365

                               where     Gapi   – nominal value of the gap in i period,
                                         ri     – fund transfer pricing cost, or market price,
                                         ti     – length of i period (in days),
                                         i      – period number

The gaps established while analyzing the maturity structure of the expected funding
matrix are linked to the adequate points of the risk bonus curve according to stress tests,
so that the value of risk due to an open liquidity risk position can be set. The results
show the changes in liquidity risk due to the new financing structure arising because of
the alteration of the market position of the bank, and the cost of shaping a closed
liquidity structure. Liquidity risk is the risk of a future increase in liquidity costs of the
open funding position of the bank.

B. 2) Liquidity ratios
The bank should commensurate asset/funding diversifying strategies with the nature of
their business, the environment in which they operate, and the types of products and
markets in which they are active. There are several ratios that are useful for assessing
the liquidity of the bank. The following table shows some of the most common:




10 Based on Reuters Presentation in Seminar on Liquidity and interest rate risk in the international
Practice Moscow 2008
                                              23
     Ratio name                                     Calculation of the ratio

 Dependency ratio      Cash + Tradable securities + Short term banking exposures
 on significant        Sum of significant deposits
 deposits
                       1.    Cash: Stock in cash-desks (local and foreign currency).
                       2.    Tradable securities
                       3.    Short term banking exposures: central bank and banking deposits maturing
                             in 0-14 days
                       4.    Significant deposit could be deposit over the percentage of the regulatory
                             capital.

 Dependency on         Cash + Tradable securities+ Short term banking exposures
 financial             Resources from financial institutions
 institutions
                       1.    Resources from financial institutions: resources from financial institutions

 Liquidity             To this effect, liabilities are sorted by the extent they are withdrawal and assets
 Vulnerability         are sorted by how easily they can be mobilised.
 Easily withdrawal                                                Easily disposable assets
                                     Liquidity vulnerability =
 liabilities covered                                              Easily withdrawal funds
 by mobile assets
                       Easily modifiable assets:
                        1. Cash in hand and settlement accounts
                        2. Placements on the interbank market with short maturity (within 14 days)
                        3. Treasury bonds and government bonds (except for treasury and
                           consolidated government bonds)
                       Easily withdrawal funds:
                        1.        Sight deposits and current account deposits,
                        2.        Time deposits
                        3.        Liabilities from repurchase agreements
                       Short term (maturing within 14 days) deposits from the interbank market.

 Coverage ratios of    Shareholders’ Equity
 bank investments      Tangible assets + Intangible assets + Business shares

 Coverage of loans     Deposits
 by deposits           Loans

 Coverage short        Liquid assets
 term liabilities by   Short term liabilities
 liquid assets
                       The assets included should only be those which are highly liquid.


III.3.2.2. Measuring Asset Liquidity Exposure

According to the IIF firms having significant reliance on asset liquidity should evaluate
haircuts and the timing of cash flows from the sources. In determining the amount of
availability liquidity and the liquidation horizon, the evaluation should include a
determination of whether the asset is encumbered as well as an assessment of market
haircuts, market capacity constraint, access to central bank facilities, concentrations in
                                                    24
collateral, potential name – specific concern, and the operational ability to complete the
transaction. In particular:
•   Encumbered assets should be excluded from incremental liquidity value
•   Haircuts should be evaluated in business as usual as well as in stressed conditions
•   Capacity of the markets for a particular asset class should be evaluated and
•   Operational capability to facilitate the transaction should be in place and tested

The firm that relies on secured funding sources to a significant extent should have
robust processes in place to evaluate asset liquidity under a variety of business as usual
and stressed conditions. It should be recognised that liquidity values of similar assets
may vary across firms depending on the nature of their business and their respective
market capabilities.
The bank could assess the ability to convert its unsecured funding to secured basis. The
loan (“collateral”) value of its unencumbered portfolios is reviewed daily. The
treatment should differentiate between the use of assets as collateral for borrowing and
for generation of cash by sales of such assets and also take into consideration the
business strategy for the assets in question, the potential P&L impact of the any
disposition, and whether management would be willing to absorb potential losses,
taking into account tax effect.

The bank should practically categorize the assets based on their liquidity. Liquidity
categories can be high, medium and low or set up by the likelihood of the action to be
taken. Most firms use haircuts or volatility analyses to determine the liquidity value of
assets.
Liquid assets could be diversified by using the following attributes: Pledgeable assets
(depending on central banks and industry criteria), repoable assets, securitizable assets
(retail consumer loans) with cash structures or with synthetic structures (credit default
swap). Securities need to be grouped by their liquidity value. High values, would apply
to eligible central bank holdings. Other criteria to be included in considering liquidity
values and categorization are rating and credit quality, market price availability,
maturity, type of security, reason for holding (trading, investment, and hedge), access
to secured funding for security, issuer type/country, currency, size of position and time
to settlement.

Firms could base haircuts on prior experience, best practice assumption, liquidation
scenarios, and regulatory requirements, practices adopted in market or credit risk or
market liquidity models (VAR type statistical techniques are often applicable in
analyses ancillary to liquidity risk analysis, such as estimating the mark-to-market
value of marketable assets, including the likely volatility of market values within
relevant time frames (e.g., one day, one week or one month).

III.3.3. Scenario analysis, stress test and limit setting
Most financial firms use a variety of metrics to monitor the level of liquidity risk to
which they are exposed. The basic approaches may be categorized into three types: the
liquid assets approach, the cash flow approach, and a mixture of the two.
•   Under the liquid assets approach, the firm maintains liquid instruments on its
    balance sheet that can be drawn upon when needed. As a variation on this approach,
                                            25
    the firm may maintain a pool of unencumbered assets (usually government
    securities) that can be used to obtain secured funding through repurchase
    agreements and other secured facilities (the relevant metrics in this approach are
    ratios.)
•   Under the cash flow matching approach, the firm attempts to match cash outflows
    against contractual cash inflows across a variety of near-term maturity buckets.
•   The mixed approach combines elements of the cash flow matching approach and
    the liquid assets approach. The firm attempts to match cash outflows in each time
    bucket against a combination of contractual cash inflows plus inflows that can be
    generated through the sale of assets, repurchase agreement or other secured
    borrowing. Assets that are most liquid are typically counted in the earliest time
    buckets, while less liquid assets are counted in later time buckets.

When the bank starts to prepare scenario analysis, the expected funding matrix has to
be supplemented with several assumptions and then the gaps should be determined. The
bank should ensure that stress tests are used to measure the behaviour of all sources of
cash inflow and outflows that could potentially be material to the firm under various
sets of assumptions For example, Scenario on the narrowing of the liquidity could be that
financing ability decreases due to (1) worsening of scoring, and (2) deposit withdrawal, or
there’s a rising need for liquidity due to utilization of credit lines.

For each scenario it could be valid that the matured loans have to be renewed. This needs
financial sources and the liquidity crisis period is 90 days long.

The liquidity risk limits should set boundaries for the level of liquidity risk exposure for
the bank and where appropriate, should also provide the capability to allocate limits to
individual portfolios, activities, or business units. Limit systems should also ensure that
positions that exceed certain predetermined levels receive prompt management
attention. Setting up limits should be based on the estimated funding capacity of the
bank (central bank and credit facility, facility of secured repo).

The IIF Committee believes in “the industry‘s resources would be better spent
improving capital measures related to other, more material risks and on strengthening
liquidity risk management. Pursuing a costly solution to an immaterial problem is
inconsistent with risk based regulation.” According to the Committee, when setting up
the limits a bank should take into account the following:
•   The diversification of funding sources is usually accomplished by having the
    others: different types of wholesale investors (e.g. central banks, pension funds,
    money market funds and money managers).
•   The bank could have notional limits by type of liquid asset, issuer, and issuer name
    credit rating, other meaningful criteria, and/or longer liquidation time frames/larger
    haircuts as inventory in specific products grows.
•   Firms should ensure that regarding potential funding from central banks are
    evaluated taking into account the level of severity and type of crisis. Firms should
    differentiate between different types of central bank facilities (e.g. standing and
    emergency).




                                            26
III.3.4. Contingency Plan11
Policy:
The Contingency plan addresses potential, early warning signals of risk. Contingency
planning should include establishing policies and procedure and clear divisions of roles
and responsibilities for liquidity events so as to avoid confusion or lack of clarity of
roles during crisis. This should include strategies and procedures for timely, clear,
consistent, and uninterrupted internal and external communication flows to ensure
timely decision to prevent undue escalation of issues and to provide adequate assurance
to market participants, employees, clients, creditors, regulators, and shareholders. This
could include the designation of a formal crisis team that can be a contact point for
senior management. The planning process should include the designation of back ups
for key functions and assurance that key systems and processes have been considered in
the firm’s business continuity planning.

Organisation:
Contingency plans need to involve Treasury, risk and business areas, IT, settlements,
communication and finance areas. Most firms have a liquidity crisis team in place that
is chaired by the Treasurer or CFO. A member of the Treasury or risk can be the
contingency coordinator to ensure that working groups understand their tasks and those
decisions and actions are logged and communicated as appropriate. There are some
banks, where the crisis team meets on a regular basis to review stress scenarios in
business as usual conditions.

Action plans:
Bank should have in place an asset reduction plan and financing strategy for firm-
specific and market-related liquidity events. Some firms define states of a crisis and
define appropriate measures to mitigate a crisis. During the disruption secured funding
asset liquidation would be possible for high-grade paper (in particular, eligible central
bank assets) but higher haircuts would be applied based on liquidity quality. The bank
can take attention the unused credit facilities from the Central bank or other
counterparties, but the latest can be disappearing in the trouble.

The existence of recourse provisions in asset sales, the extension of liquidity facilities
to securitization programs, and the early amortization triggers of certain asset
securitization transactions can involve significant liquidity risk to institutions engaged
in these secondary market credit activities. Institutions should ensure that their liquidity
contingency plans fully incorporate the potential risk posed by their secondary market
credit activities. With the issuance of new asset-backed securities, the issuing banking
organization should determine the potential effect on its liquidity at the inception of
each transaction and throughout the life of the securities in order to better ascertain its
future funding needs. An institution's contingency plans should take into consideration
the need to obtain replacement funding, and specify the possible alternative funding
sources, in the event of the early amortization of outstanding asset-backed securities. It
should be recognized that an early amortization of a banking organization’s asset-
backed securities could impede its ability to fund itself--either through re-issuance or
other borrowings--since the institution's reputation with investors and lenders may be
adversely affected.



11   This chapter based on the principles of Liquidity Risk Management, IIF, March 2007
                                                      27
III.3.5 Case Study
Medium bank: Medium Bank employs the following methodologies for measuring liquidity risk
exposure and limits.


 Methodology name                                               Limit size

 Short term liquidity

 Limits of foreign        The account balance should exceed the overdraft credit line linked to the
 exchange nostro accounts account or zero if there’s no overdraft credit line.

 Foreign exchange              The net liabilities from foreign exchange interbank deals (money market
 position of Treasury          deposit deals, foreign exchange swap deals, repo deals) in one day (T+1)
                               cannot exceed the securely accessible volume of overnight liabilities.

 Cash flow table               Medium-sized bank produces the cash-flow report for following 8 days on
                               a daily basis every day. The Middle office collected the data from IT
                               system and email letters from the branches and the Accounting
                               department.
                               The negative gap of the following day in the table cannot exceed the
                               securely accessible volume of overnight liabilities that is 25% of the limits
                               that the bank gets from the counterparties banks for o/n. The bank set limit
                               for the cumulative net funding requirement, which is 50% of the interbank
                               possibilities.

 Highly Liquid assets          The highly liquid assets (money market deposit deals matures in 30 days,
                               banking book bonds, repo deals, derivative deals and foreign exchange
                               spot deals) must exceed the maximum financing need in 30 days of (non
                               treasury) departments, which are to be set according to historical data and
                               business forecasts.

 Mid term liquidity

 Maturity gap based on         The Medium bank produces the maturity gap in domestic currency, USD
 expected events. Case:        and EUR separately every month. Based on statistical analysis Medium
 the limit of cumulated        Bank assumed that 20% of retail deposit could be withdrawn from that
 gap is independent from       bank within 1 year, and 10% in 1-2 years, 30% in 2-5 years and 40% over
 foreign exchange              5 years.
                               The limit for the gap of each matrix:
                               The absolute value of the negative value of cumulated gap on balance-
                               and off-balance sheet items in each category (except for the category over
                               5 years) cannot exceed the sum of funds securely accessible from
                               interbank market (e.g. repo deals, liabilities from the central bank).

 Maturity gap based on the     Medium bank produced the funding matrix based on the business plan
 business plan: the limit of   half-yearly. The assets and liabilities are categorized according to the
 cumulated gap is              expected cash flow in the case of retail clients.
 independent from foreign
                               The absolute value of the negative value of cumulated gap on balance-
 exchange
                               and off balance sheet items in each category (except for the category over
                               5 years) cannot exceed the sum of liabilities securely accessible by the
                               subsidiary from interbank market (e.g. repo deals, liabilities from the
                               central bank) and the value of unhedged interbank deposit collection.




                                                     28
Maturity gap




    Methodology name                                            Limit size
 Liquidity cost
 Treasury position for the      Based on the business plan from the business line the Bank compares the
 next month                     bank position to the planned transaction. The Treasury has to manage the
                                difference.
 Scenario analysis, Stress      Medium Bank analyzes the downgrade, withdrawal of deposit and
 test using the Funding         utilization of credit lines according to the scenario analysis below.
 matrix.                        The absolute value of the negative value of cumulated gap on balance-
 The limit of cumulated         and off balance sheet items in each category (except for the category over
 gap is independent from        5 years) cannot exceed the sum of liabilities securely accessible from
 foreign exchange               interbank market and possibility of selling the assets in these special
                                circumstances based on the cost. (Calculating the cost)
 1. Downgrade                   •   10% of matured banking sector sources (deposits and FX swaps) are
                                    not renewed.
                                •   10% of maturing mid-term or long-term resources from financial
                                    institutes (loans, etc) is not renewed.
 2. Withdrawal of deposits Depositors withdraw 10% of deposits in one week, and 50% of matured
                           fixed deposits is not renewed.
 3. Utilization of credit       50% of unused credit lines maturing in one year are utilized (in 7 days:
 lines                          10%, in 8-14 days: 10%, in 15-30 days: 20%, in 31-90 days: 10%).
 Dependency on                  Min 2,
 significant deposits           Significant deposit is over 15% of the regulatory capital.
 Liquidity vulnerability        25%
 Coverage short term            Medium Bank developed methodologies and policies to determine the
 liabilities by liquid assets   level of specifically earmarked liquid assets that they should maintain at
                                all times to meet immediate liquidity needs when faced with adverse
                                                      29
                             conditions.
    Coverage ratios of       The value should be higher than 1.
    investment of the bank


III.4. Tools of Interest rate risk management

III.4.1. Definition of interest rate risk 12

The interest rate risk is the exposure of a bank’s financial condition to adverse
movements in interest rates. Accepting this risk is a normal part of banking and can be
an important source of profitability and shareholder value. However, excessive interest
rate risk can pose a significant threat to a bank’s earning and capital base. Changes in
interest rates affect a bank's earnings by changing its net interest income and the level
of other interest sensitive income and operating expenses. Changes in interest rates also
affect the underlying value of the bank's assets, liabilities, and off-balance sheet (OBS)
instruments because the present value of future cash flows (and in some cases, the cash
flows themselves) change when interest rates change. Accordingly, an effective risk
management process that maintains interest rate risk within prudent levels is essential
to the safety and soundness of the bank.

Sources of the interest rate risk
•     Repricing risk: As financial intermediaries, banks encounter interest rate risk in
      several ways. The primary and most often discussed form of interest rate risk arises
      from timing differences in the maturity (for fixed-rate) and repricing (for floating-
      rate) of bank assets, liabilities, and OBS positions. While such repricing
      mismatches are fundamental to the business of banking, they can expose a bank's
      income and underlying economic value to unanticipated fluctuations as interest
      rates vary. For instance, a bank that funded a long-term fixed-rate loan with a short-
      term deposit could face a decline in both the future income arising from the position
      and its underlying value if interest rates increase. These declines arise because the
      cash flows on the loan are fixed over its lifetime, while the interest paid on the
      funding is variable, and increases after the short-term deposit matures.
•     Yield curve risk: Repricing mismatches can also expose a bank to changes in the
      slope and shape of the yield curve. Yield curve risk arises when unanticipated shifts
      of the yield curve have adverse effects on a bank's income or underlying economic
      value. For instance, the underlying economic value of a long position in 10-year
      government bonds hedged by a short position in 5-year government notes could
      decline sharply if the yield curve steepens, even if the position is hedged against
      parallel movements in the yield curve.
•      Basis risk: arises from imperfect correlation in the adjustment of the rates earned
      and paid on different instruments with otherwise similar repricing characteristics.
      When interest rates change, these differences can give rise to unexpected changes in
      the cash flows and earnings spread between assets, liabilities and OBS instruments
      of similar maturities or repricing frequencies. For example, a strategy of funding a
      one-year loan that reprices monthly based on the one-month US Treasury bill rate,
      with a one-year deposit that reprices monthly based on one-month LIBOR, exposes

12This chapter based on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision :Principle for Management and
Supervision of Interest Rate Risk (July 2004), Definition on Page 5 and source on Page..
                                                   30
    the institution to the risk that the spread between the two index rates may change
    unexpectedly.
•   Optionality: An additional and increasingly important source of interest rate risk
    arises from the options embedded in many bank assets, liabilities, and OBS
    portfolios. Formally, an option provides the holder the right, but not the obligation,
    to buy, sell, or in some manner alter the cash flow of an instrument or financial
    contract. Options may be stand-alone instruments such as exchange-traded options
    and over-the-counter (OTC) contracts, or they may be embedded within otherwise
    standard instruments. While banks use exchange-traded and OTC options in both
    trading and non-trading accounts, instruments with embedded options are generally
    more important in non-trading activities.

Open position arises from the following transactions:
- Deposit collection, borrowing, issuing securities constituting loan relationship,
  conducting repurchase agreement
- Providing loans, lending, investments in securities constituting loan relationship
- Off-balance sheet transactions affecting interest rate risks (e.g. interest rate and
  foreign exchange swaps, forward foreign exchange and securities transactions,
  forward interest rate agreements, foreign exchange option transactions)


III.4.2. Methods for Measuring Interest rate risk
The Bank should apply those methods for measuring interest rate risk with which the
Bank’s current and future interest rate risk positions can be measured. Common
methods are:
    A) Repricing risk analysis for measuring yield curve risk
    B) Analyzing basis risks for measuring the effect of the interest income
    C) Fund transfer pricing for measuring the effect of the interest income
    D) Duration

A) Repricing Risk Analysis
Repricing schedule:
The repricing analysis for measuring a bank's interest rate risk exposure begins with a
maturity/repricing schedule that distributes interest sensitive assets, liabilities, and OBS
positions into “time bands” according to their maturity (if fixed-rate) or time remaining
to their next repricing (if floating-rate). The repricing schedule could be filled based on
the duration of the items, if the bank is able to do it for each item, but in this book we
do not use it. Repricing schedule should be prepared monthly or quarterly in domestic
currencies (RUB) and in the main currencies (USD, EUR). Assets and liabilities should
be sorted into categories of intervals according to potential repricing, i.e. interest rate
changes: within 1 month, 1-3 months, and so on. For analytic reasons, this table is
supplemented with the positions that belong to the trading book and data needed for
measuring interest rate optional risk.



                                            31
Repricing schedule could be the base of the following analysis

Rate sensitivity gap:
The bank can analyze the rate sensitivity gap (RSG) as a ratio of rate sensitive assets
(RSA) to rate sensitive liabilities (RSL).

                                RSG = RSA/RSL

An RSG greater than 1 implies that there are more interest rate sensitive assets (in par
amount) than interest rate sensitivity liabilities. This suggests that, as interest rates rise,
the return on assets will rise faster than funding cost, resulting in a higher spread
income. If the RSG less than 1 if the interest rates rise, funding costs will rise at a faster
rate than return on assets.

Repricing gap analysis
These schedules can be used to generate simple indicators of the interest rate risk
sensitivity of both earnings and economic value to changing interest rates. When this
approach is used to assess the interest rate risk of current earnings, it is typically
referred to as gap analysis. The size of the gap for a given time band - that is, assets
minus liabilities plus OBS exposures that reprice or mature within that time band -gives
an indication of the bank's repricing risk exposure. A negative, or liability sensitive,
gap occurs when liabilities exceed assets (including OBS positions) in a given time
band. This means that an increase in market interest rates could cause a decline in net
interest income. Conversely, a positive, or asset sensitive, gap implies that the bank's
net interest income could decline as a result of a decrease in the level of interest rates.

Static simulation
Static simulation technique is used for measuring the effect of changing interest rate
yield curve on a bank’s economic value and interest income perspectives assuming the
gap does not change. The measuring procedure is based on simulating the future path of
interest rates and examining their impact on the cash flow. In static simulation, the cash
flows arising solely from bank’s current on- and off-balance sheet positions are
assessed and the interest rate change.
Standardized approach
According to standardized approach repricing schedule is used to evaluate the effects of
changing interest rates on a bank's economic value by applying sensitivity weights to
each time band. The weights are based on estimates of the duration of the assets and
liabilities that fall into each time band, where duration is a measure of the percentage
change in the economic value of a position that will occur given a small change in the
level of interest rates. Duration-based weights can be used in combination with a
repricing schedule to provide a rough approximation of the change in a bank's
economic value that would occur given a particular set of changes in market interest
rates.




                                              32
The calculation process is the following:
1. The first step is to offset the longs and shorts in each time band, resulting in a single short or long
    position in each time band. The net position is the sum of the balance sheet items (BS) and the off
    balance sheet items (OBS) assuming that assets have a positive and liabilities have a negative sign.
2. The second step is to weight these resulting short and long positions by a factor that is designed to
    reflect the sensitivity of the positions in the different time bands to an assumed change in interest
    rates. The set of weighting factors for each time band is set out in table below. These factors are
    based on an assumed parallel shift of 200 basis points throughout the time spectrum, and on a
    proxy of modified duration of positions situated at the middle of each time band and yielding 5%.
    If you cannot expect the 2% movement you can use the following calculation: A parallel rate
    shock substantially consistent with 1st and 99th percentile of observed interest rate changes using a
    one-year (240 working days) holding period and a minimum five years of observations. (That
    means 4 interest rate shocks: upward and downward parallel shift according to the first, and the
    same according to the 99th percentile.)
3. The third step is to sum these resulting weighted positions, offsetting longs and shorts, leading to
    the net short- or long-weighted                Time band    Middle of time Proxy of modified Assumed   Weighting
    position of the banking book in the                             band        duration in year change in   factor
                                                                                                   yield
    given currency.
                                                 Up to 1 month   0.5 months        0.04 years     200 bp     0.08%
4. The fourth step is to calculate the           1 to 3 months    2 months         0.16 years     200 bp     0.32%
                                                 3 to 6 months   4.5 months        0.36 years     200 bp     0.72%
    weighted position of the whole               6 to 12 months   9 months         0.71 years     200 bp     1.43%
    banking book by summing the net              1 to 2 years     1.5 years        1.38 years     200 bp     2.77%
                                                 2 to 3 years     2.5 years        2.25 years     200 bp     4.49%
    short- and long-weighted positions           3 to 4 years     3.5 years        3.07 years     200 bp     6.14%
    calculated for different currencies.         4 to 5 years     4.5 years        3.85 years     200 bp     7.71%
                                                 5 to 7 years      6 years         5.08 years     200 bp    10.15%
5. The fifth step is to relate the weighted      7 to 10 years    8.5 years        6.63 years     200 bp    13.26%
    position of the whole banking book to        10 to 15 years  12.5 years        8.92 years     200 bp    17.84%
                                                 15 to 20 years  17.5 years       11.21 years     200 bp    22.43%
    shareholder’s equity.                        Over 20 years   22.5 years       13.01 years     200 bp    26.03%




To measure the effect of the
                                                  Time band      Middle of time Proxy of modified   Assumed     Weighting
changing shape the interest rate                                     band        duration in year   change in    factor
yield curve on bank’s economic                                                                        yield
                                                Up to 1 month     0.5 months      0.04 years         200 bp      0.08%
capital the same approach is also               1 to 3 months      2 months       0.16 years         168 bp      0.27%
kept relevant with changing                     3 to 6 months     4.5 months      0.36 years         141 bp      0.51%
                                                6 to 12 months     9 months       0.71 years         119 bp      0.84%
scenario: yield curve shifts                    1 to 2 years       1.5 years      1.38 years         100 bp      1.38%
immediately by 200 basis points                 2 to 3 years       2.5 years      2.25 years          84 bp      1.89%
                                                3 to 4 years       3.5 years      3.07 years          71 bp      2.17%
in short term and gradually for                 4 to 5 years       4.5 years      3.85 years          59 bp      2.29%
the further periods.                            5 to 7 years        6 years       5.08 years          50 bp      2.54%
                                                7 to 10 years      8.5 years      6.63 years          42 bp      2.79%
The process of the calculation is               10 to 15 years    12.5 years      8.92 years          35 bp      3.15%
the same as above. The weights                  15 to 20 years    17.5 years      11.21 years         30 bp      3.33%
                                                Over 20 years     22.5 years      13.01 years         25 bp      3.25%
calculated on the modified
duration are in the following table.
Dynamic simulation for measuring optionality
In the dynamic simulation approach, the simulation builds more detailed assumptions
about the future course of interest rates and the expected changes in a bank business
activity over that time. The more sophisticated techniques allow dynamic interaction of
payment streams and interest rates and to better capture the effect of embedded or
explicit option.

The Bank has to measure the interest rate risk that arises from the optionality due to
potential repayment of loans before maturity or potential withdrawal of time deposits
before maturity. The scenarios that are employed in the liquidity risk management
could be used here too.


                                                         33
B) Basis risk analysis
The Bank prepares basis risk analysis denominated in domestic currency, EUR, USD
and CHF containing all balance sheet items and any off-balance sheet items that are
exposed to interest rate risk quarterly. Assets and liabilities are sorted into categories of
intervals according to benchmark interest rate into repricing periods up to 1 month, 1-3
months, 3-12 months, 1-5 years, 5-10 years, 10-15 years, over 15 years.
The bank prepares a quarterly forecasted basis risk analysis based on plans
(projections) as of the end of the following quarter in the similar structure.
For example: Bank could analyse the effect of a 100 basis point shift of the central
bank’s prime rates on interest income and expense over one year period. The effect on
the profit could be shown in two scenarios: the Bank does not change the interest rates
of variable items (only the interest rates of floating items change), and the Bank
responses to the Central Bank’s interest rate decision as it has reacted upon a Central
Bank’s interest rate decision in the past (according to historical data).
The analysis of parallel move of announced and benchmark interest rates to the central
bank’s prime rate should be completed on the basis of historic data (suggested time
range: 2 years). The table should contain the value of announced and benchmark
interest rates at the end of the quarter, the daily average of difference between the
historic data (2 years) and the central bank’s prime rate and the coefficients of
correlation.

C) Fund Transfer Pricing Analysis13
Among the methodologies of interest rate risk management we can mention the Internal
Fund Transfer Pricing (FTP), which is a well known practice in the financial sector. It
is part of the overall
management         information,
accounting and control system
which      includes     pricing,
budgeting profit planning,
asset/liability   management.
Through fund transfer pricing
bank can analyze more
efficiently its net interest
margin, because fund transfer
pricing allows quantifying the
variances caused by the
imbalance of funds provided
and funds used by the bank.
Financial institutions utilize
the     Single    Pool     Rate
Matching, Specific Matching,
Multiple Pool Rate Matching
and Matched Maturity.14

13 This chapter based on Dr. Judit Burucs: “Thoughts on Fund Transfer Pricing” was published by
Analytical Journal No.7. Circulation is 10 000. The Project introduction accompanied the article.
(http://www.abajour.ru/files/07_08_buruch.pdf.)
14Keys to community bank success: Utilizing management information to make informed decisions-
Funds transfer pricing (FTP), Journal of Bank Cost & Management Accounting, 2001, by Katafian,
Robert E.

                                               34
Matched Maturity15 is basically a gap approach similar to the repricing gap. Each
individual customer account is matched to a market driven index (transfer pricing yield
curve). FTP creates a shadow16 of assets and liabilities for each expected cash flow
item on the balance sheet and attaches to each a market price based on its term. Real
assets are accordingly funded by “shadow” liabilities to produce a match-funded
spread; conversely, real liabilities receive income from “shadow’ assets for the same
purpose. A unique charge or credit rate is assigned to each record according to its
origination date on the basis of repricing tenor, contractual cash flow and some
adjustment (repricing spread, liquidity term, embedded option and etc.)

     In the process, the lending and deposit units obtain a leveled balance sheet and a net interest
     spread per record is established. The FTP posts mismatched earnings from business units into
     a special Funding Mismatch Unit. This unit can be the Treasury, Funding Center or ALCO in
     practice. Funding Mismatch Unit acts as the central clearing house for funds, benchmarking
     all transfer rates against a market derived yield curve plus other market pricing factors.
     Calculated debits and credits are applied to book balances until the earlier of maturity or
     repricing. If the bank uses a single curve, asset and liability transactions of identical attributes
     are assigned with an identical transfer rate. When measuring performance, a transaction’s
     transfer rate remains unchanged over its repricing life. Effectively, this insulates the
     transaction’s margin contribution from the effect of subsequent market interest rate changes.17

Selecting a transfer pricing yield curve is a critical aspect of the FTP. Should we use
the funding rate or investment rate? When implementing a FTP system banks must
determine a “funding curve” that most accurately reflects their source or assets on the
whole sale market. Some banks may utilize an interbank rate such as LIBOR, interbank
SWAP curve, a treasury yield curve or state bond yield curve. Using credit risk free
market indices like state bond curve will encourage banks to make loans that are less
profitable than they appear and to discourage deposits that can be profitable. Note
however, that if the bank is significantly deposit rich (most of savings banks, which
have more deposit than loans), the bank tends to select a marginal investment curve for
their benchmark. Furthermore, bank should apply a separate benchmark yield curve to
each of the currencies in which it operates, because each of the currencies in which a
bank deals represents a distinct and independent source of interest rate risk. Interest rate
in the European Union, Russia or USA may shift in opposite directions for completely
unrelated reasons.

The funding curve for a financial instrument shows the relationship between indicators
such as time to maturity and the interest rate. Adjustments to a base FTP18 yield curve
are often necessary to reflect unique attributes of the particular institution and

15   Internal Transfer Pricing of Bank Funds by Valerie Giardini, Bank Administration Instiitute
16A bank’s focal point for market risk: The transfer pricing mismatch unit, Journal of Bank Cost &
Management Accounting, 2000 by Chittenden, John
17 A simple example will illustrate this process. Let us assume that the institution has only two items on
its balance sheet: 3 year duration deposit on which it pays 6.5% interest rate and 8 year duration
mortgage on which it receives 10% interest rate. A net interest margin is 3.5% (10%-6.5%). Assume
further that the bank is asset rich (it possesses more loan than deposits) and can borrow in the wholesale
market at 7% for 3 years and 8% for 8 years. The FTP allows the institution to split up its 3.5% net
interest margin into a 2% net interest margin on loan (10%-8%), a 0.5% net interest margin on deposit
(7%-6.5%), and interest rate risk mismatch of 1% (8%-7%).
18Adjustments to the base FTP rate index curve, Journal of Bank Cost & Management Accounting, by
Ersoz, Ali Murat / Transfer Pricing, Financial Risk management in Banking, Therory &Application of
Asset &Liability Management MCGRaw-Hill, by Dennis G. Uyemura, Domald R. Van Deventer

                                                        35
instrument. The decision to apply a certain adjustment method to use should coincide
with the bank’s own cultural and fundamental principles which are as follows:
1) Institution Credit Risk Adjustment. If the bank is not deposit rich, the base yield
   curve needs to be adjusted to reflect the bank’s own credit risk. There are some
   banks that use their own actual senior debt market spread.
2) Bid/Asked Spread or Funding Commission Adjustment: The brokering cost
   (commission or fee) can be factored into the transfer pricing yield curve. The
   typical products: for this approach all assets and liabilities are managed by the
   treasury department of a bank.
3) Term Liquidity Adjustment: Term liquidity is the impact of the repricing frequency
   of an instrument being shorter than expected maturity. The liquidity premium can
   be estimated by observing rate differentials between the organization’s wholesale
   funding curve and swap curve. Swap rates quote the cost to transfer interest rate
   risk, so differences between actual funding rates and swaps represent the cost to
   raise physical liquidity, less term repricing risk. Adjustments to the base yield curve
   are necessary for instruments that have the same duration or repricing period, but
   which, due to different liquidity characteristics, are not of the same value or cost to
   the bank. A fixed rate loan with 5 year duration may receive a lower FTP charge
   than a similar asset with the same duration due to the ability of the bank to convert
   the loan into a more liquid investment, by using a secondary market for
   securitization.
4) Option Pricing Adjustment is used to reflect the cost of providing the customer the
   right to unilaterally change the contractual terms of a transaction.
5) Prepayment Penalty Adjustment can be incorporated and applied in transfer pricing
   in two ways: The first is after the transaction that is applicable to larger-sized
   transactions, especially where an economic prepayment fee is charged to the
   borrower. Transfer rates are assigned based on the contractual amortization or
   maturity schedule. When prepayment occurs, the original transfer fund is sold back
   to the Treasury with the mark to market prepayment loss (or gain) passed to the
   business line unit in the form of a cost allocation. The second way is before the
   transaction that is used for loan products where there is generally no prepayment
   penalty charged (e.g. mortgage loan). The FTP is increased by an amount that will
   compensate the Treasury over the expected average life of such loans for the
   prepayments that will occur.
6) Mandatory Reverse Deposit Requirement Adjustment is the lost interest on the
   deposit without interest or lower interest that needs to be held in the Central bank
   by the bank.
7) Interest payment Adjustment. The banks should adjust their funds transfer price to
   an interest payment frequency. A funds transfer debit or credit adjustment is to be
   made for all interest earning and interest bearing products which interest payment
   frequency is different from the basic yield curve.
8) Other adjustments can also be made though are not common in practice. Among
   them are: Tax Advantage Adjustment for fixed asset in auto or commercial leases,
   or Stand by Liquidity Adjustment.
9) Adjustment or transfer pricing in the case of indeterminate maturity deposits and
   non interest bearing assets. In the case of the indeterminate maturity deposit
   especially in the case of demand deposits finding the appropriate FTP is a real

                                           36
     challenge and the bank should find its own way. The current rate19 method, the
     average rate methods and the blended term approach are well used.
In the FTP the residual spread between the interest rate and transfer rates can be used in
simulating funding center strategies and measuring mismatched risk exposure. Transfer
prices can also help forecasting20 margin performance of business units. When they
project the future balance sheet, they can be assisted by a simulation tool based on the
FTP which models balance sheet and interest income/expense behaviors, separating the
future impact of existing business from planned, new business. The model needs the
same information about the cash flow, repricing, maturity, currency, embedded option
and other characteristics of existing business as the other ALM model. This simulation
model provides then forecast of a business unit’s pre-ordained interest margin based on
it existing book of business. Business unit managers can project the additional new
business volumes that must be booked at appropriate margins to meet their overall net
interest contribution target. The business unit’s simulation forecast is rate environment
sensitive; managers can understand and consider rate-dependent volume effects on their
business performance. Planning usually focuses on a single, “most likely“ scenario for
interest rates and on assumptions such as prepayments while ALM mutually tests the
future balance sheet and net interest revenue projections across numerous and varying
assumptions . The originating unit’s net contribution to the overall recorded margin of
the bank is a traditional historical post performance measurement view. The FTP
cannot eliminate all effects of interest rate changes from originating business units or
unscheduled volume reductions. Rate-volume variance analysis must consider this
element. FTP insulated the originating unit’s performance only from the effects of
pricing risk, not from volume risk.

Measuring mismatch exposure is the following: After allocating the contribution
margin based on transfer prices, any residual spread is credited to a funding center. This
spread is what the bank earned from accepting funding mismatches. In aggregate,
though, sources and uses of funds in the balance sheet create numerous funding
mismatches. The residual spread provides limited information about the aggregate
balance sheet mismatch to which the bank is currently exposed. This is because it is
derived from transfer price assigned at interest rate setting. To understand and measure
the earnings’ impact on the funding center of the existing mismatch, a transaction’s
remaining-term transfer price needs to be used. A transaction’s remaining term transfer
price is the price that would be assigned today based on its remaining repayment
characteristic and today’s alternative yield curve, so the spread between the different

19The current rate method transfer prices the deposit at rates that are in place for the current processing
period. Changes in market rates are immediately and fully reflected in assigned transfer rate.
The moving average methods, a form of the average rate transfer pricing, intends to describe the sluggish
pricing observed for these types of liabilities. A time period for the moving average is chosen based on
the observed or estimated repricing responsiveness for the deposit category.
Blended term analysis initiates by assuming a portion to a product line as core stable based on historical
analysis of past cash flow patterns in balances. Non volatile balances profiles secure longer moving
averages. Balance and time segmentation continues until some amount is apportioned to a volatile
portion which receives short transfer rate. Blended term transfer rate is a weighted transfer price with
cash flow.
Transfer pricing Indeterminate-maturity Deposits, Journal of Performance Management, by Thomas E.
Bowers
20Fund transfer pricing and A/L modeling, Journal of Bank cost & management Accountant, 2000,
Payant, W Randall.

                                                    37
points of the curve indicates how much could be earned for accepting mismatches
today. To analyze the bank’s aggregate existing mismatches, the remaining term
transfer price is applied to the transfer priced principal balances for all sources and uses
of funds. The impact of overall mismatch on future earnings can be evaluated in an
income simulation model. This procedure isolates only the funding mismatch
components in the simulation’s funding risk assessment. The income simulation of the
funding mismatch assists the funding center in its management. The difference between
the origination term and remaining term simulation results represents the spread the
bank created from two factors – first accepting prior mismatch exposures which effects
on earnings may not be felt immediately and secondly because transaction’s remaining
lives shorten over time.
Income simulation can be performed with different assumptions for interest rates,
prepayments, volume growth, spreads, etc. FTP should remove future interest rate risk
planned business unit net interest revenue and yield a mismatch calculation which is
very meaningful for a Treasury department.

D) Duration
The Bank can use duration (Average Remaining Maturity) for asset/liability
management, however it is difficult for many banks to analyse the volatility of
everything on the balance sheet in order to use it for bonds. Duration analysis is the
expected life of a fixed-income security, taking into account its coupon yield, interest
payments, maturity, and call features. Duration attempts to measure actual maturity, as
opposed to final maturity, by measuring the average time required to collect all
payments of principal and interest. The duration of a callable bond, also called its
effective duration, may be considerably shorter than its stated maturity in a period of
rising interest rates. Thus, as market interest rates rise, the duration of a financial
instrument decrease. For example, a 30 year mortgage may have an effective duration
of only 11 to 12 years, which means the loan will probably be paid off in about one
third of the time, supposedly carried by originating lender as an earning asset.
Calculation
With relation to fixed rate bonds duration is the weighted average of the remaining
maturity until each individual payment is due, weighted by the ratio of the discounted
net present value of each payment, where discount rates are the individual yields
calculated until the due dates of each payment and bond’s price.
Regarding to floating rate bonds duration is the average remaining lifetime equals with
the remaining period until the next interest rate fixing.

                                       m
                                              t ⋅ Ct
                                       ∑ (1 + r )
                                       t =1
                                                       t
Duration (MD):                    D=    m
                                               Ct
                                       ∑ (1 + r )
                                       t =1
                                                       t




               where    D*    –    average remaining maturity (years)
                        r     –    yield calculated until maturity,
                        Ct    –    due amount at t time,
                        m     –    full maturity (years)

                                                    38
                                                  D
Modified Duration (MD):                 D* =
                                               (1 + r )
                  where      D*     –    modified duration (years),
                             r      –    yield calculated until maturity

Duration gap model:
Duration analysis can be used to assess the impact of interest rate changes on market
value of bank’s asset/liability structure. The duration gap model improves upon static-
gap analysis by quantifying the impact of changes in interest rates on the net worth of
the bank, rather than solely focusing on the temporal repricing characteristics of the
bank’s balance sheet. Furthermore, the concept of equity duration, by-product of the
duration-gap measurement, allows the bank’s management to assess the risk of various
asset/liability and capital structures.

If MVA and MVL are the market values of assets and liabilities, respectively, duration gap is equal to:
         DGAP = DA − ( MVL / MVA) DL
         where DA is duration of assets, DL is duration of liabilities

         For instance, if the duration of assets is 4, and those assets are 98 percent funded by liabilities
         with a duration of 2, the duration gap of the institution is 2.4 = (4.0 - (0,98 х 2)).

Based on duration gap model the change in economic value of equity can be found with the following:
                        ∆y 
         ∆EVE = − DGAP           MVA
                        (1 + y )
         where y is the general level of interest rates

The interest rate sensitivity or equity duration, of the bank can be expressed as follows:

         Equity duration = (Duration Gap)/(Leverage ratio)
         where Leverage ratio equals
                        Total market value of Rate Sensitivity Assets
                        Total market value of Equity capital

This indicates that the change in the value of an institution for a given change in interest rates is a
function not only of the duration gap, but also of the financial leverage inherent in the institution‘s
capital structure. The duration gap could serve as a strategic planning tool for evaluating and
controlling the interest rate risk of the bank. By changing the composition of the balance sheet, the
desired duration gap for a particular target account can be attained. The disadvantage of the duration
gap model is that it requires extensive data on specific characteristic and current market pricing
schedules of the bank.


III.4.3. Setting up limits and stress testing
The goal of interest risk management is to maintain a bank’s interest rate risk exposure
within self-imposed parameters over a range of possible changes in interest rates.
The interest rate risk limits should set boundaries for the level of interest rate risk for
the bank and where appropriate, should also provide the capability to allocate limits to
individual portfolios, activities, or business units. Limit systems should also ensure that
                                                          39
positions that exceed certain predetermined levels receive prompt management
attention.
•   From an earnings perspective, banks should explore limits on the variability of net
    income as well as net interest income in order to fully access the contribution of
    non interest income to the interest rate risk exposure of the bank.
•   The form of limits for addressing the effect of rates on the bank’s economic value
    of equity should be appropriate for the size and complexity of its underlying
    position. Interest rate risk limits may be keyed to specific scenarios of movement in
    market interest rates. Specified scenarios should take account of the full range of
    possible sources of interest rate risk.
    The stress test, the worst case scenarios might include abrupt changes in the general
    level of interest rates, changes in the relationships among key market rates (i.e.
    Basis risk), change in the slope and the shape of the yield curve (i.e. Yield curve
    risk) and so on.
III.4.4. Case Study

Medium bank developed interest rate risk management system in the banking book. They employed the
following methodology:

    Methodology                                              Limit

Repricing risk         Potential decrease of the interest income – based on the yield curve 1% parallel
exposure and analyze   movement should not be greater than 10% of the yearly income.
RSG=RSA/RSL
                       The bank sets the limit based on the maximum acceptable loss. What can the
                       bank afford?
                       The potential decrease of the shareholder’s equity - based on the standard
                       interest rate shock (2% parallel movement) of the repricing risk in the banking
                       book - should not be greater than 20% of the sum of the tier I and tier II capital.

Duration               Average remaining maturity of the securities portfolio of the banking book, not
                       hedged with IRS denominated in RUB with duration over 1 year of bank should
                       not exceed 5 years. The limit is based on the duration of the liability side.

Basis risk             Medium Bank’s basis risk exposure is based on the USD fund; otherwise most
                       products of the bank are fix rate, so the bank does not produce basis risk
                       analysis.

Yield curve            The bank is loan rich, it needs a transfer pricing yield curve that reflects the
                       bank’s source and use of the funds on the whole sale market. There is no real
                       good solution in the Russian market; consequently the bank derives it from
                       several benchmark yield curves. The possibilities could be the following:




                                                  40
                                                      −     For short term: Moscow Interbank Offer Rate (MIBOR) based on 31 banks
                                                            offer rates: from 2 to 7 days, from 8 to 30 days, from 31 to 90 days., from
                                                            91 to 180 days, from 181 days to 1 year, but the market for 3 months
                                                            money is not liquid.
                                                      −     From 1 year to 5 years: Yield of bonds issued by banks.
                                                      −     From 5 years and longer the yields from the state bond markets.


            Repricing gap
                                                                              According to the Maturity Date (Fix) or Repricing Date (Floaters)
                                                          up to 1  1-3    3-6      6 - 12    1-2      2-3      3-4      4-5      5-7     7 - 10     10 - 15    15 years
                                                                                                                                                                            Total
                    Description                           month months months months years years years years years                       years      years        over
                                                            1       2      3         4        5        6        7        8        9        10         11          12         13
                                                            a       b      c         d        e         f       g        h        i         j          k           l         m
Interest-bearing Assets                                       2200    500    250        500   1500        500     500      250      500       500       1000         1000           9200
  Avaiable for Sale Securities - fix                           500                                                                                                                   500
  Avaiable for Sale Securities - floaters                                                                                                                                              0
  Held-to-Maturity Securities - fix                                                               500                                                                                500
  Held-to-Maturity Securities - floaters                                                                                                                                               0
  Deposits due to the Central Bank and Other Banks -
                                                              1200                                                                                                                  1200
  fix
  Deposits due to the Central Bank and Other Banks -
                                                                                                                                                                                      0
  floaters
 Loans and Other Interest-bearing Receivables - fix            500     500      250       500    1000     500      500     250      500      500       1000         1000            7000
  Loans and Other Interest-bearing Receivables -
                                                                                                                                                                                      0
  floaters
Interest-bearing Liabilities                                  2700    2500      450     1550     1600     200        0       0        0        0          0            0            9000
  Interbank Deposits - fix                                     200                                                                                                                   200
  Interbank Deposits - floaters                                                                                                                                                        0
  Deposits - fix                                              2500    2500      250       750     500     200                                                                       6700
  Deposits - floaters                                                                                                                                                                  0
  Loans - fix                                                                                     600                                                                                600
  Loans - floaters                                                                                                                                                                     0
  Debt Securities - fix                                                         200       800     500                                                                               1500
  Debt Securities - floaters                                                                                                                                                           0
  Back-ranked Liabilities - fix                                                                                                                                                        0
  Back-ranked Liabilities - floaters                                                                                                                                                   0
Difference (Assets - Liabilities)                             -500    -2000    -200     -1050    -100     300      500     250      500      500       1000         1000             200
Off-balance Sheet net position of Banking Book                          400                                                                                                          400




                                                                                           41
         The following table shows all Adjustments to the base FTP rate yield curve in the Medium bank:


                                                                  Adjustment to the FTP rate in RUB

                                       FTP         Specific          Term                      Prepayment                        Mandatory
              Products                                                                                                                                               FTP adjusted
                                     base rate    credit risk     Liquidity21                    penalty                          reserve
Assets
Money Market assets                    8%             4%                    -                            -                             -                                12%
Prime commercial loans                 10%            4%                    -                            -                             -                                14%
Commercial loans (fixed)               10%            4%                    -                            -                             -                                14%
Mortgage loans (fixed)                 12%            4%                    -                          1%                              -                                17%
Consumer loans (fixed)                 10%            4%                    -                          1%                              -                                15%
Indeterminate maturity assets          12%            4%         weighted / -                            -                             -                                16%
Liabilities
Money Market products                  8%             4%                    -                            -                             -                                12%
Current account (fixed)                1%             4%                    -                            -                          -4%                              5% x (1-4%)
Retail term deposit (fixed)            10%            4%                    -                            -                          -4%                   14% x (1-4%) = 13.4%
Corporate term deposit (fixed)         10%            4%                    -                            -                         -4,5%                  14% x (1-4%) = 13.4%
Indeterminate maturity deposit         12%            4%         weighted / -                            -                             -                                16%



         III.5. Necessary IT support to ALM
         III.5.1. Requirement on ALM software
         The A/L Risk Management is not always perfect, since it is based on several
         assumptions and approximations. Still, it could be improved upon, if information
         technology (IT) supports it. The bank should have ALM systems that capture all
         material sources of interest rate
         and liquidity risk and that
                                            Bulding ALM system
         assesses the effect of interest
                                                         Back office
         rate changes in ways that are                                     Software for processing, delivery, conformations,

         consistent with the scope of                                           payments, collateralization and accounting
                                                                                                       across all instrument


         their activities.                                           Risk management - Middle office


         The following figure presents                                                                          Trading Book- FX, commodity, equity, interest rate
                                                                                                                         Banking Book -Liquidity and interest rate
                                                                                                                                           risk management system

         the basic requirements that an                                                                                               Value at Risk calculation



         integrated solution for global                         Treasury- Front Office

         asset and liability management                         Real-time position-keeping system with storing market data and
                                                                                                     connection to Back Office
                                                                                  Market conformity system for dealers quoting

         contains.                                                                                     Limit monitoring system




         Software for Treasury
         The Treasury has a key role in ALM. The Treasury needs a position-keeping system
         that provides real-time transaction data store, market data store, global P&L
         consolidation across trading rooms and pricing tools. The software should include full
         drilldown capabilities that enable the Treasury and Risk management to identify and
         attribute risk to its sources. The sources include business units, trading entities,
         portfolios, individual deal or deal strategies. The position-keeping system should give
         possibilities to allocate the deals into the banking book or into the trading book.

         21   The adjustment is applied for the floating rate based products.
                                                                42
The Treasury also needs an efficient tool to monitor market conformity and prevent off-
market trading. The bank should store the market rates (real time) at the time of deal
entry, together with the deal rate and produce a report on any deviation from the bank’s
defined tolerance level. These tolerance levels could be expressed in percentage form
or the absolute amount of the percentage difference between the real time value (market
price) and traded value (capture price). The latter should be less than the defined
tolerance level.
Treasury and the Risk management need limit monitoring system, that controls
utilization of daily and overnight position limits as well as stop loss limits. The system
should be able to send message to the appropriate level of the management if it is
necessary.
Software for Back Office
The bank should be equipped with intelligent systems and technology that integrate
every process related to the trade from order management to final settlement. The
system should include processing and delivery, confirmation, payment, collateralization
and booking and communication with third parties such as counterparties,
correspondents and clearing system. The system should provide fully automated
support for handling the SWIFT messages.
Software for market risk management
The system for risk management of trading book should calculate regulatory capital
based value at risk (at least historical simulation based) as an internal model based
method as well as the standard method. The system also needs a wide range of reports
covering valuation, risk scenario analysis, cash flows, that can be integrated in line with
ad-hoc market requirements. The trading book risk manager system can be developed
together with the front office system and take into account the dealers’ requirements
because the dealers also use these data for daily market risk management.
A complete A/L Risk management system approach is not simply an aggregate of
applications, data and organisation. Bank has many business units, which are engaged
in different activities and support different products. IT should optimize the exchange
of information between each entity within the bank. A key task is to organise the
necessary A/L Risk data into a common format (data dictionary). IT plans needs to take
account of how key A/L risk management information might change over time. The
information might be static or dynamic. The IT platform and operating system should
be designed so, that they do not place constraints on managers trying to obtain risk
management data. Attempting to calculate and manage A/L Risk on a global basis
requires the centralized control of algorithms and immediate access to large amounts of
data. ALM data include both historical statistics and current risk characteristics for each
transaction in every portfolio.
A simple A/L Risk management system consists of three major components:22
Portfolio Manager – This is basically a database program that facilitates the collection
and management of portfolio data. The collection phase depends on the existence of a
data warehouse in the bank. If the bank has a data warehouse containing all the data
used by the system, the source of collection can be the data warehouse instead of the
sources system. The data include details of the portfolio, such as the description and
amount of the assets and liabilities, as well as on and off balance sheet items held in the


22 Ravi E. Dattatreya, A practical Approach to Asset/Liability Management in The Handbook of Asset
/Liability management by Frank J. Fabozzy and Atsuo Konishi, Irwin McGraw-Hill, 1996
                                                   43
portfolio. The A/L Risk database contains all relevant information on interest rate,
exchange rate and liquidity risk deal by deal. Bank’s data warehouse should be
populated daily with transaction and market information. Transaction information
should also be reconciled daily to ensure that market risk is reported accurately. Risk
data warehouse should also store a time series of market data in its financial database.
If the software needs to collect the data from geographically different places, the bank
should install a computer with a relatively high capacity in a centre of the bank and
connect it with the workstation via leased line.

          ALM Risk IT model                                                                                        Treasury
                                                                                                               Position keeping market
                                                                                                                    data collecting




                                                                                            Treasury
                                                                   Liabilities




                                                                                               arket
                                               D




                                                                                               and


                                                                                               ata
                                                eposits)




                                                                                                                        system
               Loans)


                                A




                                                           (e.g.




                                                                                              M



                                                                                              D
                        (e.g.
                                 ssets




                                                                                                               Market Confirmity System




                                                                                                                                               Risk(ALM)



                                ?                                                  ALM     Cash-                   Portfolio
            Bank’s                       Program                                 Common     flow       Cash-      analyzer,
                                         manager                                   data                        incl. VaR, and
             Data                                                                         generat       flow
                                                                                  model       or       model   limit controlling
            Ware                                                                                                    system


                                                                                                                                            Management
                                         OBS




                                                                                                                                          Scenario analyses




Cash-flow generator – This program obtains portfolio information from Portfolio
Manager and generates cash flow from assets and liabilities. Most systems have a
mapping engine that converts each deal into plain vanilla deals (depo or loans with one
cash flow, namely MM deals). Depending on deals volume the software aggregates
deals and generates capital cash flows of each product.
Portfolio Analyser – It should be able to produce a number of numerical and graphical
reports, conduct scenario analyses and recommend actions to be taken regarding risk
control. It generates a discount function based on available market data and uses it to
determine present values and so on. It constructs liquidity gap and interest rate risk gap.
It could also contain a risk simulator for scenario analysis (basis risk, and so on). The
program sometimes contains Fund Transfer Pricing module and the module that is able
to calculate the VaR. The software should include full drilldown capabilities, which
enable Risk management to identify and attribute risk to its sources, for example by
business unit, trading entity, portfolio, individual deal or deal strategy.

III.5.2. Buying or developing ALM software
There are various suppliers of A/L Risk management in the international software
market. The most well-known firms provide integrated, complete software for ALM.
Most of the packages contain similar modules. There are differences between them in
price and some functionality. When a bank decides to buy software bear in mind that
the price of the software is normally the smallest part of the implementation cost. A
bank has to pay consultancy fee, and other external costs. Consultancy fee is higher if
firm has no office in the country where the bank is located. Before bank buys software,
management needs to examine the supply, and discuss detailed conditions of
installation with the firm. For software installation bank should set up a project that
consists of bank experts form IT, Treasury, Risk management, Accounting and Back
Office and firm members. The project sponsors should be CFO or CRO and IT.


                                                                                                       44
                                                   SOFTWARES FOR ALM



                             Functions               Description

                             Treasury                Treasury front office real-time position keeping system
                                                     and connection to the ALM

                             Limit monitoring and    Market risk limit controller system
                             Market Conformity       Country and Counterparty limit controller
                                                     Market conformity modul for dealers qutaing

                             Back Office/ Middle     Accounting system
                             office
                             Value at Risk (VAR)     VAR calculation model, BIS capital adequacy

                             ALM Banking Book        ALM system based on Data warehouse




                      Suppliers:                          Reuters, Sungard,
                                                          Wall Street,Sendero,etc


If the bank has a very smart IT department, and they have enough capacity, the bank
can develop software. However please note that developing ALM software is very
costly and takes a lot of time. It is more efficient for the bank to work with a smaller
local IT company that is able to develop the basics of the ALM software that could be
adjusted to the bank requirements. It can be cheaper than buying software from large
international company or developing software alone.
Database of the Medium bank
Field Name                   Field Desciption
Account number               It identifies the transaction
Product                      Banking book product identification
Currency
Interest rate                Actual rate
Minimum-Interest-Rate
Maximum-Interest-Rate
Interest-Benchmark           in case of floating rate                                                          Medium Bank
                                                                                                               bought softwares
Margin                       margin
                                                                                                               for the treasury
Interest-rate type           Fix or floating
                                                                                                               (position keeping,
Interest-Adjustment-                                                                                           limit monitoring)
                             Repricing period
Frequency
                                                                                                               from the vendor.
Last-Interest-Adjustment     Last interest adjustment date of floating structure.                              Bank set up a
Next-Interest-Adjustment     Next interest adjustment date of variable structure.                              project and found a
Trading-Date                 Trading date                                                                      local computer
Fees                         Fee is paid regularly bases                                                       company that has a
Settlement-Date              Settlement or Value date of the account                                           basic ALM system.
Maturity-Date                Maturity date or closing date of the account                                      They decided the
Next-Payment-Date            Next repayment date of the capital repayment or annuity                           data base contains
                             structure.                                                                        the data that can be
Last-Payment-Date            Last repayment date of the capital repayment or annuity                           found in this table.
                             structure.
Payment capital                                                                                                They have to collect
Payment capital-Frequency    Repayment frequency of the capital repayment or annuity                           the data from the 3
                             structure.                                                                        source systems:
Payment interest                                                                                               deposit, loan and
Payment interest -                                                                                             the treasury system.
Frequency
CreditLine
Current-Account-Balance      Current amount
Amount-origination           Loan case
Fund Transfer Price          Transfer price actual value in the trading date
FTP points                   FTP points in the FTP curve
FTP Adjustment               Curve adjustment (liquidity premium and so on)
Cash flow of the principal



                                                                45
III.6. Reports

III.6.1. Basic Reports
According to Basel II bank should establish an adequate system for monitoring and
reporting risk exposures and assessing how the bank’s changing risk profile affects
capital needs. The bank’s senior management or board of directors should, on a regular
basis, receive reports on the bank’s risk profile and capital needs. These reports should
allow senior management to:
•   Evaluate the level and trend of material risks and their effect on capital levels
•   Evaluate the sensitivity and reasonableness of key assumptions used in the capital
    assessment measurement system
•   Determine that the bank holds sufficient capital against the various risks and is in
    compliance with established capital adequacy goals and
•   Assess its future capital requirements based on the bank’s reported risk profile and
    make necessary adjustments to the bank’s strategic plan accordingly.




Who prepares the reports and who receives it?
ALM Department should be responsible for the reports to be received by the ALCO
and BoD, because these reports should contain not only data from the present exposure,
but also an explanation of the reasons. They have to produce forecast, and scenario
analysis on how exposure positions influence the bank P/L in the future.
If the bank has no appropriate computer system, collecting data for the gap reports
takes a lot of time, and normally they have not enough time to analyze the position of
the bank. IT has to support the ALM unit in preparing the report; otherwise the Bank
management cannot get the right information for the decision.


                                             46
If ALM does not produce the daily reports on Treasury position, they have to monitor
and if limit utilization does not fit to the limits approved by the ALCO they have to
report it to the Bank management.
Daily reports could be produced by Back or Middle office.

What types of reports have to be prepared?

   −   Position reports on risk exposure
   −   Overall mismatch report on the position
   −   Funding requirements for the next month and quarter
   −   Overall mismatch report on the expected position
   −   P/L reports
   −   “What if” scenarios for stress testing
   −   Scenario base on the forecast
   −   Limit reports

The form of the report
The report to the ALCO and the BoD should consist of 2 parts. The first part should
contain the explanations of results, limit utilization information, proposals on managing
the risk exposure and the effect of the new products. The second part should be the
appendix, containing detailed reports of position, scenario, P/L.
Daily reports should be more detailed.


III. 6.2. Case study

Medium Bank prepares comprehensive regular reports. The following chart shows the form and
the content of the monthly reports to the ALCO and the yearly report to the BoD.

Overview             Executive summary contains liquidity and interest rate risk exposure in the
                     reporting period. A short forecast of the market movement completes the
                     overview. Economic Capital requirement behind the position of the bank is
                     prepared to the management.

Limit utilization    A table that contains the limits, actual value of the last reporting day, and sums
                     of the limit excess in the reporting period.

Market               Short overview of the market movement with table that shows the value of the
movement             interest rates in short term and long term in RUB, EUR and USD.

Interest rate risk   Repricing gap and explanation
exposure
                     Capital requirement based on BIS
                     Scenario analysis with change of the yield curve
                     Change of the net interest income based on FTP
                     Scenario analysis based on Basis risk effect
                     Duration analysis for security portfolio


                                                    47
Liquidity     risk     Report of the daily exposure (graph)
exposure
                       Gap analysis based on expected cash flow
                       Scenario analysis (with drawing, prepayment, and so on)
                       Value of the liquidity ratios, explained the difference with previous reporting
                       Treasury position or funding requirement for the next month and quarter
                       Scenario analysis


Medium bank reports prepared by ALM unit

Reports on interest      Can be split          Description
rate risk exposure

Overall Repricing        Business lines        The repricing mismatch report contains the exposure that
Schedule                 (retail, corporate,   arise from timing differences in the maturity (for fixed-
(Mismatch)               SME)                  rate) and repricing (for floating-rate) of bank assets,
                                               liabilities, and OBS positions. While such repricing
Report                   Product groups        mismatches are fundamental to the business of banking,
                         (loans, term          they can expose a bank's income and underlying economic
                         deposits,             value to unanticipated fluctuations as interest rates vary.
                         Currency              This analysis should be prepared by currencies.
                         (RUB, USD)

“What if” scenarios,     Business lines        Repricing mismatches can also expose a bank to changes
effect of changing       (retail, corporate,   in the slope and shape of the yield curve. Yield curve risk
interest rates on        SME)                  arises when unanticipated shifts of the yield curve have
interest income and                            adverse effects on a bank's income or underlying
                         Product groups        economic value. Assuming the structure of the position is
a bank's economic        (loans, term          unchanged “What if”
value                    deposits,
                                                        1. change of the yield curve (parallel moving)
                         Currency (RUB,
                         USD, EUR)                      2. change of the shape of the yield curve
                         Type of the           A maturity/repricing schedule can also be used to evaluate
                         interest rate (fix,   the effects of changing interest rates on a bank's economic
                         floating,             value by applying sensitivity weights to each time band.
                         variable)
                         Type of the
                         benchmark
                         (Mosibor, Libor)

“What if” scenarios                            Repricing mismatches can also be prepared based on the
of portfolio change                            planned portfolio.

                         Overall
Basis risk                                     The Bank prepares a basis risk analysis denominated in
                         Business lines        domestic currency, EUR, USD and CHF containing all
                         Product groups        balance sheet items and any off-balance-sheet items that
                         Currency              are exposed to interest rate risk quarterly. Assets and
                         Type of the           liabilities are sorted into categories of intervals according
                         interest rate (fix,   to benchmark interest rate.
                         floating)
                                               The bank prepares a quarterly forecasted basis risk
                         Type of the
                                               analysis based on plans (projections) as of the end of the
                         benchmark
                                               following quarter in the similar structure.
                         (Mosibor, Libor)

“What if” scenarios                            Bank analyses the effect of a 100 b.p. shift of market yield

                                                       48
related to basis risk                         curve: how the Bank can respond to this event?

Duration analysis

Liquidity reports

Daily cash flow for                           Tools for tactical (intraday and short term) liquidity
8 days                                        management: cash-flow

Overall Maturity        Business lines        Bank should prepare the funding matrix in each currency
(Mismatch)              (retail, corporate,   (RUB, USD, other currencies) in a way that assets placed at
                        SME)                  and liabilities withdrawn from Bank for the actual position of
Report                                        the on and off balance sheet items. Then the funding matrix
                        Product groups        should be restructured for expected position based on the
                        (loans, term          past observation:
                        deposits)
                                              -   retail and other client deposits are to be regrouped
                        Currency (RUB,            from their contractual category into another category,
                        USD)                      in accordance with their expected maturity (stable or
                                                  core deposit especially for the retail deposit, sight
                                                  deposits)
                                              -   utilization of credit lines assuming normal business
                                                  activity
                                              Overall Maturity (Mismatch) report for expected position

Treasury position
based on the
business plan

Liquidity Cost                                The cost of liquidity is the additional charge of the recent
report                                        loan (risk bonus) assuming a complete, maturity-matched
                                              refinancing (i.e. the cost of liquidity depends on the
                                              bank’s specific and financial market assessment). The
                                              results show the changes in liquidity risk due to the new
                                              financing structure arising because of the alteration of the
                                              market position of the bank, and the cost of shaping a
                                              closed liquidity structure. .Liquidity risk is the risk of a
                                              future increase in liquidity costs of the open funding
                                              position of the bank

What if scenarios                             Downgrade: 10% of matured banking sector sources are
effects of the                                not renewed.
change of portfolio
                                              Withdrawal of deposits
                                              Utilization Credit lines: 50% of unused credit lines
                                              maturing in one year are utilized (in 7 days: 10%, in 8-14
                                              days: 10%, in 15-30 days: 20%, in 31-90 days: 10%).

Indicators




                                                      49
IV. Conclusion
Every bank needs a sound A/L Risk management system, even though developing an
A/L Risk management system is a complicated and time consuming job. Based on the
Basel principles the sound risk management system involves the application of four
basic elements that are the following:
   1. Appropriate board and senior management oversight
   2. Adequate risk management policies and procedures
   3. Appropriate risk measurement, monitoring, and control functions
   4. Comprehensive internal controls and independent audits.
This book introduced you to the basic steps of the development of a sound ALM
system based on the Basel principles. In the process of the system development the
bank has to answer the main questions:
   •   Where is the Bank A/L Risk management system?
   •   How does the bank want to develop it?
   •   Should the bank need the best practice in all dimensions of A/L Risk
       management in the near future?
   •   How can the bank implement the best practice in A/L Risk management?
Analyzing the first dimension of A/L Risk management, we have to emphasize:
   •   The bank should pay close attention to the role of the BoD and senior
       management is very important in ALM
   •   Without the appropriately-operated ALCO, the bank cannot manage interest and
       liquidity risk efficiently
   •   Considering that the treasurer belongs to the front office area, CRO or CFO
       should be responsible for A/L Risk management unit.
Most rating agencies believe that if a bank uses VAR model, its risk management
system is advanced. We, however, are of the opinion that a medium-sized bank’s A/L
Risk management system could be sound without using VaR model in the first stage.
As it was mentioned earlier, hundreds of pages of advanced procedures and models
sitting on a shelf are useless if no one can employ them. So the bank has to set out a
Risk management policy and guidelines that contain those methodologies and
procedures that the bank employs in its daily practice.
Studying tools of ALM the bank should define what interest rate and liquidity risk are,
how they measure it, what the bank‘s risk appetite based on the capital requirement and
the maximal acceptable loss. An efficient A/L Risk management system could not be
without an appropriate IT system; the bank has to develop the IT system parallel with
implementing new methodology of risk measurement. IT can support a reasonable
report system. Among methods of interest rate risk measurement Fund Transfer Pricing
was also introduced. The bank can use it not only for measuring interest rate risk
exposure but it could be employed for planning and profitability management
throughout the institution.
 Building a sound A/L Risk management system is a big challenge for
        the bank, but it makes bank operations more efficient

                                          50
                                  References

•   A bank’s focal point for market risk: The transfer pricing mismatch unit,
    Journal of Bank Cost & Management Accounting, 2000 by Chittenden, John
•   Adjustments to the base FTP rate index curve, Journal of Bank Cost &
    Management Accounting, by Ersoz, Ali Murat
•   Alexander Adam: Handbook of Asset/liability management from models to
    Optimal return Strategies, JohnWiley and Sons Ltd
•   Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
    •   Amendment to the Capital Accord to incorporate market risks (2005)
    •   Principles for the Management and Supervision of Interest Rate Risk (2004)
    •   Management of Liquidity Risk in Financial Groups (2006)
    •   Sound Practices for Managing Liquidity in Banking Organizations (2000)
    •   Liquidity Risk: Management and Supervisory Challenges (2008)
    •   BASEL II
•   Crockford Neil. An Introduction to Risk Management (2 nd ed.). Woodhead-
    Faulkner (1986) O 85941-332-2 (Wikipedia: Asset liability management)
•   Denis G. UYEMURA, Donald R. Van Deventer: Financial Risk Management in
    Banking. MCGraw-Hill
•   Dr. Judit Burucs: “Thoughts on Fund Transfer Pricing” was published by
    Analytical Journal No.7. 2008 in Moscow. (Available in Russian on the
    following link http://www.abajour.ru/files/07_08_buruch.pdf)
•   Frank J. Fabozzi and Atsuo Konishi: The Handbook of Asset/Liability
    Management, Irvin, McGraw-Hill, 1996
•   Fund transfer pricing and A/L modeling, Journal of Bank cost & management
    Accountant,2000, Payant, W Randall
•   Hungarian Financial Supervisory Authority Proposal for Asset/liability
    management (2/2000)
•   IFRS 7 Financial Instrument: Disclosure
•   Institute of International Finance, Principles of Liquidity Risk Management
•   Internal Transfer Pricing of Bank Funds, Valerie Giardini, Bank Administration
    Institute, Rolling Meadowa, Illinois
•   Jean Dermine, INSEAD, Fontainebleau, July 17, 2003ALM in Banking in
    Stavros A. Zenios, William Ziemba: Handbook of Asset/Liability Management,
    2003
•   Michael Crouchy, Dan Galai, Robert Mark: Risk Management McGaw-Hill, 2001
•   Stavros A. Zenios, William Ziemba: Handbook of Asset/Liability Management,
    2006
•   The Handbook of Asset/Liability Management. Frank J. Fabozzi and Atsuo
    Konishi / Irwin McGraw-Hill 1991, 1996

                                        51
