Structural Change,
Fundamentals,
and Growth
A Framework and Case Studies




            Edited by
            Margaret McMillan
            Dani Rodrik
            Claudia Sepúlveda
About IFPRI
The International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), established in
1975, provides research-based policy solutions to sustainably reduce poverty
and end hunger and malnutrition. The Institute conducts research, communi-
cates results, optimizes partnerships, and builds capacity to ensure sustainable
food production, promote healthy food systems, improve markets and trade,
transform agriculture, build resilience, and strengthen institutions and gover-
nance. Gender is considered in all of the Institute’s work. IFPRI collaborates
with partners around the world, including development implementers, public
institutions, the private sector, and farmers’ organizations.



About IFPRI’s Peer Review Process
IFPRI books are policy-relevant publications based on original and innova-
tive research conducted at IFPRI. All manuscripts submitted for publica-
tion as IFPRI books undergo an extensive review procedure that is managed
by IFPRI’s Publications Review Committee (PRC). Upon submission to the
PRC, the manuscript is reviewed by a PRC member. Once the manuscript
is considered ready for external review, the PRC submits it to at least two
external reviewers who are chosen for their familiarity with the subject mat-
ter and the country setting. Upon receipt of these blind external peer reviews,
the PRC provides the author with an editorial decision and, when necessary,
instructions for revision based on the external reviews. The PRC reassesses the
revised manuscript and makes a recommendation regarding publication to the
director general of IFPRI. With the director general’s approval, the manuscript
enters the editorial and production phase to become an IFPRI book.
                   STRUCTURAL CHANGE,
                    FUNDAMENTALS, AND
                              GROWTH
                                 A Framework and Case Studies


         Edited by Margaret McMillan, Dani Rodrik, and Claudia Sepúlveda




A Peer-Reviewed Publication



International Food Policy Research Institute
Washington, DC
Copyright 2016 International Food Policy Research Institute. All rights
reserved. Contact ifpri-copyright@cgiar.org for permission to reproduce.

Any opinions stated herein are those of the author(s) and are not necessarily
representative of or endorsed by the International Food Policy Research
Institute.

Except where otherwise noted, this work is licensed under a Creative
Commons, Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 3.0 IGO License
(CC BY-NC-ND) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/igo/.

International Food Policy Research Institute
1201 Eye Street NW, 12th floor
Washington, DC 20005 USA
Telephone: 202-862-5600

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2499/9780896292147

           Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: McMillan, Margaret Stokes, editor. | Rodrik, Dani, editor. | Sepúlveda,
  Claudia Paz, editor.
Title: Structural change, fundamentals, and growth : a framework and
  case studies / edited by Margaret McMillan, Dani Rodrik, and Claudia
  Sepúlveda.
Description: Washington, DC : International Food Policy Research Institute,
  [2016] | Includes bibliographical references.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016023389 (print) | LCCN 2016025636 (ebook) |
  ISBN 9780896292147 | ISBN 9780896292147 ()
Subjects: LCSH: Agriculture--Economic aspects--Developing countries--Case
  studies. | Agricultural productivity--Developing countries--Case studies. |
  Economic development--Developing countries--Case studies.
Classification: LCC HD1417 . S735 2016 (print) | LCC HD1417 (ebook) |
  DDC 338.9009172/4--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016023389

Cover design: Anne C. Kerns/Anne Likes Red, Inc.
Project manager: Patricia Fowlkes/IFPRI
Book layout: Laurel Muller/Cohographics
                                                                     Contents
             Tables, Figures, and Boxes                                    vii

             Acronyms and Abbreviations                                    xv

             Forewordxvix

             Acknowledgmentsxxi

Overview	    Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth                    1
             Dani Rodrik, Margaret McMillan, and Claudia Sepúlveda

Chapter 1	   Can the Whole Actually Be Greater Than the
             Sum of Its Parts? Lessons from India’s Growing
             Economy and Its Evolving Structure                           39
             Reshad N. Ahsan and Devashish Mitra

Chapter 2	   Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change
             in Viet Nam                                                   81
             Brian McCaig and Nina Pavcnik

Chapter 3	   Stuck in the Middle? Structural Change and
             Productivity Growth in Botswana                              125
             Brian McCaig, Margaret McMillan, Íñigo Verduzco-Gallo, and
             Keith Jefferis

Chapter 4	   Structural Change in a Poor African Country:
             New Historical Evidence from Ghana                           161
             Robert Darko Osei and Rémi Jedwab
vi



Chapter 5	   Structural Change and the Possibilities for
             Future Growth in Nigeria                             197
             Adedeji Adeyinka, Sheu Salau, and Dietrich Vollrath

Chapter 6	   The Political Economy of Zambia’s Recovery:
             Structural Change without Transformation?            235
             Danielle Resnick and James Thurlow

Chapter 7	   Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and
             Trade Policy in Brazil                               267
             Sergio Firpo and Renan Pieri

             Contributors	293

             Index	299
                             Tables, Figures, and Boxes


Tables
O.1	   Structural change starts to take on a bigger role for Nigeria in
       the mid-2000s                                                     22
O.2	   Agriculture is driving Zambia’s job growth but not GDP            23
O.3	   African and other countries seeing structural change in the 21st
       century                                                           28
1.1	   China’s labor productivity has grown much faster than India’s
       International comparison of value-added per worker, 1990 and
       2005                                                              49
1.2	   Agriculture’s share has fallen                                    51
1.3	   Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services leads the
       way in productivity                                               52
1.4	   Structural change, albeit still low, contributed the most during
       the 1990s                                                         54
1.5	   Gujarat has a higher labor productivity growth rate in every
       sector than Maharashtra                                           60
1.6	   Agriculture is down everywhere, except Gujarat                    62
1.7	   Informality is up slightly                                        67
1A.1	 Determinants of desirable structural change                        72
1A.2	 Labor pull versus labor push                                       73
1A.3	 The role of trade liberalization, flexible labor markets, and
      education74
viii



1A.4	 The role of trade liberalization, flexible labor markets, and
      education in manufacturing                                           75
1A.5	 Informality and structural change                                    76
2.1	    Huge productivity gaps among sectors                               86
2.2	    Demography plays only a small role in the exit from agriculture    91
2.3	    Big differences among regions in labor movements                   92
2.4	    Most workers are still in informal businesses                     103
2.5	    Workers increasingly moved to the growing private sector,
        especially in manufacturing                                       106
2.6	    Most manufacturing jobs were added in the top four industries     109
2A.1	 Mapping between GSO sectors and McMillan and Rodrik
      sectors                                                             120
3.1	    Mining initially drove sectoral productivity growth               133
3.2	    Summary of major incentive schemes                                138
3.3	    Higher labor force participation                                  141
3.4a	   High unemployment, particularly for youth . . .                   142
3.4b	   . . . and rising informality                                      142
3.5	    A major move out of construction and public administration        144
3A.1	 Trade flows by commodity group, 1991–2005/2006                      154
3A.2	 Botswana’s top-10 imports and exports, 1991 and 2005                156
3A.3	 Botswana’s top-10 source countries for imports and destination
      countries for exports, 1991 and 2005                                158
4.1	    Structural change kicks in after 1992                             180
4B.1	   Decomposition of formal employment growth in Ghana,
        1960–2006191
5.1a	   Agriculture still employs the most labor . . .                    203
5.1b	   . . . even though it has seen the biggest labor falls, followed
        by trade                                                          203
5.2	    Structural change starts to take on a bigger role in the
        mid-2000s206
5.3	    Transportation and communications sector outperforms other
        sectors207
5.4	    Agriculture and trade still dominate employment                   210
                                                                          ix



5.5	    Structural change was broad based in terms of human capital    211
5B.1	   Summary data from Nigerian General Household Surveys,
        1996–2009226
5D.1	 Human capital and hours worked by industry, 2009                 229
6.1	    Mining is no longer in the top spot                            237
6.2	    Positive structural change is the new story                    239
6.3	    Rising urbanization and high youth unemployment                243
6.4	    Agriculture is driving job growth but not GDP                  245
6.5	    Informal workers are less satisfied than formal workers        255
6A.1	 Total employment by sector, 1986–2010                            260
6A.2	 Total value-added per worker by sector, 1990–2010                261
7.1	    Within-sector changes swamp structural changes                 277
7.2a	   Agriculture and mining rose most in earnings . . .             278
7.2b	   . . . but changes in earnings don’t correlate with changes in
        employment share                                               278
7.3	    More education corresponds to higher earnings                  279
7.4	    Manufacturing, public utilities, and transport saw a rise in
        informality280
7.5a	   GDP shares for manufacturing and construction peaked in
        the late 1970s . . .                                           282
7.5b	   . . . but their employment shares peaked in the mid-1990s      282
7C.1	 Key characteristics of Brazil’s labor force                      286
7D.1	 Percentage of whites by sector                                   287
7D.2	 Percentage of males by sector                                    287
7D.3	 Average age by sector                                            287
7D.4	 Average tenure (months) by sector                                288
7D.5	 Average experience (years) by sector                             288
7D.6	 Percentage of workers in the North region by sector              288
7D.7	 Percentage of workers in the South region by sector              289
7D.8	 Percentage of workers in the Southeast region by sector          289
7D.9	 Percentage of workers in the Central-West region by sector       289
7D.10	 Percentage of workers in the Northeast region by sector         290
x



Figures
O.1a	 With advanced and developing country growth rate differentials
      narrowing in the 2000s . . .                                       2
O.1b	 . . . the income gap has been closing more rapidly than in the
      1990s2
O.2	    A typology of growth patterns and outcomes                       7
O.3	    Viet Nam’s workers move to higher-productivity sectors          14
O.4	    Bypassing industry and into services in Ghana                   16
O.5a	 Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services is
      contributing most to India’s structural change . . .              20
O.5b	 . . . and since 2000, manufacturing is helping its “within-sector”
      change20
O.6	    Gujarat and Maharashtra follow significantly different growth
        paths21
O.7	    Within-sector changes in Brazil swamping structural changes     24
O.8	    From a big role for structural change in Botswana to a drag on
        growth26
O.9	    Unconditional convergence is alive and well in Africa           30
O.10	 A move from manufacturing to services in Hong Kong                33
1.1a	   Agriculture accounts for about half of India’s workers . . .    40
1.1b	   . . . but the growth in gross domestic product is coming from
        service40
1.2a	   China leads India in GDP per capita . . .                       42
1.2b	   . . . and is on a much faster growth trajectory                 42
1.3	    Labor productivity has risen sharply since 1960                 48
1.4	    Some sectors are doing a lot better than others                 50
1.5a	   “Within-sector” productivity growth tends to be much more
        volatile than structural change . . .                           55
1.5b	   . . . with “within sector’s” greatest volatility in the 1980s   55
1.6a	   Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services is
        contributing most to structural change . . .                    57
1.6b	   . . . and since 2000, manufacturing is significantly helping
        “within-sector” change                                          57
                                                                              xi



1.7	    Gujarat and Maharashtra follow different growth paths               59
2.1a	   Big move out of agriculture in terms of GDP . . .                   83
2.1b	   . . . and in terms of employment share                              83
2.2	    Structural change played a greater role in the 2000s than in the
        1990s85
2.3a	   Low-productivity agriculture dominates employment in the
        1990s . . .                                                         88
2.3b	   . . . and 2000s, although its role is decreasing                    88
2.4	    Big move from low- to high-productivity sectors over two
        decades89
2.5	    Viet Nam has swung from a closed economy to an open one             99
2.6a	   Exports of manufactured goods have risen . . .                     101
2.6b	   . . . while the types of manufactured goods being imported
        have changed                                                       101
2.7a	   Moving away from state-owned enterprises goes hand in hand
        with bigger industry size . . .                                    112
2.7b	   . . . as does attracting foreign direct investment                 112
2.8	    Viet Nam leapfrogged over many peers                               113
2.9	    Viet Nam outperformed many other agrarian economies                114
2.10a	 Viet Nam was helped by a competitive exchange rate . . .            116
2.10b	 . . . and flexible labor markets                                    116
3.1a	   Services now dominates in value-added . . .                        126
3.1b	   . . . and in terms of employment                                   126
3.2a	   After independence, most workers were
        in low-productivity agriculture . . .                              131
3.2b	   . . . but today, most workers are in higher-productivity sectors   131
3.3	    From a big role for structural change to a drag on growth          132
3.4a	   Starting with a highly agrarian society . . .                      134
3.4b	   . . . Botswana becomes less so, then stabilizes at 40 percent for
        its agrarian share . . .                                           134
3.4c	   . . . even though productivity is still relatively low             135
3.5a	   Botswana’s currency has remained competitive . . .                 137
xii



3.5b	   . . . and its labor markets have remained flexible                 137
3.6a	   Tariffs fell sharply, especially in manufacturing . . .            147
3.6b	   . . . but import and export volumes held steady                    147
4.1	    A harbinger of political and economic changes in Africa            162
4.2	    Private investment starts to lead in the 2000s                     169
4.3	    Agricultural productivity remains far below that of industry
        and services                                                       171
4.4	    Bypassing industry and into services                               172
4.5	    Agriculture’s employment share remained fairly steady for
        decades before falling sharply after 1992                          173
4.6	    No big move into manufacturing                                     175
4.7	    Manufacturing’s level of formality is still quite low              176
4.8	    Not really a “service revolution”                                  177
5.1	    Slow growth in the 1990s turns into rapid growth in the 2000s      198
5.2	    From net food exporter to net importer                             200
5.3	    Agriculture, although losing ground, still dominates               201
5.4	    Agriculture and services have the lowest levels of productivity    202
5.5	    A picture of positive structural change                            204
5C.1	 Measures of crop production, 1996–2009                               227
5C.2	 Measures of electricity production, 1990–2010                        228
6.1	    The seesaw role of agriculture                                     240
7.1a	   Structural change played a positive role for Brazil . . .          273
7.1b	   . . . especially in the golden age, although manufacturing wasn’t
        the main draw                                                      273
7.2a	   Structural change becomes less important after 1964 . . .          274
7.2b	   . . . a lot less so between 1980 and 1994 . . .                    274
7.2c	   . . . and even weaker between 1995 and 2005 . . .                  275
7.2d	   . . . including through 2008                                       275
7.3	    Within-sector changes swamp structural changes                     276
7.4	    Trade liberalization didn’t seem to alter major sectoral trends    280
7E.1	   Decomposition of informality growth, 1993/1995–2007/2008 290
                                                                     xiii



Boxes
O.1	    An eclectic spin on the two traditions	                       5
O.2	    Putting the focus on the “fundamentals”	                     35
1.1	    Are India’s labor regulations a problem?	                    46
3.1	    Is it possible that the share of agricultural workers has
        continued to fall?	                                         139
5.1	    The naira’s role in foreign trade	                          218
                    Acronyms and Abbreviations


ASD	       Africa Sector Database
ASEAN 	    Association of Southeast Asian Nations
BDP 	      Botswana Democratic Party
BIDPA 	    Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis
CEPR	      Center for Economic and Policy Research
CSO 	      Central Statistical Office (India, Zambia)
CSO 	      Central Statistics Office (Botswana)
EEG 	      Export Expansion Grant
FDI	       foreign direct investment
FBS	       finance, business, and real estate (as described in Chapter 6)
FIRE	      finance, insurance, real estate, and business services
           (as described in the Overview and Chapters 2, 3, 4, and 5)
FIREBS 	   finance, insurance, real estate, and business services
           (as described in Chapter 1)
FISP	      Farmer Input Support Program
FRA 	      Food Reserve Agency
FRN	       Federal Republic of Nigeria
FTZ	       free trade zone
GDP	       gross domestic product
GGDC 	     Groningen Growth and Development Centre
GHS	       General Household Survey
xvi



GLSS 	     Ghana Living Standards Survey
GSO 	      General Statistics Office of Vietnam
HS	        Harmonized System
IDA 	      Industrial Disputes Act
IEI 	      Innovation Enterprise Institution
IFPRI 	    International Food Policy Research Institute
IMF	       International Monetary Fund
IPUMS 	    Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
ISI 	      import-substitution industrialization
ISIC 	     International Standard Industrial Classification
ISS 	      Import Substitution System
kg/ha 	    kilogram per hectare
km	kilometer
kWh	kilowatt-hour
LCMS	      Living Conditions Monitoring Surveys
LFS 	      Labor Force Survey
MFDP 	     Ministry of Finance and Development Planning
MoFNP 	    Ministry of Finance and National Planning
MIB 	      Manufacture-in-Bond program
MMD 	      Movement for Multiparty Democracy
MPC	       Minnesota Population Center
MW	megawatt
NAFCON 	   National Fertilizer Company of Nigeria
NBER	      National Bureau of Economic Research
NBS	       National Bureau of Statistics
NBTE	      National Board of Technical Education
NGO 	      nongovernmental organization
NLC 	      National Liberation Council
NSSO 	     National Sample Survey Organisation
NTB 	      nontrade barrier
OECD 	     Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
                                                                    xvii



PF 	       Patriotic Front
PNAD 	     Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (Brazilian
           Household Survey)
PPP 	      purchasing power parity
PS 	       Priority Survey
RHS 	      right-hand side
RoZ	       Republic of Zambia
SACU	      Southern African Customs Union
SADC 	     Southern African Development Community
SAP 	      structural adjustment program
SITC	      Standard International Trade Classification
SMME 	     small, micro, and medium-sized enterprises
SOE 	      state-owned enterprise
TDCA 	     Trade, Development and Cooperation Agreement
UNCTAD 	   United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNPF	      United Nations Population Fund
VASS	      Vietnam Academy of Social Sciences
VEI	       Vocational Enterprise Institution
VHLSS 	    Vietnamese Household Living Standards Survey
WDI 	      World Development Indicators
WTO 	      World Trade Organization
                                                              Foreword




S
       tructural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth: A Framework and Country
       Studies is the outcome of a joint project of the International Food Policy
       Research Institute and the World Bank.
    The volume consists of an overview and seven country studies, writ-
ten by leading scholars from both developed and developing coun-
tries. The overview lays out a unifying framework for thinking about
economic growth as a combination of two challenges. The “structural
change challenge” is focused on moving resources from traditional low-
productivity activities into modern, more productive industries. The “fun-
damentals challenge” faced by policy makers in the developing world is
about how best to develop broad capabilities such as human capital and
infrastructure. While the two are inextricably linked, they are conceptu-
ally different, and making this distinction is one of the contributions of
this book. The overview also includes a description of the common meth-
odology used in the country studies, a discussion of data and measurement
issues, and a synthesis of the findings.
    Of the seven countries studied, only Viet Nam seems to be in the midst
of rapid structural change based on an expansion in modern manufacturing.
By contrast, India’s growth has been driven primarily by increases in within-
sector productivity. In Ghana, Nigeria, and Zambia, structural change has
helped boost growth in labor productivity largely as a result of an expan-
sion in the services sector. Botswana and Brazil experienced rapid structural
change decades ago, but recent growth in these middle-income countries
xx



has come from investments in fundamentals. The book and its findings
demonstrate that with all things considered, rapid structural changes are
now more difficult to achieve and investments in fundamentals will be key
to sustaining growth in low-income countries.

Shenggen Fan
Director General, IFPRI
                                            Acknowledgments




T
      his volume is the outcome of a project funded by the World Bank
      Knowledge for Change Program. Chapter authors participated in a
      workshop at the World Bank, co-hosted by the International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI) in 2012. We would like to thank all those who par-
ticipated as discussants and observers; their comments were extremely help-
ful in shaping the direction of this volume. We acknowledge the assistance of
Leita Jones and Gabriela Calderón in helping us to organize the workshop and
produce this volume. We are also grateful for the assistance of the Publication
Review Committee at IFPRI and the comments received from anonymous
reviewers. The authors acknowledge the support of the CGIAR Research
Program on Policies, Institutions, and Markets (PIM) led by IFPRI. The book
was thoughtfully and tirelessly edited by Laura Wallace. Our deepest appre-
ciation goes to all of the scholars who contributed to this volume. Finally, we
would like to thank Xinshen Diao and Ann Harrison for their encouragement
and support throughout the process.
                                                                 Overview


               STRUCTURAL CHANGE, FUNDAMENTALS,
                                    AND GROWTH

                    Dani Rodrik, Margaret McMillan, and Claudia Sepúlveda




T
      he first decade of the 21st century was extraordinarily good for develop-
      ing countries and their mostly poor citizens. Their economies expanded
      at unprecedented rates, resulting in both a large reduction in extreme
poverty and a significant expansion of the middle class. In fact, their growth
rates were an average 4 percentage points faster than those of the advanced
countries—versus only 1.3 percentage points in the 1990s (Figure O.1a). This
growth was led by the efforts of China, India, and a small number of other
Asian countries, and assisted by the weaker economic performance of the rich
countries. Latin America and Africa resumed growth as well, catching up
with—and often surpassing—the growth rates they experienced during the
1950s and 1960s. As a result, the developing countries moved more quickly
to close the income gap with the advanced countries (Figure O.1b), a process
known as economic convergence. More recently, however, that process has
slowed down—reflecting a narrowing of the advanced and developing coun-
try growth rate differentials since 2010—making it unlikely that poorer
countries will be able to close the development gap with richer countries any-
time soon.
    What are the growth prospects for developing countries? Two traditions
for examining and explaining growth exist side by side within economics. The
first has its roots in development economics and is based on the dual-economy
approach (initially formalized by Lewis 1954 and expanded upon by Ranis
and Fei 1961). It draws a sharp distinction between the traditional (agri-
culture) and modern (industry) sectors of the economy, and it assumes that
different economic logics are at work within them—and therefore the two
sectors cannot be lumped together. Accumulation, innovation, and productiv-
ity growth all take place in the modern sector—often in unexplained ways—
while the traditional sector remains technologically backward and stagnant.
Thus, economywide growth depends largely on the rate at which resources—
principally labor—can migrate from the traditional to the modern sector.


                                                                              1
2 OVERVIEW



FIGURE O.1a  With advanced and developing country growth rate differentials narrowing in
the 2000s . . .

                                                        Growth rate 1990–2014
                     10

                      8

                      6

                      4
           Percent




                      2

                      0
                                     Developing countries growth
                                     Developing countries trend growth
                     –2
                                     High-income countries growth
                                     High-income countries trend growth
                     –4
                          90

                                92

                                      94

                                            96

                                                   98

                                                         00

                                                                02

                                                                      04

                                                                             06

                                                                                    08

                                                                                           10

                                                                                                   12

                                                                                                          14
                         19

                               19

                                     19

                                           19

                                                 19

                                                        20

                                                              20

                                                                     20

                                                                           20

                                                                                  20

                                                                                         20

                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                        20
Source: World Development Indicators database (World Bank, various years).


FIGURE O.1b  . . . the income gap has been closing more rapidly than in the 1990s

                                               Developing countries GDP per capita as share of
                                            high-income GDP per capita 1990–2014 (in 2011 PPP)
                25

                                                                                                                21.9
                20                                                                                       21.4



                15
     Percent




                10


                     5


                     0
                          90

                               92

                                     94

                                            96

                                                  98

                                                        00

                                                               02

                                                                     04

                                                                             06

                                                                                   08

                                                                                          10

                                                                                                  12

                                                                                                         14
                     19

                               19

                                     19

                                           19

                                                 19

                                                        20

                                                              20

                                                                     20

                                                                           20

                                                                                  20

                                                                                         20

                                                                                                20

                                                                                                        20




Source: World Development Indicators database (World Bank, various years).
Note: The gross domestic product (GDP) trend was calculated using a Hodrick-Prescott filter with smoothing parameter equal
to 6.25; PPP = purchasing power parity.
                                    Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   3




   The second tradition has its roots in macroeconomics, and derives from
the neoclassical growth model of Solow (1956). It eschews such distinctions
and presumes different types of economic activity are structurally similar
enough to be aggregated into a single representative sector. In neoclassical
models, growth depends on the incentives to save, accumulate physical and
human capital, and (in subsequent variants that endogenize technological
change) innovate by developing new products and processes (Grossman and
Helpman 1991; Aghion and Howitt 1992).
   These traditions offer complementary perspectives on economic growth.
One way to combine their insights is to think of the neoclassical model as
essentially focusing on the growth process within modern sectors, while the
dual-economy model focuses on relationships and flows among sectors. As
such, each perspective provides a distinct reason why growth in the lagging
countries should be not just feasible, but also easy and rapid. In the dual-
economy world, growth is just a matter of moving traditional farmers into
modern industries in urban areas where productivity is on a positive trajec-
tory. In the neoclassical world, physical and human capital levels in devel-
oping countries are low, and thus returns to accumulation should be high.
Either way, economic convergence with rich nations should be the norm
rather than the exception.
   As it turns out, however, those predictions have not been borne out.
Nevertheless, their failure informs us about the obstacles that need to be over-
come if economic development is to happen. Using these two sets of models to
guide us, we can identify two broad development challenges:
 •	   The “structural transformation” challenge: How to ensure that resources
      flow rapidly to the modern economic activities that operate at higher levels
      of economic productivity.
 •	    The “ fundamentals” challenge: How to accumulate the skills and broad
       institutional capabilities needed to generate sustained productivity
       growth, not just in a few modern industrial sectors but also across the
       entire range of services and other nontradable activities. There is con-
       siderable debate about whether it is primarily the quality of institutions
       (governance, rules of law, and the business environment) or the level of
       human capital (education, skills, and training) that drives long-run levels
       of income (see Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001 versus Glaeser et
       al. 2004). But for our purposes, we can just lump them under the rubric of
      “fundamentals.”
4 OVERVIEW




     The critical question is the relationship between these two challenges,
 especially in Africa, which, until recently, has been largely absent from any
 work on structural change (Box O.1). A major reason for this absence has
 been largely unreliable or nonexistent economic data for most African coun-
 tries. A deeper reason is poverty itself. Until recently, few African countries
 have enjoyed the sustained economic growth needed to trace the patterns of
 structural transformation achieved in earlier decades elsewhere. However,
 since the beginning of this century, African countries have grown at an
 unprecedented pace and in unusual ways, making them especially interesting
 for such research.
     This book speaks directly to our lack of information about structural change
 and growth in developing countries. It includes four African countries—
 Botswana, Ghana, Nigeria, and Zambia—all of which have experienced
 rapid growth in recent years, but for different reasons. They are also inter-
 esting because it does not appear that the process of structural change in
 any of these countries is following the standard patterns that we are familiar
 with from the historical literature or from widely used models of structural
 change. These case studies may thus shed light on both the processes that are
 unfolding at present and some of the barriers that remain. We also include
 two fast-growing Asian countries that appear to be following different paths:
 India and Viet Nam. Finally, we include Brazil because of its position as a
“postindustrial” developing country.
     The authors of these chapters try to answer how much of the growth in
 labor productivity during given time periods can be attributed to the “within-
 sector” versus the “structural change” component, paying particular attention
 to the structural transformation challenge (drawing on the methodology in
 McMillan and Rodrik 2011). While the starting year for each country differs
 depending on data availability, all of the studies cover the period 1990–2010.
 Moreover, the authors painstakingly piece together data to paint a detailed
 account of structural change for subperiods and sectors.
     From these chapters, we learn that the experience with structural change
 has been quite diverse around the world. In particular:
 •	   Structural change played only a tiny role in the recent growth performance
      of the middle-income countries of Brazil and Botswana, although it did
      play an important role in launching them into middle-income status.
 •	   Structural change contributed significantly to growth in Viet Nam and
      Ghana over the past two decades, although their experiences have been
      quite different—with Viet Nam undergoing much more industrialization
      than Ghana, where the formal manufacturing sector is still relatively small.
                                  Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   5




Box O.1  An   eclectic spin on the two traditions
From a theoretical perspective, within-sector productivity growth and struc-
tural change go hand in hand, but there is disagreement as to where the
process of growth originates. For example, Schultz (1953) argued that in
a closed-economy setting, advances in agricultural productivity are a pre-
condition for growth. This view featured prominently in several later pieces,
including work by Johnston and Mellor (1961), Johnston and Kilby (1975),
and Timmer (1988). More recently, the role of agriculture has featured promi-
nently in work by noneconomists, such as Jared Diamond (1997).
    In stark contrast to Schultz (1953), Sir Arthur Lewis (1954) argued that the
low marginal productivity of farm labor would persist until nonfarm employ-
ment expanded enough to absorb rural population growth. Moreover, indus-
trialization could mechanically raise agricultural productivity by reducing the
size of the labor force in agriculture without affecting output. Subsequent
work also challenged the link between agricultural productivity growth and
structural change by using open- rather than closed-economy models (for
example, Mokyr 1976; Field 1978; Wright 1979; Matsuyama 1992). Rather
than focusing on international trade, a third strand of the literature began to
emphasize the “special” properties of industry—such as increasing returns,
learning by doing, and coordination failures—and called for a “big push”
type of industrial policy (for example, Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny 1989).
   More recent work on structural change has typically focused on docu-
menting the stylized facts of structural change, estimating the contribution of
structural change to economywide productivity growth, and developing multi­
sector growth models consistent with the stylized facts of structural change.
This work was recently reviewed in an excellent and extensive piece on
growth and structural change by Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2013).
    From the perspective of our book, the most important conclusion they
reach is probably the fact that economists have a substantial amount of data
regarding the process of structural transformation in today’s advanced econ-
omies, but we know little about this process in today’s developing econo-
mies. To what extent are they following different paths from today’s developed
economies? And if so, what factors give rise to these differences? Specifically,
Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2013) call for more quantitative studies
on structural transformation in today’s poor economies—a topic that our book
tries to shed light on. They also emphasize the importance of two issues that
they did not examine in their review piece. The first is human capital and its role
in determining both within- and across-sector productivity growth. The sec-
ond is market failures and the role for government—notably, the extent to which
externalities, public goods, market power, or other factors associated with inef-
ficient equilibrium outcomes—shape the process of structural change.

Source: Authors.
6 OVERVIEW




 •	   Structural change contributed to growth in India, Nigeria, and Zambia,
      but it is not the kind of structural change that China and Viet Nam
      enjoyed. Rather, the three countries have seen a less rapid decline in the
      employment share of low-productivity agriculture, exacerbated by the lack
      of a boom in labor-intensive manufacturing for export.
    In short, the policy requirements of rapid structural change do not seem to
align neatly with conventional recommendations of the “fundamentals” type.
Despite significant improvements in policy regimes in Africa—macroeconomic
stabilization, external opening, democratization—the rate and direction of
structural transformation have been disappointing in this region. And in
Latin America, although privatization and liberalization may have contrib-
uted to within-sector productivity growth, they seem to have done so at the
expense of economywide productivity. In countries with significant unex-
ploited potential for structural change, there are large payoffs for taking imag-
inative shortcuts (such as investment zones or competitive currencies) that
target the development of new industries directly. In other cases, policies must
remain focused on long-run fundamentals—institutions and human capital.


A Unifying Framework
 To place these results in perspective, we begin this overview with an overall
 unifying framework for thinking about growth (drawing on Rodrik 2013a).
We drew above a distinction between the “structural transformation” and
“fundamentals” challenges in growth—the first focusing on moving resources
 into modern industries, and the second on developing broad capabilities. At
 first sight, these two challenges may seem one and the same, too closely linked
 to be separable. Much of the development literature operates on the assump-
 tion that policy that is good on one front is also good on the other. For exam-
 ple, investing in human capital and improving the legal regime should be good
 for boosting overall productivity, as well as promoting industrial expansion.
 Deregulating industrial restrictions and international trade should be good
 for developing the economy as a whole, as well as fostering entry into new eco-
 nomic activities. What is desirable policy for growth need not differ based
 on whether we look at growth from the perspective of facilitating structural
 transformation or building fundamentals.
     While there is substantial overlap between the two sets of policies, it is also
 clear that the two challenges have somewhat different strategic implications.
 In practice, it may be far easier to promote industrialization directly, by sub-
 sidizing industry in diverse ways or removing specific obstacles to it, than to
                                    Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   7




promote it indirectly by making broad investments in human capital and insti-
tutions and hoping that these will trickle down to investment incentives in
industry. It is possible to have rapid structural transformation (in other words,
industrialization) without significant improvements in fundamentals. East
Asia is the premier example of this strategy. In China, governance and human
capital have lagged significantly behind the country’s manufacturing prowess.
Viet Nam is a similar case, following on China’s footsteps with some lag.
    It is also possible to invest significantly in fundamentals without reaping
much reward in terms of structural transformation. Since the early 1990s, Latin
America has considerably improved its governance and macroeconomic funda-
mentals, yet structural change in the region has been, if anything, growth reduc-
ing. Manufacturing and some other modern sectors have lost employment to
lower-productivity services and informal activities (McMillan and Rodrik 2011).
   We can visualize these possibilities in Figure O.2, which depicts a typology
of growth patterns and outcomes. It shows that structural transformation
can fuel rapid growth on its own, but if it is not backed up by fundamentals,
growth peters out and remains episodic (quadrant 2). On the other hand, the
accumulation of fundamentals, which requires costly, time-consuming, and
complementary investments across the entire economy, only produces steady
but slow growth if it is not backed up by structural change (quadrant 3). The
bottom line is that, ultimately, sustained growth and convergence require
both processes (quadrant 4). Even in the best of all worlds, structural transfor-
mation will eventually run its course and industrialization will reach its limits.


FIGURE O.2  A typology of growth patterns and outcomes


                                      Structural transformation (industrialization)

                                      Slow                                  Rapid



                                       (1)                                   (2)
                        Low
      Investment in                 No growth                          Episodic growth
      fundamentals
    (human capital,
        institutions)                                                         (4)
                                       (3)                         Rapid, sustained growth
                        High
                                   Slow growth                      (South Korea, Taiwan,
                                                                       and Hong Kong)


Source: Authors.
8 OVERVIEW




From that point on, growth must depend on the steady accumulation of fun-
damentals emphasized by neoclassical growth theory. Long-term successes,
such as Britain, Germany, and the United States, have all gone through these
phases, as have more recent examples, such as Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan.
If doubts remain about China’s economic future, it is because so much of the
country’s institutional transformation, particularly with respect to political
institutions, still remains ahead of it.
    This typology helps clarify one of the puzzling aspects of cross-national data:
institutional quality and human capital are both highly correlated with income
levels, yet improvements in institutions and human capital are not a reliable
predictor of economic growth. It suggests that this empirical finding is not a
contra­diction. Only countries that steadily enhance their fundamental capabil-
ities eventually become rich. But investment in fundamentals is not the quick-
est or easiest way of getting there, at least during the early stages of development.
Early on, it is rapid industrialization that fuels growth, and this requires policies
that may differ considerably from conventional fundamentals. Countries that
rely exclusively on building up broad-based capabilities are rewarded with
modest growth, and may in fact be diverted from those policies as a result
(Rodrik 2013a).
    We will use this typology to interpret the experiences of our country
ex­amples. None of them can be said to have made it definitively to the nir-
vana of quadrant (4). Botswana has high fundamentals but limited structural
change, while Viet Nam has relatively rapid structural change but relatively
low fundamentals. Our other African examples (Ghana, Nigeria, and Zambia)
typically have had episodic growth-promoting structural change at best,
moving back and forth between quadrants (1) and (2), although Ghana has
recently moved into quadrant (3). Brazil has moved from quadrant (2) to
quadrant (3), with greatly improved fundamentals but much weaker growth
underpinned by slow structural change. India meanwhile has not experi-
enced the kind of structural change that import-substituting countries (such
as Brazil in the 1950s–1970s) or the East Asian exporters (such as Viet Nam)
have gone through, so its growth prospects remain brittle.


Country Studies: Methodology
In an effort to retain consistency across country studies, all of the country
chapters use the same methodology as McMillan and Rodrik (2011). This
approach is not intended to resolve questions about causality; rather, it is
intended to lay out a set of facts that we hope will help policy makers better
                                  Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   9




understand their economies and allow future researchers to develop better
theories of growth and structural change.
    The decomposition used in our paper follows Haltiwanger (1997) and
Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001), who used this decomposition to
explore the contributions of the reallocation of activity across plants and plant
productivity growth to overall productivity growth in the US manufacturing
sector. Instead, we use this decomposition to establish the contributions of the
reallocation of activity across broad sectors of the economy and sectoral pro-
ductivity growth to economywide productivity growth.
    There is no doubt that studying productivity at the sector level necessarily
masks the underlying heterogeneity of productivity within sectors. However,
focusing solely on heterogeneity within one particular sector ignores the econ-
omywide implications of sector-specific changes in productivity. For example,
numerous studies have shown that intensified import competition has forced
manufacturing industries across the globe to become more efficient by ratio-
nalizing their operations. Typically, the least productive firms have exited
manufacturing, while the remaining firms have shed “excess labor.” It is evi-
dent that the top tier of firms has closed the gap with the technology frontier
in Latin America and Africa, no less than in East Asia.
    However, the question left unanswered by these studies concerns what
happens to the workers who are thereby displaced. In economies that do not
exhibit large intersectoral productivity gaps or high and persistent unemploy­
ment, labor displacement would not have important implications for
economy­wide productivity. In developing economies, on the other hand, the
prospect that the displaced workers would end up in even lower-productivity
activities (services, informality) cannot be ruled out. That is, indeed, what
seems to have typically happened in Latin America. An important advantage
of the broad, economywide approach taken in this volume is that the authors
are able to capture changes in intersectoral allocative efficiency, as well as
improvements in within-industry productivity.
    In this framework, total labor productivity is given by:
                                        n
   	                              Pt = ∑θi,t pi,t	(1)
                                       i=1

where Pt is total labor productivity in year t, θi,t denotes the proportion of
total labor employed in sector i at time t, and pi,t denotes labor productivity in
sector i at time t; where i = 1, …, 9. Then, the change in total labor productiv-
ity between t and t – k (Δ Pt) can be written as:
10 OVERVIEW


                       n              n               n
   	Δ Pt = ∑θi,t–kΔ pi,t + ∑Δθi,t pi,t–k + ∑Δθi,tΔ pi,t	(2)
                      i=1             i=1            i=1

    Whereas the first term on the right-hand side (RHS) captures within-sector
productivity changes, the second term on the RHS captures between-sector pro-
ductivity changes, and the third term on the RHS captures cross-sector produc-
tivity changes. In essence, the cross term is a covariance term that captures the
effects on overall productivity of simultaneous changes in sectoral employment
and productivity. For the purposes of this book, we combine the second and
third terms into what we call the “structural change” term. Some authors, such
as de Vries, Timmer, and de Vries (2015), estimate these terms separately, call-
ing them the static and dynamic components of structural change. We find this
confusing for two reasons. First, structural change by definition is a dynamic
concept. And second, the third term alone is difficult to interpret when, for
example, reductions in the employment share are accompanied by increases in
productivity. This is because the term becomes negative, seemingly acting as a
drag on productivity, when in fact it could be viewed as a positive development
in such sectors as agriculture.
    By combining the second and third terms in equation (2), we arrive at
the equation used by McMillan and Rodrik (2011) and by all of the country
authors of this book:
                               n               n
   	Δ Pt = ∑θi,t–kΔ pi,t + ∑ pi,tΔθi,t	(3)
                               i=1            i=1

where Pt and pi,t refer to economywide and sectoral labor productivity lev-
els, respectively, and θi,t is the share of employment in sector i at time t. The
Δ operator denotes the change in productivity or employment shares between
t – k and t. The implication of this decomposition is that economywide labor
productivity growth can be achieved in one of two ways.
    The first term—the “within-sector” component—captures how much of
overall labor productivity growth can be attributed to changes within sec-
tors. It is the weighted sum of productivity growth within individual sectors,
where the weights are the employment share of each sector at the beginning
of the time period. The second term—the “structural change” component—
captures how much of overall labor productivity growth can be attributed
to movements of workers across sectors. It is essentially the inner product of
productivity levels (at the end of the time period) with the change in employ-
ment shares across sectors. When changes in employment shares are positively
correlated with productivity levels, this term will be positive, and structural
change will increase economywide productivity growth.
                                 Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   11




    This decomposition clarifies how partial analyses of productivity perfor-
mance within individual sectors (such as manufacturing or agriculture) can be
misleading when there are large differences in labor productivities ( pi,t) across
economic activities. In particular, a high rate of productivity growth within
an industry can have quite ambiguous implications for overall economic per-
formance if the industry’s share of employment shrinks rather than expands.
For example, if the displaced labor ends up in activities with lower productiv-
ity, economywide growth will suffer and may even turn negative.
    Armed with the results of the decomposition, the authors of each of the
chapters then use a variety of strategies to gain a deeper understanding of
the country-specific factors that played a role in facilitating (or impeding)
structural change. For example, in Chapter 1 of this book, Mitra and Ahsan
use state-level data on employment shares by industry, tariffs, education, and
labor regulations to explore the correlates of structural change across states
in India.


Country Studies: Data and Measurement Issues
Here, too, in an effort to maintain consistency, all of the country studies use
national accounts data and labor force statistics to compute measures of sec-
toral employment and value-added for nine broad sectors of the economy.
The authors also draw on several complementary datasets to conduct more
detailed analyses of the underlying correlates of structural change and within-
sector productivity growth. Country-specific data appendixes appear at the
end of each of the country chapters. These appendixes document the sources
of data, as well as any inconsistencies in the data and how these were handled.
Nevertheless, several measurement issues common to all of the studies war-
rant clarification.
    Informality. A big question with national output and employment data
in developing countries is how well they account for the informal sector.
The coverage of the informal sector in national accounts data varies from
country to country (Timmer and de Vries 2009). While all countries make
an effort to track the informal sector, obviously the quality of the data can
vary greatly. In contrast, employment shares are more likely to include the
informal sector, because they are typically obtained from nationally repre-
sentative household surveys (labor force surveys or population censuses). A
failure to account for activity in the informal sector will lead to an underes-
timate of value-added in activities that are heavily dominated by informality,
such as agriculture.
12 OVERVIEW




    Multiple jobs. In labor force surveys, workers are typically classified by
their primary sector of employment. A potential concern with this classifica-
tion is for individuals classified as “agricultural” but who work a substantial
fraction of their hours in nonagricultural activities (Haggblade, Hazell, and
Reardon 2007), as this would lead to an underestimate of labor productivity
in agriculture. Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014) use Living Standards
Measurement Study data for several developing countries to estimate labor
productivity using hours worked; Adeyinka, Salau, and Vollrath do the same
in Chapter 6 of this book on Nigeria. They find that the overwhelming
majority of individuals classified as working in agriculture
do in fact allocate almost all of their time to agriculture. Gollin, Lagakos,
and Waugh (2014) also find that a significant portion of individuals in rural
households is classified as working in nonagricultural activities.
    Accounting for human capital. If human capital differs significantly across
sectors, using the number of workers unadjusted for differences in human
capital can be misleading. For example, if most of the labor in agriculture is
unskilled and most of the labor in services is skilled, simple measures of pro-
ductivity will understate labor productivity in agriculture and overstate labor
productivity in services. One way to account for this is to adjust employ-
ment numbers for educational attainment, which is what Gollin, Lagakos,
and Waugh (2014) do for their sample of countries (in the poorest countries,
human capital is on average 1.4 times higher in the nonagriculture sector than
in the agriculture sector). However, even after making this adjustment, they
still arrive at the conclusion that average labor productivity in agriculture is
significantly lower than average labor productivity in other economic sectors.
    Average versus marginal productivity. The country authors of this book
compare gaps in sectoral productivities using measures of average labor pro-
ductivity, as is done in McMillan and Rodrik (2011) and Gollin, Lagakos, and
Waugh (2014). It is well known that efficiency in well-functioning markets
is characterized by an equalization of productivities at the margin. Under a
Cobb-Douglas production function specification, the marginal productivity
of labor is the average productivity of labor multiplied by the labor share.
Thus, if labor shares differ greatly across sectors, comparing average labor pro-
ductivities can be misleading. However, the existing evidence suggests that
labor shares do not vary widely across sectors, except in a few activities (like
public utilities) that typically do not absorb lots of labor (Mundlak, Butzer,
and Larson 2012; Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh 2014).
    Quality of African statistics. Recently, concerns about the quality of Africa’s
national accounts data have been raised by a number of researchers, including
                                 Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   13




Devarajan (2013) and Jerven and Johnston (2015). Like them, we think that
the quality of national accounts data is intimately linked to Africa’s growth
and prosperity. Over the past decade or so, as growth in gross domestic product
(GDP) has picked up in Africa, there has been a renewed focus on the quality
of data—even leading to a rebasing of national accounts data for some coun-
tries. This is important, because of the rapid growth in small business activity
that had previously been unrecorded. As a result, economies that did rebase saw
significant gains in GDP per capita. In view of these issues, the authors of this
book’s African chapters have tried to collect data from a wide range of sources
and to account for inconsistencies. For example, in the case of Botswana, the
authors consider two scenarios for structural change in recent years, depending
on assumptions about the share of the labor force in agriculture.
    Failure to distinguish location. Most agriculture takes place in rural areas,
and most manufacturing and services take place in urban areas. Given the
higher costs of living in urban areas (particularly high cash rents), urban
wages must typically exceed rural wages simply because of higher living costs.
Thus, comparing nominal urban service and industrial wages with nomi-
nal rural farm wage rates inevitably leads to higher urban prices and wages. A
more appropriate and purely sectoral comparison would involve comparing
farm with rural nonfarm earnings or urban agriculture with urban unskilled
manufacturing and service sector wage rates. We would guess that rental costs
alone would require a 20 percent higher wage in urban areas, simply to main-
tain a standard of living comparable with rural areas.
    In summary, while all of the measurement issues discussed above are
important, we think that there is adequate evidence to support the approach
taken by the authors of the country studies in this book. Adjusting aver-
age productivities for measurement error may diminish the labor produc-
tivity gaps uncovered, but it is highly unlikely that it would overturn any of
the results.


Country Studies: Findings

Significant Structural Changes, Different Outcomes: Viet Nam
and Ghana
On the surface, Ghana and Viet Nam appear to have much in common: big
pools of labor in agriculture that over time move primarily into services, rather
than manufacturing. But a closer look reveals how different their paths have
been and, thus, why Viet Nam is further along in its economic convergence.
14 OVERVIEW




    In the late 1990s, Viet Nam still had 70 percent of its workforce in agri-
culture, producing a third of the country’s GDP. This discrepancy between
agriculture’s claim on the economy’s resources and its contribution to out-
put reflected the large differential in labor productivity across activities.
The typical worker in manufacturing produced four times more output
than the typical worker in agriculture. The typical worker in services such
as construction or wholesale and retail trade produced even a bigger mul-
tiple than this. But over the next two decades, workers moved from lower-
to higher-productivity activities (Figure O.3). In Chapter 2 of this book,
McCaig and Pavcnik tell us that agriculture’s employment share declined
to 54 percent, while services’ share rose from 18 percent to 32 percent, and
manufacturing’s share rose from 8 percent to 14 percent. During the 2000s,
jobs in manufacturing grew at an annual rate greater than 10 percent,
with the rate exceeding 15 percent in garments and reaching 30 percent in
office and computing machines. The growth was particularly rapid in the

FIGURE O.3  Viet Nam’s workers move to higher-productivity sectors


                                                                1.4       Relationship between initial productivity and changes in employment share, 1990–2008
 Log of sectoral productivity/aggregate productivity in 1990




                                                                1.2
                                                                                                                                        ﬁre
                                                                1.0

                                                                0.8                                                                   pu

                                                                0.6                                                                   min
                                                                                                                                                       wrt
                                                                0.4                                                                           con
                                                                                                                               tsc                   man
                                                                0.2

                                                                0.0                                                                  cspsgs

                                                               –0.2

                                                               –0.4                        agr
                                                                                                                                            y = 3.0091x + 0.4296
                                                               –0.6                                                                              R 2 = 0.343
                                                               –0.8
                                                                  –0.30     –0.25      –0.20     –0.15     –0.10      –0.05      0.00         0.05    0.10       0.15
                                                                                                     Change in employment share

Source: McCaig and Pavcnik, Chapter 2 in this book.
Note: The size of the circle indicates employment in 1990. agr = agriculture; cspsgs = community, social, personal services,
and government services; con = construction; fire = finance, insurance, real estate, and business services; man = manu-
facturing; min = mining and quarrying; pu = public utilities (electricity, gas, and water supply); tsc = transport, storage, and
communications; wrt = wholesale and retail trade.
                                  Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   15




Southeast and Red River Delta, which entered the world economy on the
back of export-oriented industrialization.
    Viet Nam’s structural transformation came alongside two other import-
ant shifts that were closely linked: (1) a transition from state-owned firms
to private employment; and (2) a transition from family farms and busi-
nesses to formal, registered firms (particularly in manufacturing). These
shifts contributed directly to productivity growth within sectors, but also
enabled reallocation of factors of production across sectors. As a result, GDP
per capita tripled in real terms over two decades, and poverty fell sharply,
although McCaig and Pavcnik caution that large productivity gaps still
exist both among and within sectors. Between 1990 and 2008, the growth
in aggregate labor productivity was 5.1 percent per year, with structural
change accounting for 38 percent of this increase and within-sector growth
accounting for the rest.
    In examining a case like Viet Nam’s—a clear-cut development success
enabled greatly by structural transformation—ex post explanations are easy to
come by. The country started with a large pool of “excess” labor in the country-
side. The unexploited productivity gains from moving people from the farm to
urban employment were huge. Relaxing the grip of state regulations and state-
owned enterprises could unleash these hidden sources of productivity. In Viet
Nam this meant abolishing collective farms and replacing them with house-
hold farms, titling land, liberalizing internal and external trade, and introducing
competition and private businesses. Opening the country up to the world econ-
omy—through special economic zones and liberalization of investment rules—
brought in foreign investment and technology, rendering modern sectors even
more competitive. Encouraging exports enabled the expansion of manufactur-
ing enterprises without running into market-size constraints.
    Now consider Ghana, a country that has also done reasonably well in the
1990s and 2000s, certainly by African standards. In Chapter 4 of this book,
Osei and Jedwab tell us that following a sharp decline in the 1970s, Ghana’s
real GDP per capita picked up from the mid-1980s on, with labor productivity
registering annual growth of 3 percent between 1992 and 2010. Keep in mind
this is only 60 percent of Viet Nam’s growth rate over the same period. While
structural change appears to have contributed roughly half of the increase over
this period—after contributing close to zero before then—a closer look indi-
cates that the impact was highly uneven across sub­periods (in fact, it was nega-
tive during 2000–2006).
   While agricultural employment did decrease—dropping from 60 percent
in 1980 to about 40 percent in 2010—the labor that was released was
 16 OVERVIEW




absorbed mostly by low-productivity services, with limited impact on econo-
mywide productivity (Figure O.4). Moreover, the bulk of manufacturing took
place in the informal sector, where productivity is more than 20 times lower
than in the formal sector. Despite the apparent potential, industrialization
has so far played a much more modest role in Ghana than in Viet Nam. But to
the extent it has played a role, Osei and Jedwab contend that “it has occurred
without a green revolution, industrial revolution, or service revolution of
the types seen, for example, in Asia.” In our eyes, this assessment is rather
troubling, in that a lack of these types of revolutions would inhibit the poten-
tial for progress on the structural change front. Keep in mind, as the authors
point out, “there are still enormous hurdles on the socioeconomic front, with
troubling levels of poverty, unemployment, and underemployment—especially
for youths, and income inequality.”
    Why the difference between the two countries? It is tempting to ascribe
Viet Nam’s superior performance to its government’s liberalization policies


 FIGURE O.4  Bypassing industry and into services in Ghana


                                 Sectoral composition of GDP and employment, 1960–2010
                                 (a) GDP                                              (b) Employment
            70

            60

            50
Share (%)




            40

            30

            20

            10

             0
                 1960   1970   1980      1990    2000      2010 1960         1970      1980      1990      2000      2010
                                      Industry                Services                   Agriculture

 Source: Osei and Jedwab, Chapter 4 in this book.
 Note: Panel (a) plots the sectoral composition of GDP, using three aggregate sectors: agriculture, industry, and services.
 Panel (b) plots the sectoral composition of employment, using the same three sectors. Employment data are available for
 the following years: 1960, 1970, 1984, 1992, 2000, 2006, and 2010. The vertical dashed line is for 1992, the year when the
 nature of structural change was modified in Ghana.
                                Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   17




and other efforts to remove obstacles facing private business. For example,
in Chapter 2 McCaig and Pavcnik note that Viet Nam was ranked 99th
out of 185 countries in 2013 in the World Bank’s “Doing Business” indi-
cators, “slightly behind China, ranked 91st, and ahead of such countries
as Indonesia and Bangladesh.” Yet Ghana ranks 27 countries ahead of Viet
Nam, in 64th place. According to the indicators, it was considerably easier
to get credit in Ghana than in Viet Nam, paying taxes was less of a hassle,
insolvency was much more quickly resolved, and access to electricity was less
problematic. In terms of how well investors are protected, there is a whop-
ping 40-point difference between the two countries, in favor of Ghana.
    Other cross-national indexes tell a similar story. The Cato Institute’s
Index of Economic Freedom, which attempts to quantify the extent to
which economies are free of government encumbrance, ranks Viet Nam
in 96th place, compared with 71st place for Ghana (Gwartney, Lawson,
and Hall 2012). (This is for 2010, which is the latest year for which data
are available.) A reasonable objection to these comparisons would be that
what matters is more the change than the level of an index. Economic prog-
ress may be more a function of how much policies have “improved” than
where they stand at the end of the relevant period. But here too, it is hard to
make the case that Viet Nam looks better than Ghana. Both countries have
undertaken significant reforms since the 1980s, opening up their economies
to trade, reducing the role of the government, and deregulating. Ghana’s
summary rating on the Cato Index steadily rose (on a scale from 0 to 10)
from 3.05 in 1980, to 5.53 in 1995, to 7.09 in 2010. Unfortunately, Cato
does not provide a comparable series for Viet Nam over the full period, so a
direct comparison is not possible. But in light of the scale of improvement
in Ghana’s rating, it is difficult to imagine that Viet Nam could have done
much better. (To get a relative sense of these ratings, note that the United
States had a rating of 7.70 in 2010.)
    None of this is to deny the possibility that Viet Nam’s government does
indeed provide a more hospitable environment than Ghana for private busi-
ness, both by nurturing new economic activities and by removing obstacles
that existing ones face. The point is that the way such an environment is con-
structed is subtler than what is captured by standard indexes and conventional
types of policy advice. Although economic liberalization and removal of red
tape may foster private investment, the comparison with Ghana suggests it
would be a mistake to describe Viet Nam’s strategy in those terms—or those
terms alone. Of course, a similar argument could be made for many other East
Asian success stories as well.
18 OVERVIEW




    Viet Nam’s spectacular growth is also likely to be partly driven by a strong
commitment to improving the fundamentals. Viet Nam outshines Ghana
on all standard measures of education and infrastructure. Its investment rate
is 35 percent, while Ghana’s is only 25 percent. Industrial policy in Viet Nam
appears to be focused on increasing exports in all sectors. At the start of the
reforms in the late 1980s, Viet Nam was a net importer of rice, and agricultural
exports were paltry. Today, it is the second-largest exporter of rice, and the coun-
try has become a major player in the international coffee market. In fact, Viet
Nam runs a sizable trade deficit in manufactured goods, which is covered by
agricultural and oil exports. Thus, while it is true that productivity growth has
been the highest in export-oriented manufacturing, it would be incorrect to
attribute all or even most of Viet Nam’s success to its success in manufacturing.
Rather, the deeper reason for Viet Nam’s success in manufacturing is likely to be
the same reason for its success in other export- oriented sectors.


   Typology placement: Viet Nam seems to have reaped the growth bene-
   fits of rapid structural change, even though its institutional indicators
   are comparatively poor and have not improved as much. In other words,
   Viet Nam has been in quadrant (2) of Figure O.2 since the early 1990s.
   Ghana, on the other hand, has seen significant improvements in gov-
   ernance, and yet its comparatively poor record with structural change
   has kept it in quadrant (3) with lower growth. By the same token, Viet
   Nam’s continued growth and migration into quadrant (4) are by no
   means ensured, given the weakness of many of its fundamentals.



Limited Structural Change, Enormous Potential: India, Nigeria,
and Zambia
India, Nigeria, and Zambia provide an interesting contrast. On paper, these
countries have the makings of industrial success stories, with their large
endowments of relatively unskilled labor still in rural areas and their enor-
mous domestic markets. Yet all three have underperformed remarkably on
this dimension, and it is clear that all of them would benefit greatly from
greater attention to the fundamentals.
    Over the past 50 years, as we learn from Ahsan and Mitra in Chapter 1,
agriculture’s share of employment in India has fallen by roughly 20 percentage
points—from about 70 percent in 1960, to 60 percent in 2004, to 50 percent
in 2011—with the sector now contributing about 15 percent of GDP, sharply
                                   Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   19




 down from around 40 percent in 1960. However, manufacturing’s labor
 share has barely changed over this time period, from 10 percent in 1960 to
 12 percent today, with the GDP share unchanged at 13 percent. To put these
 numbers in perspective, Viet Nam was able to achieve more than double this
 rate of industrialization in less than half the time. For India, the biggest labor
 movement has been into services (up from 18 percent in 1960 to 28 percent
 in 2011), with the GDP share rising to nearly 60 percent (up sharply from just
 below 40 percent in 1960).
     Structural change did make a positive contribution to growth in India
 after the 1990s, especially during the first decade after the 1991 reforms. But
 the biggest part of that came from the expansion of finance, insurance, and
 other business services, with manufacturing actually shrinking and making
 a negative contribution during 2000–2004 (Figure O.5a). Information tech-
 nology and business process outsourcing services, on which India’s recent
 growth has relied, are no doubt high-productivity activities with convergence
 dynamics that may be even stronger than in manufacturing. But they are also
 highly skill-intensive sectors, unable to absorb the vast majority of the Indian
 workforce that remains poorly educated. As a consequence, India’s underlying
 growth trend is suppressed by the necessarily slow accumulation of fundamen-
 tal capabilities—education, infrastructure, and governance—in the economy
 as a whole.
     Moreover, Ahsan and Mitra report that while manufacturing was the
 leading contributor to within-sector productivity growth in 2000–2004
 (Figure O.5b), it fell in terms of its employment share during these years
 (even though its labor productivity was higher than the economywide aver-
 age). Thus, they stress the need for overhauling restrictive labor regulations,
“especially because the future potential of agriculture and services in generat-
 ing overall growth is limited (beyond a point) at India’s stage in the develop-
 ment process.”
     At the state level, the authors find that two of the fastest-growing states
 between 1998 and 2004 followed strikingly different growth paths. For Gujarat,
 all of the growth came from within-sector change; in fact, structural change was
 slightly negative, unlike the rest of the states, which enjoyed some positive struc-
 tural change (Figure O.6). In contrast, in Maharashtra, the within-sector and
 structural change components were about the same. The only state that experi-
 enced negative within-sector change was Assam.
     The story in Nigeria is not that different. In Chapter 5, Adeyinka, Salau,
 and Vollrath show that between 1996 and 2009 (not including petroleum),
 the share of employment in agriculture fell only slightly, from 66 percent
 20 OVERVIEW



 FIGURE O.5a  Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services is contributing most to
 India’s structural change . . .

                                              Each sector’s contribution to overall structural change
                             Agriculture                               Mining                        Manufacturing
              1.0
              0.5
              0.0
             –0.5
                            Public utilities                       Construction                   Wholesale and retail
              1.0
              0.5
Percent




              0.0
             –0.5
                        Transport and storage                          FIREBS                       Community and
              1.0                                                                                   social services
              0.5
              0.0
             –0.5
                    0        2          4            6    0        2            4         6   0         2        4           6
                                                                   Time perioda

 FIGURE O.5b  . . . and since 2000, manufacturing is helping its “within-sector” change


                                     Each sector’s contribution to overall with-sector structural change
                             Agriculture                               Mining                       Manufacturing
               2
               1
               0
              –1

               2           Public utilities                       Construction                    Wholesale and retail

               1
   Percent




               0
              –1

                        Transport and storage                          FIREBS                       Community and
               2
                                                                                                    social services
               1
               0
              –1
                    0        2          4            6   0        2             4     6       0       2        4         6
                                                                  Time   perioda

 Source: Ahsan and Mitra, Chapter 1 in this book.
 Note: aPeriod values are: 1 = 1960–1969; 2 = 1970–1979; 3 = 1980–1989; 4 = 1990–1999; 5 = 2000–2004.
 FIREBS = finance, insurance, real estate, and business services.
                                                   Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   21



FIGURE O.6  Gujarat and Maharashtra follow significantly different growth paths


                 Within-sector productivity growth and structural change by state (percentage), 1988–2004

 Andhra Pradesh                                                                             Within-sector
          Assam                                                                             Structural
            Bihar
          Gujarat
         Haryana
       Karnataka
           Kerala
 Madhya Pradesh
    Maharashtra
           Orissa
          Punjab
       Rajasthan
     Tamil Nadu
   Uttar Pradesh
    West Bengal
                   –2                      0                  2                 4                   6
                                                           Percent

Source: Ahsan and Mitra, Chapter 1 in this book.



to a little more than 60 percent (still the dominant sector at 40 percent
of GDP), while the share of employment in manufacturing increased by
a meager 2.2 percentage points to 4.1 percent (accounting for only about
10 percent of GDP). Over this same period, average annual productivity
growth was 4.5 percent for the nonpetroleum economy, but the lion’s share
of this growth (3.5 percent) was accounted for by within-sector produc-
tivity improvements. If petroleum (oil and gas)—which employs less than
1 percent of the labor force but accounts for 20–30 percent of GDP—is
included, productivity rose less but structural change played a bigger role
(Table O.1). The authors suggest that productivity gains could have been
as much as 54 percent greater had structural change been greater. They see
the key levers for this to occur as (1) stimulating agricultural production,
(2) liberalizing trade policies, (3) upgrading infrastructure, and (4) improv-
ing human capital.
   A worrying feature of the Nigerian economy is that productivity growth
in manufacturing between 1996 and 2009 was actually negative relative
to agriculture. The reasons for this are unclear. One explanation may be
that people entering the manufacturing workforce are in the informal sec-
tor, as in Ghana and several other African countries. Another explanation
22 OVERVIEW




Table O.1  Structural change starts to take on a bigger role for Nigeria in the mid-2000s

                              Components of labor productivity change, 1996–2009
                                                                           Time periods
       Growth decomposition                  1996–1999           1999–2005         2005–2009    1996–2009
Panel A: Excluding oil and gas
  % annual productivity growth                     0.8              4.8                   7.0      4.5
of which:
  % within-sector productivity                   −2.0               9.4                   2.6      3.5
  % structural change                              2.8              -4.6                  4.4      1.0

Panel B: Including oil and gas
  % annual productivity growth                   −0.8               4.4                   4.1      2.9
of which:
  % within-sector productivity                   −7.1               6.2               −1.6         0.7
  % structural change                              6.3             −1.8                   5.7      2.2
Source: Adeyinka, Salau, and Vollrath, Chapter 5 in this book.



may have to do with Nigeria’s low levels of fundamentals (such as infrastruc-
ture and human capital). However, to explain negative productivity growth,
these conditions would have had to deteriorate. In addition, large productiv-
ity gains were made in wholesale and retail trade, transportation and com-
munications, agriculture, and general services. This is puzzling, because it is
not obvious why fundamentals would matter more for manufacturing than
for other sectors. That said, Nigeria’s record on this front is inexcusable.
In 2010, only half of Nigeria’s population was literate, life expectancy was
51 years, only 15 percent of the roads were paved, electric power consump-
tion was only 135 kilowatt-hours per capita, and investment stood at only
17 percent of GDP.
    As for Zambia—a country that reclaimed its “middle-income” status in
the 2000s thanks to rapid growth—the story is one of extremely uneven
structural change. In Chapter 6, Resnick and Thurlow find that structural
change was an overall drag on economic growth in Zambia between 1991 and
2010, as labor productivity grew by only 0.31 percent. But if that period is
divided into two subperiods, a more nuanced picture emerges. Between 1991
and 2001, there was a mass exodus out of urban areas as copper mines and
other parastatals shut down during a phase of privatization, with the share of
employment in agriculture (the sector with the lowest productivity) actually
increasing (Table O.2).
                                                 Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   23




Table O.2  Agriculture is driving Zambia’s job growth but not GDP

                          Drivers of GDP and formal employment growth, 1991–2010
                                         GDP (millions of 2002 US$)         Employment (1,000s people)
                                      Initial    Change over period (%)   Initial   Change over period (%)
Sectors                               1991      1991–2002 2002–2010       1991      1991–2002 2002–2010
Value (US$ millions or
1,000s people)                        8,410        1,023       6,108      2,519       1,001        865
Contribution (%)                      100.0        100.0       100.0      100.0       100.0       100.0
 Agriculture                           15.2            30.5       8.1      65.4        87.6        51.4
 Mining                                20.1        –84.4        13.6         1.9        0.2          1.0
 Manufacturing                         10.7            21.3       6.8        4.3        1.4          1.3
 Utilities                               3.3            2.6       1.6        0.9       –1.2          0.7
 Construction                            8.4           -8.0     21.9         1.9       –0.3          4.2
 Trade                                 17.3            49.3       9.8      10.3         4.8        19.6
  Hotels, catering                       1.2           14.0       2.5        0.5        1.9          1.3
  Transport, communications              6.1           12.1     16.5         2.9       –1.5          3.7
  Finance, business services             9.8           48.8       9.0        1.8        0.6          6.1
 Government                              7.1           11.4       8.9        5.6        6.7          6.7
  Other services                         0.7            2.3       1.4        4.5       –0.2          4.1
Source: Resnick and Thurlow, Chapter 6 in this book.




    But starting in 2002, the share of employment in agriculture began to fall,
with services absorbing most of the workers who left the farm. Although the
services sector is dominated by small-scale informal activity, its activities are
still more productive than subsistence agriculture. Mining staged an impres-
sive recovery, but only accounted for 1 percent of the new jobs created. And
manu­facturing not only failed to rally, but actually continued its decline. In the
end, structural change and within-sector growth each accounted for around
half of the 3.56 percent increase in labor productivity between 2002 and 2010.
However, Resnick and Thurlow emphasize that the renewed growth and posi-
tive structural change have not translated into social transformation—a reality
that has been reflected “in the country’s shifting political landscape,” and one
that they contend can be seen playing out elsewhere in Africa, even in countries
without large-scale mineral resources.
    With more than half of the population engaged in low-productivity agri-
culture, structural change could play a significant role in Zambia’s growth
going forward. But it may well be that to realize this potential, Zambia must
first invest more in its fundamentals. Gross fixed capital formation as a share
24 OVERVIEW




of GDP was only 22 percent in 2010, and physical and human infrastructures
are still comparatively low.


     Typology placement: India, Nigeria, and Zambia have not had the full
     benefit of quadrant (2), and India in particular has hovered not too far
     from quadrant (1). For all of them, investing in the fundamentals is
     now critical.


No Structural Change in Recent Years: Botswana and Brazil
Unlike the rest of the countries featured in this book, Botswana and Brazil
have been middle-income countries for some time. Structural change played a
significant role in catapulting these countries into middle-income status, but
its role has been more muted in the past two decades. Their stories, though,
are quite different.
    In Brazil, structural change was rapid from the 1950s through the 1970s
(especially in the 1950s and early 1960s), accounting for 40 percent of total labor
productivity growth during this period (Figure O.7). As agricultural employ-
ment shrank, manufacturing jobs expanded slightly, and modern service activ-
ities—the most productive sector—absorbed the bulk of the labor. By the late
1970s, industries as a whole accounted for close to 40 percent of total labor pro-
ductivity growth. This period of high-growth, rapid structural change was one

FIGURE O.7  Within-sector changes in Brazil swamping structural changes


                                      Decomposition of productivity growth by period and database

           GGDC 1950–2005
           GGDC 1995–2005
           GGDC 1980–1994
           GGDC 1965–1979
           GGDC 1950–1964
           GGDC 1990–2005                                                                             Within-sector
   PNAD 1993/95–2007/08                                                                               Structural

                           –20       0        20       40       60      80    100          120      140      160      180
                                                                      Percent

Source: Firpo and Pieri, Chapter 7 in this book.
Note: The bars correspond to growth rates for the whole period indicated. For example, for the period 1950–2005, using
Groningen (GGDC) data, labor productivity resulting from the within-sector and structural change effects grew by 132 percent and
24 percent, respectively. GGDC = Groningen Growth Development Centre; PNAD = Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios.
                                   Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   25




in which policies of import substitution predominated. (It goes without say-
ing that such policies are anomalous from the perspective of the World Bank’s
Doing Business database and Cato Institute’s Economic Freedom indicators
[World Bank, various years; Gwartney, Lawson, and Hall 2012]).
    But in Chapter 7, Firpo and Pieri argue that by the late 1970s, the coun-
try had run out of room for continuous and long-term structural change, at
least along broad intersectoral lines, and had to rely on within-sector enhance-
ments—like investing in human capital and new technologies (in agriculture
especially) and improving institutions. In fact, they assert that efforts aimed
at reversing this natural trend (by enlarging manufacturing and contracting
agriculture) failed “and the early years of the 1980s of slow growth can serve
as evidence of those efforts.”
    So what path remains open for Brazil today? The authors argue that the
Brazilian experience suggests a return to the old policies is likely to fail. They
believe horizontal, across-the-board policies are more likely to spur produc-
tivity within sectors than selective policies that give priority to some sectors
over others. Given where Brazil stands in term of its stage of development, it
is reasonable to expect that future growth will have to rely predominantly on
investment in fundamentals (institutions and human capital), and that broad
patterns of structural change will play a comparatively small role. In particu-
lar, it will be difficult for Brazil to reindustrialize. But there are still strategic
opportunities that could be exploited by a nimble government. If used well,
the country’s deep-water oil reserves should boost not only oil exports but also
a range of associated services and industries at home.
    As for Botswana, its story is similar to Brazil’s, in that the share of employ-
ment in agriculture fell dramatically between 1970 and 1990. But unlike Brazil,
the decline in agriculture’s share of employment was almost entirely matched
by an increase in the share of the labor force in services. Moreover, numerous
govern­ment efforts to industrialize never succeeded (perhaps not surprising for
a small landlocked country). The authors of Chapter 3—McCaig, McMillan,
Verduzco-Gallo, and Jefferis—point to two distinct periods in Botswana’s eco-
nomic evolution. Between 1970 and 1989, they find that labor productivity grew
at an average of 8 percent per year, with structural change playing a major role in
this spectacular growth, especially in the 1970s (Figure O.8). But in the decades
that followed, labor productivity slowed to 1.9 percent per year, driven entirely
by within-sector productivity growth—with structural change an actual drag on
growth in the 2000s.
    Historically, diamonds played a significant role in fueling Botswana’s eco-
nomic growth, although this has changed in recent years. Between 1968 and
2010, economic activity shifted out of agriculture, first to mining and later to
26 OVERVIEW



FIGURE O.8  From a big role for structural change in Botswana to a drag on growth


                         Labor productivity growth decomposition, by decade, 1970–2010

                  10                                                                          Within-sector
                                                                                              Structural
                                                                                              Total

                   5
        Percent




                   0


                        1970–1980             1980–1990              1990–2000             2000–2010
                  –5
                                                             Year

Source: McCaig et al., Chapter 3 in this book.
Note: Graph shows decomposition of average annual labor productivity growth (value-added in 2005 output per worker)
during each decade.



services. In 2010, diamonds made up only 17.7 percent of value-added and a
mere 1.5 percent of total employment. In contrast, the share of services in val-
ue-added reached 64.4 percent, while the share of services in employment
reached 50.6 percent. Although the share of employment in agriculture remains
high at 38.6 percent, its share in value-added has dropped from 27.4 percent to
2.7 percent—an indication of agriculture’s abysmal performance in Botswana.
   An interesting feature of both Brazil’s and Botswana’s economies is that
trade liberalization in the early 1990s did not have a major impact on the struc-
ture of either economy, although it did give a sharp boost to within-sector pro-
ductivity. This limited impact on the structural front is especially surprising
in Brazil, where manufacturing has been central to the economy. Also unlike
Brazil, Botswana does not have the same potential in agriculture, as most of the
land inhabited by farmers is semi-arid and prone to drought. For both of these
countries, growth is more likely to come from improvements in fundamentals
that facilitate within-sector productivity growth.

    Typology placement: The expectation was that Brazil would move from
    quadrant (1) to quadrant (4); but the country instead ended up in quadrant
    (3), with much-improved fundamentals, but also sharply reduced growth.
    Botswana is similarly stuck in quadrant (3), with slow growth and relatively
    strong fundamentals, although unlike Brazil, it has never industrialized.
                                Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   27




The Verdict on Structural Change versus
Within-Sector Productivity Growth
So what do these findings on individual countries add up to in terms of broad
trends in structural change? We believe this book provides a worthwhile
insight in that, although we are only examining seven country studies, these
countries together represent about 22 percent of developing country GDP and
30 percent of developing country population. Moreover, within their respec-
tive regions, some of these countries matter greatly—like Nigeria (19 percent
of Africa south of the Sahara’s GDP and 19 percent of the region’s population),
India (82 percent of South Asia’s GDP and 75 percent of the region’s popula-
tion), and Brazil (35 percent of Latin America and the Caribbean’s GDP and
34 percent of the region’s population).
    Overall, our country sample shows that the past two decades have seen
extraordinary growth and rapid catch-up convergence in developing countries—
underpinned by increases in labor productivity—although the patterns of
within-sector versus structural change increases vary widely (Table O.3).
Nonetheless, a few themes emerge at the regional level.
    Africa. Labor productivity rose in all four countries during the 2000s,
with the second half of the period characterized by a resurgence of struc-
tural change as a driver of productivity growth in Nigeria and Zambia, and
to a lesser extent in Ghana. Botswana, the only upper-middle-income coun-
try in the African sample, resembles a Latin America country in the sense that
most of the productivity stems from within-sector growth rather than from
structural change. These results are consistent with McMillan and Harttgen
(2014), who show that structural change was growth enhancing in Africa
post-2000.
    Asia. In this region, India and Viet Nam represent stark contrasts in terms
of what has driven labor productivity increases. In Viet Nam, structural
change has been a strong driver throughout the period. However, in India,
most of the productivity growth has come from within-sector productivity. In
fact, the contribution of structural change decreased in the 2000s from the
1990s, down from 1.3 percent to 0.3 percent—a definite worrying sign for a
country that still has a large portion of the population working in the agricul-
ture sector.
    Latin America. Brazil exemplifies an upper-middle-income country that has
already undergone a deep structural transformation, moving a large share of
workers from agriculture to manufacturing by the end of the 20th century. Over
the past two decades, however, the country has strongly relied on within-sector
productivity change—in fact, gains in structural change are minimal.
28 OVERVIEW




Table O.3  African and other countries seeing structural change in the 21st century

                                                             Labor productivity growth (percent)
Country                                             Total                     Within                    Structural
Botswana
 1990–2000                                           1.1                        1.7                        –0.6
 2000–2010                                           2.7                        4.9                        –2.2
Ghana
 1992–2000                                           1.0                       –0.9                         2.0
 2000–2006                                           4.5                        6.0                        –1.5
 2006–2010                                           2.7                        0.0                         2.6
Nigeria
 1996–1999                                         –0.8                        –7.1                         6.3
 1999–2005                                           4.4                        6.2                        –1.8
 2005–2009                                           4.1                       –1.6                         5.7
Nigeria, excluding oil and gas
 1996–1999                                           0.8                       –2.0                         2.8
 1999–2005                                           4.8                        9.4                        –4.6
 2005–2009                                           7.0                        2.6                         4.4
Zambia
 1991–2002                                         –2.0                         0.0                        –2.0
 2002–2010                                           3.6                        1.8                         1.8
India
 1990–1999                                           2.9                        1.7                         1.3
 2000–2004                                           6.5                        6.2                         0.3
Viet Nam
 1990–2008                                           5.1                        1.9                         3.1
 1990–2000                                           5.2                        1.0                         4.2
 2000–2008                                           4.9                        2.7                         2.2
Brazil
 1995–2005                                           0.8                        0.6                         0.2
 1990–2005                                           0.8                        0.8                        –0.0
 1993/1995–2007/2008                                 0.5                        0.3                         0.2
Source: Botswana —Value-added and employment data are from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre Africa
Sector Base; Ghana —Economic Survey of Ghana 1961–1982; population and housing censuses 1960, 1970, 1984,
2000, and 2010; Ghana Living Standard Survey 1991–1992 and 2005–2006; Singal and Nartey (1971); Androe (1981);
Ewusi (1986); GSS (2010); and World Bank (2010); Nigeria —Output data are from the Nigerian Bureau of Statistics.
Employment data are from the Nigeria General Household Survey (GHS) [1996–2011]; Zambia—Data are from the
Central Statistics Office [1993, 2004, 2011, and 2012.]; India —Value-added and employment data are from the Gron-
ingen Growth and Development; Viet Nam —Employment, gross domestic product (in constant 1994 prices), and labor
productivity (also in constant 1994 prices) data are from the General Statistics Office of Viet Nam; Brazil —For the period
1950–2005, value-added and employment data are from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre. For the period
1993/1995–2007/2008, data are from Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios.
Note: Botswana —Data are disaggregated at 10 sectors, as in McMillan and Rodrik (2011); Ghana —Data are disaggre-
gated at 9 and 14 sectors; Nigeria —Data are disaggregated at 9 sectors; Zambia —Data are disaggregated at 9, 10, or 3
sectors; India —Data are disaggregated at 10 or 9 sectors. Viet Nam —Data are disaggregated into 19 economic sectors;
Brazil —Data are disaggregated at 10 sectors, as in McMillan and Rodrik (2011).
                                 Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   29




The “Double Whammy” of Manufacturing
Like India, African countries seem to be bypassing the industrialization stage
that was so important to Brazil’s and Viet Nam’s rapid growth. In fact, the
share of employment in African manufacturing is still only roughly half the
share in Asian manufacturing (McMillan 2013). Instead, to the extent that
structural change is taking place, it is primarily fueled by an expansion in
services. To understand the ramifications of this pattern, it is important to
understand the role that manufacturing has played in the past.
    A manufacturing-based growth strategy has two distinct advantages. First,
a great deal of manufacturing is labor intensive, so it can absorb large amounts
of relatively unskilled workers from other sectors at a substantial productivity
premium. It is comparatively easy to turn a rice farmer into a garment factory
worker, without significant investment in human capital and with manageable
investment in physical capital. And the industrialization process can go on for
quite some time—several decades—during which income and productivity
levels converge with those of rich countries.
    Second, manufacturing—specifically, formal manufacturing—exhibits a
remarkable property known as “unconditional convergence.” That is, it takes
place regardless of the quality of domestic policies or institutions and other
aspects of economic context, such as geography and infrastructure (Rodrik
2013b). For developing countries, where lagging manufacturing sectors are the
norm, labor productivity tends to catch up with the productivity of developed
countries, where technologies are the most advanced as if on an automatic
escalator, at a rate of 2–3 percent per year. The greater the distance from the
productivity frontier, the faster the rate of productivity growth. Of course, the
better the environment, the more rapid the convergence—that is, conditional
convergence is even more rapid (Rodrik 2013b).
    Unconditional convergence can be visualized in Figure O.9, which maps
the relationship between initial labor productivity in manufacturing indus-
tries for 21 countries in Africa south of the Sahara (including Ghana) and
their growth rates in the subsequent decade. The negative slope of the scat-
ter plot captures the essence of unconditional convergence. The trend is as
unmistakable in Africa as it is elsewhere. Perhaps this outcome is not surpris-
ing, given that these industries produce tradable goods and can be rapidly inte-
grated into global production networks, facilitating technology transfer and
absorption. Even when they produce just for the home market, these indus-
tries operate under a competitive threat from efficient suppliers from abroad,
requiring them to upgrade their operations and remain efficient.
30 OVERVIEW



FIGURE O.9  Unconditional convergence is alive and well in Africa


                                                            Labor productivity in ISIC two-digit manufacturing industries in Africa
                                                 0.2
      Growth deviation over subsequent decade




                                                 0.1


                                                 0.0


                                                –0.1


                                                –0.2

                                                       –2             –1                0                 1                2          3
                                                                  Log deviation in initial manufacturing labor productivity

Source: Author’s calculations, based on Rodrik (2013b).
Note: Data cover the 21 countries south of the Sahara (including Ghana) with the requisite data. Each observation represents
an International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) two-digit manufacturing industry in an African country, for the latest
10-year period for which data are available. Period, industry, and period × industry dummies are included as controls, so that
values on the axes are purged of these “fixed effects,” but there are no country-level controls.




Prospects for Economic Convergence
Against this backdrop, where should developing countries be focusing their
energies to jumpstart economic convergence? The possible paths include reviv-
ing industrialization, focusing on natural resources and nontraditional agri-
cultural products, and raising productivity in services.

Revive Industrialization?
The classic path of rapid catch-up through industrialization played out well
in East Asia, as well as in Latin America and certain other countries, such as
Turkey, during their earlier, import-substituting phase. But there are a variety
of reasons to think this path will figure much less prominently in the future:
 •	                  Many African countries are starting out with a much better endow-
                     ment of natural resources and are not as well positioned for specialization
                     in manufacturing.
 •	               The success of East Asian economies—China and its successors, such as
                  Viet Nam and Cambodia—poses significant competitive challenges to
                  newcomers in manufacturing, especially in light of globalization and the
                  reduced barriers to trade virtually everywhere.
                                   Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   31




 •	   New trade rules—local content requirements, subsidies, import restrictions—
      limit to a much greater extent than previously the room for industrial poli-
      cies, which Asian countries have deployed with some success.
 •	   The economic difficulties of the advanced countries make them more resis-
      tant to significant surges of manufactured imports from low-cost sources.
 •	   Technological changes in manufacturing itself have made the sector much
      more capital and skill intensive than in the past, reducing both the advan-
      tage of poor economies in manufacturing and the scope for labor absorp-
      tion into the sector.
 •	   The prospect of climate change and the greater awareness of the associated
      risks call for green technologies that are more environmentally friendly but
      also are more costly for developing nations.
    Nevertheless, one can deploy counterarguments. First, diversification
into manufacturing can sometimes be facilitated by the presence of natural
resources; Ethiopia, for example, can deploy its high-quality livestock to turn
itself into an exporter of designer shoes. Second, Chinese manufacturers are
now looking for low-cost suppliers themselves, not the least in Africa. Third,
even if the world economy stagnates, there are sizable domestic (Nigeria) and
regional markets in Africa. There are glimmers of hope in all of these direc-
tions in the data—but they remain glimmers for the time being.
    It is also true, as Baldwin (2011) has emphasized, that the spread of global
supply chains—what he calls “globalization’s second unbundling”—has facil-
itated the spread of industry from the advanced countries to the periphery.
New entrants do not have to build entire supply chains (from intermediate
inputs to final products) at home; they can simply join existing global supply
chains by producing a narrow range of components. Even so, industrialization
remains limited and fleeting, even when a country can succeed in plugging
into global supply chains.
    Taken together, these trends imply that even the most successful countries
of the future are likely to fall far short of the industrialization levels that have
been the norm in economic history. The available data indicate that deindustri-
alization is now beginning to happen at lower levels of income. Manufacturing’s
share of employment peaked at above 30 percent in the United Kingdom and
Germany, and at around 25 percent in Japan and South Korea. But in China,
manufacturing employment rose to slightly less than 15 percent in the mid-
1990s before it started to fall gradually. Viet Nam, Cambodia, and other smaller
countries will likely not surpass such levels. The apparent failure of African
32 OVERVIEW




countries to industrialize to date and the deindustrialization of Latin America
have to be seen against such a global context. The industrialization-led growth
model may have run its course. The question is, what will take its place?

Focus on Natural Resources and Nontraditional Agriculture?
Natural resource booms can fuel growth, but resource sectors that exhibit
high labor productivity—such as oil and diamonds—tend to be capital
intensive and absorb few workers. Continued growth in a resource-based
economy is dependent on rapid and sustained productivity increases in the
resource sector, new discoveries, or a steady rise in world market prices. And
even if one or more of these fortuitous circumstances materialize, the pat-
tern of growth tends to become skewed. Growth benefits the state or a rent-
ier class, spawns inequality and distributive politics, and proves generally
detrimental to institutional development. Resource-based growth tends
to produce spurts of growth, followed by stagnation or decline. Take the
case of Ghana, where manufacturing expanded little while investtment and
growth were concentrated in the resource sector—a trend that was exacer­
bated after the discovery of oil in 2008. Aside from oil, Ghana’s main
exports are gold, cocoa beans, timber products, and other natural resources.
Viet Nam, meanwhile, is a major exporter of textiles and garments. In 2012,
manufacturing’s share of merchandise exports stood at 65 percent in Viet
Nam, but only 9 percent in Ghana (having actually come down from a peak
of 25 percent in 2009).
    As for nontraditional agricultural products—horticulture, aquaculture,
floriculture, and so on—they could well act as an intermediate stepping
stone out of traditional farm products, but here, too, the record with labor
absorption is not encouraging. We do not have any examples of countries
that have successfully developed through diversification in agriculture.
Typically, agricultural transformation represents the early stage of a growth
takeoff. If not followed by rapid industrialization, growth peters out.
Moreover, given the inexorable trends in urbanization, the bulk of the new
jobs has to be created in urban rather than rural areas. So it is hard to think
of an agriculture-led path as anything other than a bridge to a more sustain-
able urban-based strategy.

Raise Productivity in Services?
Tradable services can substitute to some extent for manufacturing, but the
evidence to date on that has not been encouraging either. The reality is
that an expansion of services is not necessarily a bad thing for structural
                                                                                     Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   33




transformation and growth, as long as the economy has been able to build up
human capital and accumulate fundamental capabilities that transform those
services into high-productivity activities (like finance and business services).
However, this typically happens rather late in the development process, after
industrialization runs its course, and high-productivity (tradable) segments of
services cannot absorb as much labor. As for labor-intensive tradable services
(like tourism), they have typically spawned few links to the rest of the econ-
omy and have not produced much diversification.
     One prominent exception is the success of Hong Kong. Its structural trans-
formation picture looks just like that in Viet Nam, except that the roles of
agriculture and manufacturing are reversed (Figure O.10). In Hong Kong,
it is manufacturing that has rapidly shrunk since 1990, releasing more than
20 percent of the economy’s labor force to other sectors. The displaced labor
found employment in services (wholesale and retail trade, finance, insurance
and business services, and so on), but at even higher levels of productivity. So
deindustrialization was growth promoting. The difference with other coun-
tries is that Hong Kong first achieved significant levels of industrialization

FIGURE O.10  A move from manufacturing to services in Hong Kong


                                                                         Correlation between sectoral productivity and change
                                                                          in employment shares in Hong Kong (1990–2005)
                                                     2
                                                         β = 2.8359; t-stat = 2.51                                 pu
  Log of sectoral productivity/total productivity




                                                     1                                                                            ﬁre

                                                                                                                   tsc
                                                     0
                                                                                                                   min             wrt
                                                                                                                                cspsgs
                                                                                                             con
                                                         man
                                                    –1

                                                                                                          agr
                                                    –2
                                                         –0.2                        –0.1                       0.0                      0.1
                                                                              Change in employment share (∆Emp. Share)
                                                                                                 Fitted values

Source: Author’s calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009); McMillan and Rodrik (2011).
Note: Size of circles represents employment share in 1990; β denotes coefficient of independent variable in regression
equation: ln(p/P = α + βΔEmp. Share; agr = agriculture; cspsgs = community, social, personal services, and government
services; fire = finance, insurance, real estate, and business services; con = construction; man = manufacturing; min =
mining and quarrying; pu = public utilities (electricity, gas, and water); tsc = transport, storage, and communications;
wrt = wholesale and retail trade.
34 OVERVIEW




before deindustrializing—and then used the intervening period to strengthen
its human capital base and other fundamental capabilities.
    In principle, then, structural transformation can play a potent positive role
both during the early stages of development when there is “excess supply of labor”
in agriculture and informal economic activities, and during later stages when
capabilities have accumulated and modern services have caught up with and sur-
passed industrial activities. But neither outcome is ensured. Structural change is
frequently slow, and often goes in the wrong direction. And the correspondence
between market liberalization and structural change is weak, at best.


Tempering Expectations
All of this suggests that we should not be surprised if broad patterns of inter-
sectoral structural change play a more muted role in the future. Development
will have to happen the hard way for the most part, through the steady accu-
mulation of skills and human capital and improvements in governance and
institutions. In terms of the central growth-decomposition equation used in
McMillan and Rodrik (2011) and the chapters that follow, growth will come
mainly from the within-sector components of productivity change, rather
than from structural change (Box O.2).
    A corollary is that rapid growth of the type experienced in South Korea,
Taiwan, China, Viet Nam, and other East Asian cases will be out of reach
for most developing countries. It has proved significantly more complicated
and time consuming to upgrade a country’s health system, tertiary education,
or judiciary—to name just a few examples of nontradable sectors—to first-
world standards than to ride the wave of global competitiveness in a narrow,
but expanding, range of standardized manufacturing industries. Automatic
escalators may be rare in nonmanufacturing parts of the economy.
    One reason is that improving human capital and institutions entails a wide
range of reforms and investments that are highly context specific and comple-
mentary to each other. Context specificity implies that off-the-shelf imported
blueprints are not useful. Local experimentation and expertise are needed to
get systems to cohere and work well. Complementarity means investments on
a broad front are required for any of them to pay off. Together, these imply
an S-shaped relationship between fundamentals and growth—investments in
human capital and institutions produce at best moderate growth until they
(and income) accumulate and reach a certain threshold (Rodrik 2013a). The
downside of this mode of growth is that it can easily produce reform fatigue.
                                 Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   35




Box O.2  Putting   the focus on the “fundamentals”
In all of our country studies, a frequent refrain is the need to improve “within-
sector” productivity. Here, we try to illustrate the range of policies needed
with current examples from our sample countries. These policies can be
grouped into four key areas.

Political economy. In Zambia, where structural change has not translated
into economic transformation, a major problem has been a lack of macro­
economic stability and persistent policy volatility—like currency swings
and periodic trade bans on maize exports and wheat imports, which
deter investment in agriculture and other sectors. In Botswana, some of the
constraints are as much political economy as technical ones. Building
up the industrial sector involves issues of political capture, and making
more land available for business touches on issues of land markets and
even immigration.

Labor regulations. In India, labor regulations appear to be a major impedi-
ment to employment growth in manufacturing. But in a democratic country
such as India, changing these laws may take a long time—which is worri­
some, given that the future potential of agriculture and services in gen-
erating overall growth is limited (beyond a point) at India’s stage in the
development process.

Institutions and education. In Viet Nam, which continues to feature large
productivity gaps within and across sectors, it is vital to remove distortions
(like improving access to land and capital) to help workers transition out of
agriculture and to further enhance agricultural productivity. In Brazil, policies
that raise overall labor productivity—like improving educational quality—are
likely to have a deeper impact on growth than those that are strictly con-
cerned with deepening an unfinished structural change.

Infrastructure. In Nigeria, the employment share in low-productivity agricul-
ture is still quite high, indicating a potential for rapid structural change. But
the country’s levels of human capital and infrastructure are still abysmal,
making a rapid exodus out of agriculture unlikely in the near future. In Ghana,
which needs to diversify away from natural resource exports, a key focus
is making the manufacturing sector more competitive. High nonlabor costs
could be reduced by investing in roads, the power supply, and the regulatory
framework. Although the business environment has improved greatly over
the past 20 years, a lot remains to be done for Ghana to be as competitive
as Mauritius or South Africa.

Source: Authors.
36 OVERVIEW




Growth payoffs will appear as disappointing, despite substantial efforts
at reform.
    The bottom line is that the balance of forces going forward appears less
favorable to rapid structural change than has been the case during the past six
decades. We may well need to moderate the optimism that the recent experi-
ence of high growth across the developing world has spawned.


References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
     Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91 (5): 1369–1401.
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt. 1992. “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction.”
     Econometrica 60 (2): 323–351.
Androe, G. 1981. Industry in Ghana. Production Form and Spatial Structure. Stockholm: Sweden:
     Scandinavian Institute of African Studies.
Baldwin, R. 2011. Trade and Industrialisation after Globalisation’s 2nd Unbundling: How Building
     and Joining a Supply Chain Are Different and Why It Matters. Working Paper 17716.
     Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Devarajan, S. 2013. “Africa’s Statistical Tragedy.” The Review of Income and Wealth 59 (S1): S9–S15.
de Vries, G. J., M. P. Timmer, and K. de Vries. 2015. “Structural Transformation in Africa: Static
     Gains, Dynamic Losses.” Journal of Development Studies 51 (6): 674–688.
Diamond, J. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: Norton.
Ewusi, Kodwo. 1986. Statistical Tables on the Economy of Ghana 1950–1985. Accra: Institute of
     Statistical, Social and Economic Research, University of Ghana.
Field, A. J. 1978. “Sectoral Shift in Antebellum Massachusetts: A Reconsideration .” Explorations in
     Economic History 15 (2): 146–171.
Foster, L., J. C. Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan. 2001. “Aggregate Productivity Growth. Lessons
     from Microeconomic Evidence.” In New Developments in Productivity Analysis, edited by
     C. R. Hulten, E. R. Dean, and M. J. Harper. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Glaeser, E. L., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer. 2004. “Do Institutions Cause
     Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth 9 (3): 271–303.
Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and Michael E. Waugh. 2014. “The Agricultural Productivity Gap.”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2): 939–993.
Grossman, G., and E. Helpman. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy. Cambridge,
     MA: MIT Press.
                                          Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth   37




GSS (Ghana Statistical Service). Various years. Population and Housing Censuses 1960, 1970,
     1984, 2000, and 2010. Accra.
Gwartney, J., R. Lawson, and J. Hall. 2012. Economic Freedom of the World: 2012 Report. With
     contributions from S. L. Baier, C. Bjørnskov, M. Clance, A. M. Crisp, A. Dreher, G. P. Dwyer,
     N. J. Foss, and K. Gehring. Vancouver, BC: Fraser Institute.
Haggblade, S., P. B. R. Hazell, and T. Reardon. 2007. Transforming the Rural Nonfarm Economy.
     Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Haltiwanger, J. 1997. “Measuring and Analyzing Aggregate Fluctuations: The Importance of
     Building from Microeconomic Evidence.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 79 (3):
     55–78.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi. 2013. Growth and Structural Transformation.
     Working Paper 18996. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jerven, M., and D. Johnston. 2015 . Statistical Tragedy in Africa? Evaluating the Data Base for
     African Economic Development. London: Routledge.

Johnston, B. F., and P. Kilby. 1975. Agriculture and Structural Transformation: Economic Strategies
     in Late-Developing Countries. New York: Oxford University Press.

Johnston, B., and J. Mellor. 1961. “The Role of Agriculture in Economic Development.” American
     Economic Review 51 (4): 566–593.

Lewis, W. A. 1954. “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor.” Manchester School
     of Economic and Social Studies 22 (2): 139–191.

Matsuyama, K. 1992. “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and Economic Growth.”
     Journal of Economic Theory 58 (2): 317–334.

McMillan, M. 2013. “The Changing Structure of African Economies.” Unpublished paper.

McMillan, M., and K. Harttgen. 2014. What Is Driving the Africa Growth Miracle? Working Paper
     20077. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

McMillan, M., and D. Rodrik. 2011. “Globalization, Structural Change, and Productivity
     Growth.” In Making Globalization Socially Sustainable. Geneva: International Labour
     Organization and World Trade Organization.

Mokyr, J. 1976. Industrialization in the Low Countries, 1795–1850. New Haven: Yale University
     Press.

Mundlak, Y., R. Butzer, and D. F. Larson. 2012. “Heterogeneous Technology and Panel Data:
     The Case of the Agricultural Production Function.” Journal of Development Economics 99 (1):
     139–149.

Murphy, K., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1989. “Industrialization and the Big Push.’’ Journal of
     Political Economy 97 (5): 1003–1026.
38 OVERVIEW




Ranis, G., and J. C. Fei. 1961. “A Theory of Economic Development.” American Economic Review
     51 (4): 533–558.

Rodrik, D. 2013a. The Past, Present, and Future of Economic Growth. GCF Working Paper 1.
     London: Global Citizen Foundation. www.sss.ias.edu/files/pdfs/Rodrik/Research/GCF_
     Rodrik-working-paper-1_-6-24–13.pdf.

—. 2013b. “Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
     128 (1): 165–204.
Schultz. T. W. 1953. The Economic Organization of Agriculture. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Singal, M. S., and J. D. M. Nartey. 1971. Sources and Methods of Estimation of National Income at
     Current Prices in Ghana. Accra: Central Board of Statistics.
Solow, R. M. 1956. “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 70 (1): 65–94.
Timmer, M. P., and G. J. de Vries, 2009. “Structural Change and Growth Accelerations in Asia and
     Latin America: A New Sectoral Data Set,” Cliometrica 3 (2): 165–190.
World Bank. Various years. Doing Business database. Washington, DC. www.doingbusiness.org/.
World Bank. Various years. World Development Indicators database. Washington, DC. Accessed
     December 2015. http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
Wright, G. 1979. “Cheap Labor and Southern Textiles before 1880.” The Journal of Economic
     History 39 (3): 655–680.
                                                                   Chapter 1


                      CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE
              GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?
                   LESSONS FROM INDIA’S GROWING
             ECONOMY AND ITS EVOLVING STRUCTURE

                                       Reshad N. Ahsan and Devashish Mitra




I
  ndia’s economy today is much larger than what it was half a century
  ago, with most of that growth occurring since the early 1990s—an indi-
  cation that it has flourished in the postglobalization phase. Since 1991,
GDP growth has averaged 6 percent, with the rate hitting close to 9 percent
in recent years (before the recent slowdown in the last couple of years to
roughly 5 percent). While some modest “business-friendly” reforms in the
1980s resulted in higher growth rates relative to the earlier years (Rodrik and
Subramanian 2005), the big economic reforms were announced in 1991.
    What is behind India’s rapid growth in the past two decades? At the sec-
toral level, we see that, unlike emerging economies like China and South
Korea, the big push in India has come from an expanding services sector,
rather than an expanding (labor-intensive) manufacturing sector. Keep in
mind that in the early 1960s, India and South Korea had similar growth rates.
When India became independent in 1947, more than half of its GDP came
from agriculture—a share that has dropped considerably over time to less than
15 percent today.
    However, today around half of India’s labor force is still in agriculture,
although down from 70 percent in 1960 (Figure 1.1a). This means that while
agriculture’s output share has decreased significantly, its employment share has
declined only modestly—a clear sign that agriculture’s relative productivity has
fallen. Yet workers leaving agriculture have largely sidestepped manufacturing,
whose share of GDP remains quite low, at about 13 percent, and whose share of
total employment is even lower, at about 12 percent. This contrasts sharply with
China and South Korea, where about a third of GDP comes from manufac-
turing. Instead, India’s services sector constitutes nearly 60 percent of its GDP
(Figure 1.1b), although the employment share is lower, at around 28 percent.
    For India, the obstacles to developing a vibrant manufacturing sector have
been many, such as poor infrastructure, land constraints, and restrictive labor

                                                                               39
40 Chapter 1



FIGURE 1.1a  Agriculture accounts for about half of India’s workers . . .


                                              India’s sectoral shares, employment (% of total)
           80

           70
                     Agriculture
           60

           50
 Percent




           40

           30
                     Services
           20

           10
                     Manufacturing
            0
             0

                    3

                           6

                                  9

                                         2

                                                5

                                                       8

                                                              1

                                                                     4

                                                                            7

                                                                                   0

                                                                                          3

                                                                                                 6

                                                                                                        9
                                                                                                             02

                                                                                                                  05

                                                                                                                         08

                                                                                                                          11
                                                 7



                                                               8
                                                        7




                                                                             8
                                          7
                                   6




                                                                                           9
              6

                     6

                            6




                                                                                    9




                                                                                                         9
                                                                      8




                                                                                                  9




                                                                                                                       20
                                              19

                                                     19
                                       19




                                                            19



                                                                          19
                                19




                                                                                        19




                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                  20
                                                                   19




                                                                                                                       20
           19

                  19




                                                                                 19




                                                                                                      19
                         19




                                                                                               19

FIGURE 1.1b  . . . but the growth in gross domestic product is coming from services


                                              India’s sectoral shares, value-added (% of GDP)
           60

           50
                         Agriculture

           40
 Percent




                         Services
           30

           20

           10            Manufacturing

            0
             0

                    3

                           6

                                  9

                                         2

                                                5

                                                       8

                                                              1

                                                                     4

                                                                            7

                                                                                   0

                                                                                          3

                                                                                                 6

                                                                                                        9
                                                                                                             02

                                                                                                                  05

                                                                                                                         08

                                                                                                                          11
                                                 7



                                                               8
                                                        7




                                                                             8
                                          7
                                   6




                                                                                           9
              6

                     6

                            6




                                                                                    9




                                                                                                         9
                                                                      8




                                                                                                  9




                                                                                                                       20
                                              19

                                                     19
                                       19




                                                            19



                                                                          19
                                19




                                                                                        19




                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                  20
                                                                   19




                                                                                                                       20
           19

                  19




                                                                                 19




                                                                                                      19
                         19




                                                                                               19




Source: Groningen Growth and Development Centre database, extended from 2004 to 2012, using the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators database (along with interpolations).
Note: The manufacturing employment share is only available for the period 1960–2004.



regulations. For example, numerous labor regulations in India make for a rigid
labor market by making hiring and firing workers and reassigning them from
one task to another difficult, if not impossible. In contrast, the restrictive labor
laws do not apply to India’s services sector. Also, the relatively higher value-
added services depend more on the global rather than the local infrastructure.
                         CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  41




The global infrastructure we are referring to is basically the Internet and the vari-
ous modern means of telecommunications, whose connectivity in India has been
rather good over the last couple of decades. However, at India’s stage of develop-
ment, there is a limit to which the services sector can be the prime contributor.
    It needs to be pointed out, however, that India has managed its global-
ization phase much better than most Latin American countries and African
countries south of the Sahara. An important recent study by McMillan and
Rodrik (2011), which looks at 38 developing and developed countries from
1990 to 2005, finds that changes in the sectoral composition of the economy
were “growth enhancing” in India and Thailand, but were “growth reducing”
in Argentina, Brazil, Nigeria, and Zambia. They also argue that globalization
by itself cannot deliver this growth. Rather, what matter are the availability
of factors, such as the type of factor endowments a country possesses, the
kind of specialization globalization leads to, and, above all, how globalization
is managed. They contend that sectors that are exposed to foreign competi-
tion through globalization need to receive government support, as they have
in most of Asia—unlike in Latin America, where not only import-competing
sectors failed to receive government support in the form of subsidies, but
also trade barriers were eliminated rapidly. Making matters worse, exchange
rates were overvalued in Latin America (unlike in Asia), thereby encouraging
imports and discouraging exports. Also, McMillan and Rodrik (2011) under-
score the importance of labor-market flexibility.
    India is now one of the BRIC countries, along with Brazil, Russia,
and China. Together, these large emerging economies account for about
40 percent of the world population and more than 25 percent of the world
GDP. Yet the differences among them are huge. In 2010, India’s per capita
GDP (in purchasing power parity terms) was $3,477, which is less than a quar-
ter of Russia’s per capita income, about 40 percent of Brazil’s, and about half
of China’s—a stark change from 1991 when India and China had similar per
capita GDP levels (Figure 1.2a).1 Moreover, India’s per capita income is less
than one-seventh of that of South Korea (they had similar levels until the mid-
1960s) and one-tenth of that of the United States. And its GDP level is less
than half of China’s (they had similar levels until the late 1970s) (Figure 1.2b).
    As India weighs how to increase growth in a sustainable, inclusive man-
ner, the key will be raising the economy’s average labor productivity (that is, its
output per worker). The possible sources of growth are (1) greater productivity

 1	 We present purchasing power parity adjusted GDP and GDP per capita numbers in Figures 1.2a
   and 1.2b to facilitate meaningful intercountry comparisons of real incomes.
42 Chapter 1



FIGURE 1.2a  China leads India in GDP per capita . . .


                         PPP converted GDP per capita (chain series), at 2005 constant prices
    30,000

    25,000
                                                                                                          KOR
    20,000

    15,000

    10,000
                                                                                                          CHN
     5,000

                                                                                                           IND
          0
           50
           53
           56
           59
           62
           65
           68




           86
           89
           71
           74
           77
           80
           83




           92
           95
           98
           01
           04
           07
           10
        19




        20
        19
        19




        19




        20


        20
        19
        19
        19
        19


        19




        19
        19
        19




        19
        19


        19
        19
        19




        20
FIGURE 1.2b  . . . and is on a much faster growth trajectory


                                 PPP converted GDP (chain series), at 2005 constant prices
   10,000,000


    8,000,000                                                                                          CHN


    6,000,000


    4,000,000                                                                                            IND


    2,000,000                                                                                            KOR


              0
                 71
                 74
                 77




                 10
                 89




                 01
                 04
                 07
                 59
                 62
                 65
                 68




                 80
                 83
                 86


                 92
                 95
                 98
                 50
                 53
                 56




              19




              20
              19


              19




              20


              20
              19




              19
              19
              19



              19
              19




              19
              19
              19



              19
              19


              19
              19




              20
              19




Source: Penn World Tables 7.1, Heston, Summers, and Aten (2012).
Note: CHN = China; GDP = gross domestic product; IND = India; KOR = South Korea; PPP = purchasing power parity.



within individual sectors (typically triggered by technological improvements),
and (2) greater productivity arising from the movement of resources toward
high-productivity sectors—known as “structural change.” According to
Kuznets (1971), modern economic growth is characterized by rapid innova-
tion and rapid structural change. It can take the form of changes in the output
                     CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  43




and employment composition of an economy in terms of broad sectors, such
as agriculture, manufacturing, mining, and services. Or it can take the form
of changes in the shares of the rural and urban components of the economy,
such as urbanization. But keep in mind that the contribution of structural
change can be positive or negative, leading to the whole being greater or less
than the sum of its parts.
    How does India fit into this picture of growth-enhancing (that is, “desir-
able”) structural change in Asia? In this chapter, we try to answer this ques-
tion, starting with a brief synopsis of how the Indian economy has evolved
since independence in 1947. We then study the relative contributions of
within-sector growth and structural change to overall labor productivity
growth in the past five decades at the economywide and state levels, using the
McMillan and Rodrik (2011) decomposition approach. We document how
this decomposition varies across both time and sectors. We also see how vari-
ous industry characteristics—including industry-level labor force characteris-
tics, state-level characteristics, and institutions—are correlated with the ability
of an industry in a state to attract workers. Next we illustrate the differing
paths of two high-performing states—Gujarat and Maharashtra. Then we
analyze whether India’s structural change has been growth enhancing, before
concluding with thoughts on possible paths for India going forward.
    Encouragingly, we find that, overall, structural change has contributed
positively to India’s growth, since workers have moved from sectors with low
value-added per worker to those with relatively high value-added per worker.
Indeed, the contribution of structural change to productivity growth has been
mainly positive, with negative (growth-reducing) structural change concen-
trated mainly in the 1970s. In the postreform period (1991–2004), structural
change has contributed slightly less than a fourth of the overall productivity
growth rate of slightly more than 4.0 percent. In the 2000s, structural change
was a small fraction of the overall productivity growth rate of 6.5 percent.
    In addition, sectors in the right policy and institutional environments
have benefited. High-productivity sectors located in states where workers have
been exposed to foreign competition (through their employment composition
being skewed toward the relatively less protected sectors) have seen labor flows
in their direction. Education (especially in rural areas) and urbanization have
also aided these flows, and must continue to do so in the years and decades
ahead. Also vital will be tackling rigid (and even some arcane) labor regula-
tions that serve as impediments to the creation of a vibrant manufacturing
sector that can boost overall growth and generate jobs for India’s still rapidly
growing population.
44 Chapter 1




Evolution of the Indian Economy
After independence from British rule in 1947, India did not start out with a
closed economy (Panagariya 2008). In fact, during the first postindependence
phase (1951–1965), beginning with the launch of its first five-year plan in
1951–1952, trade and foreign investment policies were quite open and liberal.2
While the industrial policy regime was somewhat restrictive and an important
role was given to the public sector, the policy regime did not act as a major bar-
rier to private initiative. The purpose of the public sector was to complement
the private sector. India’s first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, emphasized
the growth of industry, in particular heavy industry, and some have argued
that he did this at the cost of agriculture. In any event, in this 14-year phase,
growth rose from 1.0 percent to 4.1 percent per year.
    In the second phase (1965–1981), there was a sharp fall in the GDP per
capita growth rate, brought about by a combination of wars, droughts, and
inward-looking policies. Foreign aid declined, economic policies emphasized
equity (sometimes at the cost of efficiency), and progress with poverty allevia-
tion was unsatisfactory. For all practical purposes, until the early 1980s, India
pursued a strategy of import substitution. Complicating matters, India’s labor
laws made it difficult, if not impossible, to lay off workers in response to changes
in demand or even on grounds of incompetence. In turn, firms were reluctant to
hire for fear of being stuck with those workers in bad economic times.
    These two phases can be seen as a period when the focus was on self-
sufficiency, as would be expected of a country recently freed from foreign rule
(Kochhar et al. 2006). This argument points to a series of government five-
year plans that aimed at promoting rapid industrialization, especially the cre-
ation of domestic heavy capital-producing industries (1947–1980), with trade
restrictions following as a result. These plans also promoted a “mixed econ-
omy” in which the public sector and a controlled private sector would co­­exist,
with some industries (especially the large-scale, capital-intensive ones like steel
and machine tools)—the “commanding heights”—reserved for the public sec-
tor. Note that the emphasis was not on labor-intensive industries, as would
have been expected in a populous developing country. Moreover, the manufac-
turing sector was subject to several regulatory constraints, such as investment
licensing, import licensing, foreign exchange controls, controls on credit allo-
cation, and price controls. To encourage labor-intensive manufacturing in the
private sector, small-scale firms enjoyed significant government benefits, and

 2	 We follow here the division into the different time phases (along with some of the description)
   presented in Panagariya (2008).
                      CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  45




 some goods (usually those produced by labor-intensive methods) were reserved
 for production by these firms. However, by preventing the existence of large-
 scale firms in most labor-intensive industries and thereby also preventing the
 reaping of economies of scale, this policy turned out to be counterproductive
 and detrimental to employment generation (and overall output expansion in
 labor-intensive manufacturing activities).
     In the third phase (1981–1988), there were some industrial policy reforms,
 including a partial relaxation of constraints on capacity expansion, changing
 the product mix by firms and creating product lines. Also, some piecemeal
 incentives were provided to exports—in fact, there was some liberalization in
 almost every dimension of economic policy—and the growth rate reverted to
 that experienced in the first phase. Overall, the reforms could be described as
“business friendly” (Kochhar et al. 2006; Rodrik and Subramanian 2005).
     But it was the next phase, notably in 1991, when the major trade reforms
 were launched—a response to the balance-of-payments crisis, which was exacer­
 bated by the dramatic rise in oil prices originating from the Gulf War. At the
 time, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) helped the Indian government
 with financial assistance, but attached the conditionality that India embark on
 major economic reforms, which were to be implemented almost immediately.
The reforms took the form of rationalization of rules, the gradual removal of
 price and quantity restrictions on import and export barriers, and a movement
 toward the full convertibility of the Indian rupee for foreign exchange trans­
 actions. There were also significant devaluations of the Indian rupee in 1991
 and 1992. At the same time, foreign direct investment (FDI) stopped being
 highly restricted—up to a 51 percent foreign equity stake was allowed in many
 industries—facilitating a steep acceleration in FDI flows (Sivadasan 2009).
 However, it was difficult to reap the full benefits of these trade and FDI reforms
 in light of the rigid labor regulations that created impediments to resource re­­
 allocation, underscoring the need for labor reforms (Box 1.1).
     What is the economic verdict for the period 1980–2000? Kochhar et al.
 (2006) found that manufacturing growth (in output and especially employ-
 ment) was below that of other countries, controlling for the level of develop­
 ment and overall economic growth, while services’ growth in output was
 much more rapid—constituting a much bigger proportion of value-added—
 although there was not a commensurate growth in employment. There was a
 movement toward more skill-intensive manufacturing industries and services,
 especially in the faster-growing states. But it is important to note that India’s
 performance in labor-intensive manufacturing was not satisfactory for its level
 of development.
46 Chapter 1




   Box 1.1  Are   India’s labor regulations a problem?
   For India, a high priority is making the labor market more flexible. But to do
   so, policy makers will have to tackle long-standing labor regulations based
   on a wealth of complex labor laws. To understand India’s regulatory frame-
   work for labor issues, it is important to note two important features of India’s
   labor regulations. First, under the Indian constitution, both the central (fed-
   eral) government as well as state governments are empowered to legislate
   on labor-related issues, with the latter having the authority to amend cen-
   tral labor laws and the responsibility to enforce all labor regulations. Second,
   there is considerable disagreement regarding the impact of labor market
   regulations on the various aspects of economic performance.
       Much of the controversy surrounds Chapter VB of the Industrial Disputes
   Act (IDA), which requires employers with more than 100 workers to seek
   prior government approval before workers may be dismissed. Given that
   governments have often been unwilling to grant permission to retrench
   (Datta-Chaudhuri 1996), critics argue that this labor rule creates a strong dis-
   incentive to hire (additional) workers and generates a bias in favor of capital-
   intensive techniques of production. But some analysts counter that most of
   India’s labor regulations have been either ignored (Nagaraj 2002) or circum-
   vented through the increased use of temporary or contract labor (Dutta 2003;
   Ramaswamy 2003). However, it is hard to imagine that temporary or contract
   (casual) workers will always be as productive and will have as much incentive
   to learn on the job as permanent workers.
       A seemingly obvious and natural way to determine whether Chapter VB
   of the IDA has been binding in practice has been to check whether there
   has been clustering or bunching of firms around the 100-worker mark. Most
   studies have not found such a clustering. However, we believe, for several
   reasons, that we should not infer from this lack of clustering that labor regu-
   lations in India are not binding or that they lack any bite. First, technologies
   could be discrete or lumpy (and not continuous), in that production tech-
   niques could be available in discrete steps (for example, very small, small,
   medium, large, very large). A firm that chooses a small-scale production
   technique in response to Chapter VB may well find it optimal to employ sig-
   nificantly fewer than 100 workers. Also, there could be fixed costs of mov-
   ing into larger scales of production, which could restrict a firm well before it
   reaches the 100-worker threshold. In addition, there is the issue of enforce-
   ment (Hasan and Jandoc 2013).
      Finally, we believe that there is one important feature of firm-level employ-
   ment in India that makes it obvious that the labor laws are binding. Close to
   the 100 regular workers mark, there is a sudden spike in the use of “workers
                      CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  47




   hired through contractors” (temporary workers). This is important, as
   Chapter VB of the IDA has its threshold at 100 regular workers (not all work-
   ers). Specifically, ongoing work with Annual Survey of Industry data for 2005
   reveals for labor-intensive industries the average share of temporary workers
   (more specifically, “workers hired through a contractor” divided by the sum
   of “workers hired through a contractor” and “directly hired workers”) at firms
   with 90–99 regular workers (“directly hired workers”) to be double the share
   for firms with 80–89 and 100–109 regular workers. The prevalence of contract
   workers also shows a similar spike. These patterns are repeated for all manu-
   facturing industries as a whole (though the spikes are not as sharp).1
   1 Personalcommunication with the Asian Development Bank’s Rana Hasan, who is
   carrying out this research.

   Source: Authors.




Role of Structural Change in India
How big of a role has structural change played in India’s growth? To under-
stand the role structural change could play, suppose there is no within-sector
productivity growth, but let workers move between sectors. As long as labor
productivity is different across sectors, this movement will lead to some
changes in average labor productivity in the economy. In particular, if workers
move from low-productivity sectors into relatively high-productivity sectors,
we will see positive productivity growth in the economy as a whole (through
structural change). However, if misguided and restrictive policies or various
types of frictions prevent labor from flowing from low- to high-productivity
sectors, we will not see structural change that makes a positive contribution to
labor productivity growth. While the contribution of within-sector growth
to overall productivity growth in an economy is measured by the weighted
sum of productivity growth rates in the various parts of the economy called
sectors (with employment shares of the sectors as weights), the contribution of
structural change comes about through the movement of workers across sec-
tors with differing labor productivities.
   We begin with a look at real value-added per worker—which measures
labor productivity—using the National Income and Employment data from
the Groningen Growth and Development Centre database for the period
1960–2004 (also used by McMillan and Rodrik 2011). This dataset provides
value-added at constant prices (in 1993–1994 Indian rupees) for 10 broad sec-
tors in India for the period 1950–2005 and employment data for those sectors
48 Chapter 1




for the period 1960–2004. Because of data limitations, we follow McMillan
and Rodrik (2011) and convert the 10-sector database to a 9-sector database
by combining the government services sector with the community and social
services sector. Dividing real value-added by employment, we are able to con-
struct a 9-sector real labor productivity series for the period 1960–2004.
    We find that real value-added per worker has been steadily rising in
India over the 1960–2004 period, barring some minor dips in the mid-
1960s and late 1970s (Figure 1.3). But while in the first 30 years labor pro-
ductivity increased by around 70 percent, it roughly doubled in the final
14 years (1990–2004), with the longest-lasting high-growth phase. The
sharp difference between performances in the two periods (1960–1990 and
1990–2004) can be attributed to the difference in their economic policy
regimes—initially restrictive and distortionary, then more open. The accel-
eration since 1990 parallels that of Malaysia, South Korea, and Taiwan, but
it is far behind that of China (Table 1.1). Between 1990 and 2005, India’s
value-added per worker grew at 4.23 percent per year—a distant second to
China, whose value-added per worker grew at 8.78 percent per year. For
this reason, by 2005, China’s value-added per worker was $9,518.31 (in
2005 purchasing power parity (PPP) US dollars), which was well ahead of

FIGURE 1.3  Labor productivity has risen sharply since 1960


                                4,000            Trends in value-added per worker (weighted)
    Constant 1993–1994 rupees




                                3,000




                                2,000




                                1,000
                                        1960   1970             1980              1990            2000
                                                                   Year

Source: Constructed from the National Income and Employment data from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre
database.
Note: The weights are each sector’s share of total employment.
                             CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  49




Table 1.1  China’s labor productivity has grown much faster than India’s International
comparison of value-added per worker, 1990 and 2005
                     Value-added per worker in          Value-added per worker in          Annual growth rate
                        1990 (constant 2000                2005 (constant 2000             of value-added per
Country                   PPP US dollars)                    PPP US dollars)                   worker (%)
China                          2,692.58                            9,518.31                        8.78
India                          4,135.26                            7,700.01                        4.23
Indonesia                      7,437.95                          11,222.20                         2.78
Malaysia                      17,951.44                          32,712.26                         4.08
Philippines                    8,810.10                          10,145.76                         0.95
South Korea                   18,908.86                          33,552.34                         3.90
Taiwan                        25,647.95                           46,128.77                        3.99
Thailand                       8,818.66                          13,841.79                         3.05
Source: Constructed from the National Income and Employment data from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre
database.
Note: PPP = purchasing power parity.


India’s at $7,700.00—although in 1990, India’s value-added per worker was
50 percent higher than China’s.
    Digging a little deeper, we look at the trends in productivity in India’s nine
key sectors and find that not everyone sees an increasing secular trend over the
time period (Figure 1.4). Those sectors whose productivity did grow include
(1) mining (except for the last two years and a minor dip in the mid-1990s);
(2) public utilities; (3) wholesale and retail (especially in the last decade, which
is not surprising, given the spread of department stores and super­markets,
along with their distribution networks); (4) transport and storage; and
(5) community and social services.3 Construction followed an up-and-down
path, rising rapidly in the first 20 years, followed by a rapid decline in the next
22 years, although the last two years show a rapid uptick. This pattern in con-
struction is not surprising, given that it coincided with the start of a real estate
boom, plus the establishment of call centers and the arrival of various multina-
tionals. Manufacturing saw fairly big fluctuations in the 1990s, but grew quite
rapidly in the early 2000s. Agriculture was highly volatile until the late 1980s,
probably because of the uncertainty in rainfall, coupled with inadequate irri-
gation facilities. But since the late 1980s agriculture has settled down, giving
way to a rising secular trend (perhaps thanks to better irrigation facilities and
higher-quality inputs).

 3	 Following McMillan and Rodrik (2011), we combined “community, social, and personal
    services” and “government services” into a single sector. We refer to this combined sector as
    “community and social services.”
  FIGURE 1.4  Some sectors are doing a lot better than others


                                                                                   Trends in annual value-added per worker by sector, 1980–2000
                                      13   Agriculture                                200   Mining                                            60   Manufacturing
                                                                                                                                                                                            50 Chapter 1




                                      12                                              150                                                     50

                                      11                                                                                                      40
                                                                                      100
                                      10                                                                                                      30
                                                                                       50
                                       9                                                                                                      20
                                                                                        0
                                       8                                                                                                      10
                                        1960       1970       1980   1990   2000         1960        1970    1980      1990      2000           1960      1970      1980      1990   2000
                                     250   Public utilities                                 Construction                                           Wholesale and retail
                                                                                       80                                                     70
                                     200                                               70                                                     60

                                     150                                               60                                                     50

                                     100                                               50                                                     40

                                      50                                               40                                                     30
                                        1960       1970       1980   1990   2000         1960        1970    1980      1990      2000           1960      1970      1980      1990   2000




Thousands of 1993–94 Indian rupees
                                           Transport and storage                      300   Finance, insurance,                                    Community and social services
                                     120                                                                                                      60
                                                                                      250   real estate, and
                                     100                                                    business services                                 50
                                      80                                              200                                                     40
                                      60                                              150                                                     30
                                      40                                              100                                                     20
                                      20                                               50                                                     10
                                        1960       1970       1980   1990   2000         1960        1970    1980      1990      2000           1960      1970      1980      1990   2000

         Source: Constructed from the National Income and Employment data from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre database.
                              CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  51




    The story on finance, insurance, real estate, and business services
(FIREBS) is somewhat confusing, given that different datasets show dif-
ferent outcomes for the final 14 years—which matters, especially for such
a vibrant sector. What does not seem controversial is that value-added per
worker kept growing until the early 1990s. However, after then, according to
the Groningen Growth and Development Centre data, value-added has been
falling steeply, leading to a halving of the 1990 productivity level by 2005.
But this outcome is not confirmed by our sectoral data at the state level (dis-
cussed later) for the 15 major states for which consistent data are available.
Most of the states (10 out of 15) saw a fair amount of increase in FIREBS pro-
ductivity between 1993 and 1999, although there was some decline in many
of the states between 2000 and 2004. But only in one state (Orissa) do we
see a much lower FIREBS labor productivity in 2004 relative to 1993. In all
other states, the 2004 productivity is higher, roughly the same as, or slightly
lower than in 1993. Thus, our state-level data for FIREBS show much more
plausible trends than the Groningen Centre data for the same sector. In any
event, whichever data we use, what is important is that labor productivity in
FIREBS is much higher than in other sectors, and it is overall an expanding
sector in terms of employment.
    As for the trends in the sectoral composition of employment from 1960
to 2004, we see a drop in the share of agriculture in national employment,
from 71.48 percent to 61.51 percent (Table 1.2). Over the same period,


Table 1.2  Agriculture’s share has fallen

                       Sector composition (percentage of total employment), 1960–2004
                                                                       Decade
Sector                              1960–1969       1970–1979       1980–1989        1990–1999       2000–2004
Agriculture                             71.48           72.26           70.05           64.81           61.51
Mining                                   0.55            0.44            0.47            0.59            0.55
Manufacturing                            9.80            9.44            9.64           11.09           12.42
Public utilities                         0.21            0.29            0.29            0.34            0.40
Construction                             1.48            1.21            1.37            2.44            3.32
Wholesale and retail                     4.88            4.99            6.05            7.56             8.27
Transport and storage                    2.06            2.43            2.58             3.01           3.32
Finance, insurance, real estate,
                                         0.32            0.43            0.40            0.78            1.68
and business services
Community and social services            9.21            8.50            9.15            9.38            8.53
Source: Constructed from the National Income and Employment data from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre
database.
52 Chapter 1




manufacturing’s share rose from 9.80 percent to 12.42 percent, wholesale
and retail’s share increased from 1.48 percent to 3.32 percent, transportation
and storage’s share rose from 2.0 percent to 3.3 percent, and FIREBS’s share
inched up from 0.3 percent to 1.7 percent. Even though this looks like a small
change, FIREBS, as we will see later, makes a substantial contribution to
structural change, because worker productivity in FIREBS is much higher
than the national average.
    Turning to relative labor productivity in the various sectors, we see a
more dramatic switch in which sectors are leading growth (Table 1.3). While
agricultural labor productivity in the 1960s was 30 percent lower than the
economywide labor productivity, it fell to 62 percent below overall labor pro-
ductivity in the 2000s. Over the same period, manufacturing’s productivity
rose from 32 percent to 45 percent; wholesale and retail’s productivity in rel-
ative terms stayed high, moving down a bit from two and a half times the
economy’s average to twice the economywide average; and transport and
storage’s relative productivity inched up from 2.28 percent to 2.92 percent.
However, construction’s relative productivity dropped from 4.0 percent to
1.68 percent, and FIREBS rose significantly from 5.62 percent in the 1960s
to 9.80 percent in the 1990s. For the 2000–2004 period, the Groningen data
show an implausible drop of FIREBS relative productivity to 4.87 percent.

Table 1.3  Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services leads the way in
productivity
                                        Relative labor productivity, 1960–2004
                                                                               Decade
Sector                                  1960–1969         1970–1979         1980–1989         1990–1999         2000–2004
Agriculture                                  0.70              0.62              0.54             0.47              0.38
Mining                                       3.56              4.42             5.16              4.50              4.47
Manufacturing                                1.32              1.51             1.64              1.60              1.45
Public utilities                             4.17              4.88              6.62             7.45              6.30
Construction                                 4.00              4.86             4.17              2.29              1.68
Wholesale and retail                         2.46              2.58             2.33              1.91              1.96
Transport and storage                        2.28              2.34             2.68              2.47              2.92
Finance, insurance, real estate,
                                             5.62              5.71             9.88              9.84              4.87*
and business services
Community and social services                1.06              1.28             1.29              1.34              1.64
Source: Constructed from the National Income and Employment data from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre
database.
Note: Relative labor productivity is defined as a sector’s value-added per worker in any given year divided by the economy-
wide value-added per worker in that same year. *For the 2000–2004 period, the Groningen data show an implausible figure
for FIREBS relative productivity of 4.87. Aggregation using our state-level productivity data shows the figure at roughly 7.50.
                          CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  53




Our aggregated state-level productivity data tell a more positive story, with the
sector’s relative productivity for this period at about 7.50 percent.
    To measure how much of the labor productivity growth over the period
1960–2004 was the result of structural change, we follow the decomposition
methodology used by McMillan and Rodrik (2011). (See the Overview in this
book for details on the methodology.)4
   We should note here that there is little research on structural change
in India, apart from the work by McMillan and Rodrik (2011), who exam-
ine India as part of their comparative analysis of structural change in vari-
ous regions. They show that India has been successful in moving labor from
low-productivity sectors to relatively high-productivity sectors, thereby result-
ing in a positive contribution made by structural change to overall labor pro-
ductivity growth. Another related contribution is a paper by Hasan, Lamba,
and Sen Gupta (2013) that looks at how the two components of state-level
labor productivity growth are associated with poverty reduction across states
in India. They find that structural change and within-sector growth are
equally important in poverty reduction. The focus of the work by Hnatkovksa
and Lahiri (2013) and by Verma (2010, 2012a, 2012b) is different from, but
complementary to, our own work. Verma analyzes the recent structural trans-
formation of India’s national output toward services and concludes that it
was driven by higher total factor productivity growth in services than in
other sectors, which was the result of “market-based liberalization policies.”
Hnatkovksa and Lahiri’s (2013) study highlights the importance of tech-
nological progress along with urbanization in dealing with the rural–urban
divide—with a special role for rural education.
   What did McMillan and Rodrik (2011) find for India as a whole? They
estimate 4.23 percent annual growth in overall labor productivity between
1990 and 2005, of which the “within-sector” component was 3.24 percent
and the “structural change” component was 0.99 percent. We follow the same
procedure to calculate within-sector and structural change components over
various subperiods between 1960 and 2004 to trace the story over a longer

 4	 Algebraically, the decomposition is:
                                             N                      N
                                    Δ Pt =   ∑θ
                                             i–1
                                                   i,t−k Δ pi,t +   ∑p
                                                                    i–1
                                                                          i,tΔθi,t

	whereΔ Pt is the change in aggregate labor productivity between period t − k and t. The ﬁrst term
 is the “within-sector” component, which is a weighted average of the change in labor produc-
 tivity in each of the N sectors, with the weight for sector i being the labor share of that sector in
 period t − k, measured by θi,t−k . The second term is the “structural change” component, which is
 a weighted average of the change in labor shares in the N sectors, with the weights captured by
 the labor productivity of the sector in period t.
54 Chapter 1




period and to illustrate how the shares of these components changed over time
(Table 1.4).
   We find that while 2000–2004 saw by far the largest growth in labor
productivity—6.5 percent per year—most of this growth was accounted for
by within-sector growth (6.24 percent). The biggest contribution of struc-
tural change was in the 1990s (1.26 percent out of a total of 2.93 percent
growth per year), followed by the 1980s (1.06 percent out of a total of
3.14 percent per year). The only period that seems to have experienced
truly undesirable structural change in the form of a negative contribution
to growth was the 1970s—a period that also saw negative within-sector
growth. This period can be regarded as the peak of the “License-Permit Raj,”
during which firms had no flexibility in their input and output decisions
in their response to shocks to the system. In addition, the public sector was
given an important role in every sphere of economic activity. In the 1960s,
the contribution of structural change, even though positive, was small
(0.26 percent).
    During these subperiods, the trends in within-sector change are much
more volatile than those of structural change (Figure 1.5a), especially in
the 1980s (Figure 1.5b). The reason may be that labor mobility is costly and
changing employment from one sector to another is a longer-term decision,
whether made by employers or employees, while technological change is an
uncertain process. It is important to note that both components lie in the
positive region much more often than in the negative region, with negative
contributions of both components concentrated in the 1970s—a time of dis-
tortionary and restrictive economic policies.

Table 1.4  Structural change, albeit still low, contributed the most during the 1990s

   Within-sector and structural change components of productivity by various periods (%), 1960–2004
Period                                          Annual growth                Within-sector             Structural change
1960–1969                                             2.671                        2.411                        0.261
1970–1979                                           –0.515                       –0.266                       –0.250
1980–1989                                             3.141                        2.077                       1.064
1990–1999                                             2.930                        1.669                       1.262
2000–2004*                                            6.535                        6.242                       0.293
Source: Constructed from National Income and Employment data collected by the Groningen Growth and Development
Centre database.
Note: See footnote 4 in this chapter for how within-sector and structural change components are constructed. *As a result of
issues with the Groningen data on finance, insurance, real estate, and business services for this period, as explained later in
this book, the true figure for structural change should be considerably higher (more than 0.5), but still a small fraction of the
overall growth.
                               CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  55



FIGURE 1.5a  “Within-sector” productivity growth tends to be much more volatile than
structural change . . .




                           Trends in within-sector productivity growth and structural change,
                                                      1960–2004
                10

                                 Within-sector
                                 productivity growth
                 5
      Percent




                 0

                                                                                        Structural change


                –5

         1960. . . with “within
FIGURE 1.5b                 1970             1980 volatility in1990
                                sector’s” greatest              the 1980s                      2000
                                                          Year
                           Trends in within-sector productivity growth and structural change,
                                                      1979–1999
                6
                                                       Within-sector
                                                       productivity growth

                4
                                   Structural
                                    change
     Percent




                2



                0



               –2
                    1980            1985                 1990                   1995                  2000
                                                         Year

Source: Constructed from National Income and Employment data collected by the Groningen Growth and Development
Centre database.
56 Chapter 1




   At the sectoral level, we find that in the postliberalization period (1990–
2004), FIREBS made the biggest contribution to structural change—
between 0.5 and 1.0 percent, as Figure 1.6a shows—although the range may
have been 0.75–1.0 percent using our back-of-the envelope correction.5,6
During the period 2000–2004, manufacturing made a negative contribu-
tion (roughly minus 0.5 percent), with its employment share declining, even
though its labor productivity was higher than the economywide average.7
Substantial contributions to within-sector productivity growth have been
made in the postliberalization period by manufacturing (up to 2.0 percent
in 2000–2004), wholesale and retail (up to 1.0 percent in 2000–2004),
transport and storage (up to roughly 1.2 percent in 2000–2004), and com-
munity and social services (roughly 1.0 percent throughout 1990–2004)
(Figure 1. 6b).


The Stories of Gujarat and Maharashtra
We next turn to what was going on at the state level to discern whether
the more productive sectors and states have experienced larger increases in
employment. Our results for all the 15 major states (except Assam) show a
positive growth in labor productivity between 1987 and 2004 (Figure 1.7).
The average within-sector growth was positive for all states (except Assam),
while the contribution of structural change was positive everywhere, except
for Gujarat, where it was slightly negative. Ironically, Gujarat was one of the
fastest-growing states in India during this period, but it appears that this
growth was driven strictly by within-sector growth. Gujarat’s within-sector

 5	 This is the change in the share of employment in FIREBS times labor productivity in FIREBS
    (as a fraction of overall change in national output), in turn multiplied by the overall growth rate
    of national output per worker. 
 6	 The back-of-the-envelope calculation is very rough. If we assume that FIREBS average produc-
    tivity was roughly unchanged for the period 1993–2004 (as roughly seen from the aggregation
    of the state-level data from the Central Statistics Office (CSO) and National Sample Survey
    Organisation (NSSO)), then actual productivity in 2004 is about 50 percent.
 7	 Note that the contribution to structural change is being measured by looking at the productivity
    level in each industry, rather than looking at the productivity level in an industry relative to the
    average productivity in the economy. In other words, what we are looking at is the contribution
    of individuals moving into a sector relative to those individuals remaining unemployed (making
    zero output or income), rather than relative to those individuals earning the economy’s average
    income. Therefore, according to our measure, any expanding sector makes a positive contri-
    bution to structural change. With the alternative measure of contribution to structural change
    mentioned above, even a sector that is expanding its employment share can make a negative
    contribution to structural change if its productivity is less than the economywide labor produc-
    tivity. We believe these are alternative measures of contribution to structural change, and that
    both these measures are useful in their own ways.
                                       CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  57



FIGURE 1.6a  Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services is contributing most to
structural change …

                                Sector contributions to overall structural change (percentage), 1960–2004
            1.0              Agriculture                           Mining                     Manufacturing
            0.5
            0.0
           –0.5
            1.0             Public utilities                  Construction                 Wholesale and retail
            0.5
Percent




            0.0
           –0.5

            1.0         Transport and storage                      FIREBS                    Community and
                                                                                             social services
            0.5
            0.0
           –0.5
                  0          2          4         6 0          2            4     6 0          2            4     6
                                                              Time perioda


FIGURE 1.6b  . . . and since 2000, manufacturing is significantly helping “within-sector”
change

                      Sector contributions to overall within-sector productivity growth (percentage), 1960–2004
             2               Agriculture                         Mining                       Manufacturing
             1
             0
            –1
             2             Public utilities                   Construction                Wholesale and retail
             1
 Percent




             0
            –1
                       Transport and storage                       FIREBS                   Community and
             2
                                                                                            social services
             1
             0
            –1
                  0         2           4        6 0          2             4     6 0          2        4         6
                                                              Time   perioda

Source: Constructed from National Income and Employment data collected by the Groningen Growth and Development
Centre database.
Note: aPeriod values are (1 = 1960–1969; 2 = 1970–1979; 3 = 1980–1989; 4 = 1990–1999; 5 = 2000–2004).
FIREBS = finance, insurance, real estate, and business services.
58 Chapter 1




average annual growth rate of labor productivity of 4.58 percent was the
highest in India, while the contribution of structural change was the low-
est, at –0.60 percent. The best performer in terms of structural change
was Maharashtra. While its annual growth rate of labor productivity was
3.65 percent, structural change contributed 1.85 percent, with the remainder
coming from within-sector growth.8,9
    Why was there such a sharp contrast between Gujarat and Maharashtra
in terms of their growth patterns? A closer look at what happened at the
sectoral level is quite revealing. We see that in almost every sector—apart
from FIREBS and mining (which had a negative productivity growth rate
in Gujarat and accounts for only around 1 percent of the labor force in each
of these two states)—Gujarat shows higher value-added per worker growth
than Maharashtra (Table 1.5). In construction, Gujarat’s growth rate in val-
ue-added per worker was 14.12 percent, while Maharashtra’s was only
1.40 percent—although Gujarat saw a rapidly declining employment share
(about 14.10 percentage points), while Maharashtra saw a slight increase. In agri-
culture, Gujarat’s growth rate was more than five times that in Maharashtra
(1.66 percent versus 0.31 percent), and if the expanding employment in this sec-
tor is also factored in, clearly the size of this sector was growing quickly. Even so,
for both states agriculture still has the lowest value-added per worker—although
its employment share expanded by 10 percentage points in Gujarat, while it con-
tracted by 6.40 percentage points in Maharashtra.


 8	 Our estimates differ from those of Hasan, Lamba, and Sen Gupta (2013), who also use Central
    Statistical Office (CSO) and National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) data to construct
    state-level structural change. However, their estimation differs in the following ways: (1) they
    use an additional round of NSSO data (2009–2010), and (2) they define an NSSO worker’s sec-
    tor using the worker’s principal industry of employment, whereas we use an NSSO worker’s cur-
    rent weekly industry of employment. Nonetheless, the results in Hasan, Lamba, and Sen Gupta
    (2013) support our finding that growth arising from structural change has been more positive
    (and constitutes a much bigger proportion of overall growth) in Maharashtra relative to Gujarat.
 9	 It is very important to note here that in the 1960s and 1970s, Punjab performed spectacularly
    in the agriculture sector. Of all Indian states, it was the most successful in terms of agricultural
    productivity growth—propelled mainly by the “Green Revolution,” which involved the use of
    high-yielding varieties of seeds and modern agricultural production techniques. The contribu-
    tion of agricultural productivity growth to overall growth falls in the category “within-sector
    growth.” While a case study of Punjab’s agricultural growth and Green Revolution should be an
    important component of any serious analysis of the Indian growth experience during the last
    half century, our main focus in this chapter is on the last quarter century and the relative impor-
    tance of structural change and within-sector growth. Given that the overall productivity levels
    in manufacturing and services remain much higher than in agriculture, direct growth-enhanc-
    ing structural change will come through a movement of employment out of agriculture (even
    though agriculture can have an indirect effect in this regard by providing inputs to the other
    sectors). For the above reasons and because of space constraints, we decided not to present a case
    study of Punjab’s agricultural performance in this chapter.
                                CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  59



FIGURE 1.7  Gujarat and Maharashtra follow different growth paths

                          Within-sector productivity growth and structural change by state (percentage),
                                                           1987–2004
    Andhra Pradesh                                                                            Within-sector
                                                                                              Structural
             Assam
               Bihar
             Gujarat
            Haryana
          Karnataka
              Kerala
    Madhya Pradesh
       Maharashtra
              Orissa
             Punjab
          Rajasthan
        Tamil Nadu
      Uttar Pradesh
       West Bengal
                     –2                       0                      2                        4                       6
                                                                  Percent

Source: Constructed from India’s National Accounts Statistics data from the Central Statistical Office, along with employment
survey data from the National Sample Survey Organisation.


    One explanation for Gujarat’s superior performance in most sectors is the
state’s fast pace of infrastructure development (with investments in ports, roads,
rail, power, and so on), reflecting incentives designed to attract private capital
and governance geared toward facilitating private investment (for example, by
rapidly clearing projects and flexibility in land use) (Sood 2012). Even agricul-
ture has been “corporatized” with a switch to cash crops (like cotton, vegetables,
groundnuts, and fruits), where profits are high and growing. As explained in Sen
and Mallik (2012), farmers are able to directly sell their output to wholesalers,
thereby leading to greater profitability, and noncultivable land (including waste-
land) has been brought under cultivation, leading to a rapid decline in landless-
ness. In addition, high-yielding, genetically engineered varieties of crops have
been spread throughout the state, with active technical education provided to
farmers in the cultivation of these varieties. A few new agricultural universities
have also been established. And rapid expansion of irrigation facilities (includ-
ing incentives for micro-irrigation to tap the state’s groundwater potential) has
led to less dependence on the vagaries of monsoons.
    The main factor responsible for Gujarat’s poor performance relative to
Maharashtra’s in the structural change component appears to be the fairly
Table 1.5  Gujarat has a higher labor productivity growth rate in every sector than Maharashtra
                                                                                                                                                                                                   60 Chapter 1




                                                                 Gujarat                                                                         Maharashtra

                             Value-added per         Value-added          Share   Change in share of Value-added per                    Value-added           Share   Change in share of
                            worker (thousands         per worker         of state state employment worker (thousands                     per worker          of state state employment
                            of constant 2004–        growth rate       employment    (percentage     of constant 2004–                  growth rate        employment    (percentage
                              2005 rupees)             (percent)        (percent)       points)        2005 rupees)                       (percent)         (percent)       points)
Sector
Agriculture                          27.25                1.66               58                   9.8                  20.75                 0.31               54                 –6.4
Mining                             469.87                –1.94                1                   0.2                 179.34                 0.83                 1                  0.2
Manufacturing                      159.60                 3.73               17                  3.0                  180.51                 2.34               12                   0.5
Public utilities                 1,069.90                 4.51                0                     0                 656.39                 4.46                 0                –0.1
Construction                       167.93                14.12                4                –14.1                  131.01                 1.40                 5                  0.7
Wholesale and retail               171.43                 3.00                9                   1.8                 164.86                 2.34                11                  3.0
Transport and storage               160.51                4.32                4                  0.9                  171.81                 3.32                 5                  1.3
Finance, insurance, real           925.60                 1.14                1                   0.6                 892.81                 1.69                 3                  1.9
estate, and business
services
Community and social                 64.19                3.87                6                 –2.1                    67.51                4.44                 9                –1.1
services
Source: Constructed from India’s National Accounts Statistics data from the Central Statistical Office, along with employment survey data from the National Sample Survey Organisation.
Note: Value-added per worker is for 2004. Value-added per worker growth is the compound annual growth rate in value-added per worker over the period 1987–2004. The share of state employment is
for the year 2004. Change in share of state employment is the change between 1987 and 2004.
                          CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  61




rapid expansion of the employment share of the relatively low-productivity
agriculture sector and the rapid contraction of the employment share of the
high-productivity construction sector. However, the reasons for the employ-
ment expansion in agriculture were probably no different from those respon-
sible for agricultural productivity growth in Gujarat. After all, most of the
construction activities were publicly funded in the 1980s, and they were pri-
marily aimed at protecting agricultural workers from the uncertainties of
monsoons—typically for drought relief (Lalitha and Orza 2002). Workers
were also sometimes employed for building irrigation facilities. Given that
Gujarat’s agriculture was later made virtually independent of the vagaries of
monsoons, employment in publicly funded construction projects was proba-
bly not needed as much. In addition, the high and fast-growing productivity
of Gujarat’s construction sector probably meant that less labor was needed to
meet demand.10
    By far, the most productive sector for both states was FIREBS, where
the value-added per worker was 35–45 times that in agriculture and
around 6 times that in manufacturing. However, while Gujarat saw only a
0.6 percentage point increase in employment share, Maharashtra saw almost
a 2.0 percentage point increase—a difference that can lead to a big differ-
ence in how much structural change contributes to growth because of the
extremely high labor productivity of FIREBS relative to the economy’s
average. In this context, it is important to reiterate that for Maharashtra,
FIREBS has been a big contributor to structural change. Not only has the
change in its employment share of FIREBS been more than three times that
in Gujarat, its actual employment share level in this sector (3 percent) is also
three times that of Gujarat’s (1 percent). This is not unexpected, as Mumbai,
Maharashtra’s capital city, is India’s financial capital, with the country’s pre-
mier stock exchange. Also, the capacity of FIREBS to absorb labor is limited
in Gujarat relative to Maharashtra by the much lower levels of education—
especially in terms of outcomes (reading, writing, and math), the proportion
of the population with eight years of education or higher, and the standard
literacy rate measure (Drèze and Sen 2013; Ghosh 2012).
    Is the agriculture–construction story of Gujarat and Maharashtra evi-
dent in other states? Our results show that in agriculture, all states—except

10	 It is important to note that what appears as structural change or alternatively “within-sector
   growth” depends on the degree of aggregation or disaggregation of the analysis. For instance, if
   we could treat food grain production and cash crops as two separate sectors, it is quite possible
   that some of the within-sector growth contribution of Gujarat’s agriculture would get converted
   to structural change.
62 Chapter 1




Gujarat—have seen a decline in the share of employment (Table 1.6). In con-
struction, all states—except for Gujarat (major decline) and Rajasthan (minor
decline)—have seen an increase in their employment share. But this increase
may have more to do with the role of the public construction sector (to tackle
the seasonality of agricultural employment, which is also subject to the vaga-
ries of monsoons) than anything else in employment generation.


Forces for “Desirable” Structural Change
 The final step in our examination of India’s growth patterns is using economet-
 ric analysis to determine whether—and to what extent—structural change was
“growth enhancing” (or what we call “desirable”) and which factors played the big-
 gest roles. Our work picks up on that of McMillan and Rodrik (2011), who used
 their nine-sector data at the national level to examine patterns in a number of
 countries. They find that structural change was growth enhancing in India and
 Thailand, but it was “growth reducing” in Argentina, Brazil, Nigeria, and Zambia.


Table 1.6  Agriculture is down everywhere, except Gujarat

                Changes in agriculture and construction employment between 1987 and 2004
                                         Agriculture                                        Construction
                       Share of state Change in share of state Share of state Change in share of state
                       employment in employment 1987–2004 employment in employment 1987–2004
Sector                 1987 (percent)   (percentage points)    1987 (percent)   (percentage points)
Andhra Pradesh               63.5                       –6.4                       3.6                        1.6
Assam                        71.4                       –3.6                       1.6                        1.4
Bihar                        73.1                       –5.4                       2.5                        3.1
Gujarat                      47.7                        9.8                      17.8                     –14.1
Haryana                      57.5                       –4.6                       4.0                        3.2
Karnataka                    64.7                      –1.9                        2.9                        1.1
Kerala                       44.4                      –10.1                       5.5                        5.7
Madhya Pradesh               73.0                       –4.2                       3.5                        1.9
Maharashtra                  60.8                       –6.4                       4.5                        0.7
Orissa                       66.2                       –5.5                       4.6                        1.8
Punjab                       52.2                       –0.4                       3.8                        4.2
Rajasthan                    63.6                       –3.1                      11.6                      –1.3
Tamil Nadu                   48.2                       –2.4                       4.2                        2.4
Uttar Pradesh                69.1                       –8.4                       3.1                        2.5
West Bengal                  50.1                       –4.7                       2.9                        2.1
Source: Constructed from India’s National Accounts Statistics data from the Central Statistical Office, along with employ-
ment survey data from the National Sample Survey Organisation.
                           CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  63




They also argue that globalization by itself cannot deliver the “desirable” kind of
structural change. Rather, what matters is the availability of such factors as the
type of factor endowments a country possesses, the kind of specialization glo-
balization leads to, and, above all, how globalization is managed. They contend
that sectors that are exposed to foreign competition through globalization need
to obtain government support, as they have in most of Asia—unlike in Latin
America, where not only import-competing sectors failed to receive government
support in the form of subsidies, but also trade barriers were eliminated rapidly.
Making matters worse, exchange rates were overvalued in Latin America (unlike
in Asia), thereby encouraging imports and discouraging exports. Plus, they under-
score the importance of labor-market flexibility.
    We begin by asking about the nature of the relationship between produc-
tivity and employment share—an indicator of whether structural change is
growth enhancing or growth reducing—in India’s sectors between 1987 and
2004. In particular, we examine whether the more productive sectors and
states have experienced larger increases in employment. We do so by estimat-
ing the following econometric specification:
    	∆θjst = α2 + β1 Xjst–1 + φst + φj + εjst	                                                 (2)

where ∆θjst is the one-period difference in sector j ’s share of state employ-
ment in state s and year t. Xjst is a vector of one-year lagged variables that vary
by sector, state, and year. The key variable included in Xjst is one-year lagged
value-added per worker in natural logarithm. If β1 > 0 when Xjst is one-year
lagged labor productivity, it follows that the more productive sectors are expe-
riencing higher increases in employment. This is evidence of positive struc-
tural change. Other variables that are sequentially included in Xjst are one-year
lagged values of the fraction of casual workers, the fraction of workers with a
primary education, and the fraction of rural workers.11 φst and φj are state-by-
year and sector fixed effects, respectively. Finally, εjst is a classical error term.
   We find that the change in employment share of a sector in overall state-
level employment is positively related to the value-added per worker in that
sector (column 1, Table 1A.1). A 1 percent increase in the value-added per
worker leads to an increase in the change in the share of the sector in state-
level employment of about a 0.02 percentage point between two consecutive
National Statistical Survey rounds (roughly six years).
    So what is behind this desirable structural change? Using our state-by-
industry-level data, we next look at the underlying factors that enable this

11	 Note that these alternate state characteristics are used in place of labor productivity.
64 Chapter 1




positive outcome. We find that a 1.0 percentage point decline in the fraction
of casual workers leads to a 0.04 percentage point increase in the change in
employment share of a sector—in other words, sectors with a smaller share
of casual workers have been expanding in their relative employment size (col-
umn 2, Table 1A.1). We also find a weak (statistically insignificant) relation-
ship between this employment share increase and both the fraction of workers
with primary education and above, and the rural share of a sector’s employ-
ment (columns 3 and 4, Table 1A.1).
   As for the trend over time, we find that desirable structural change is stron-
ger in the postliberalization period than in the preliberalization period (col-
umns 5 and 6, Table 1A.1)—which is consistent with the McMillan and
Rodrik (2011) story that globalization has been managed better in India than
in most of Latin America, and good management of globalization can deliver
good results. We also see that education and urbanization matter in the post-
liberalization phase (columns 7 and 8, Table 1A.1). Indeed, employment
increased more (or decreased less) in sectors with a bigger share of educated
workers (those with primary education and above). And the employment
share rose more in sectors with a smaller proportion of rural employees in
their total employment.

A Bigger Role for “Labor Pull” Than for “Labor Push”
What about the roles of agricultural and modern-sector productivity—that is,
 whether the impetus is “labor push” or “labor pull” (Matsuyama 2008)? The
 assumption that demand for agricultural goods is less responsive to income
 than demand for modern goods means that growth in agricultural labor
 productivity will push labor out of agriculture and toward the modern sec-
 tor (which represents all nonagriculture sectors). This is called “labor push.”
“Labor pull” occurs when growth in labor productivity in the modern sector
 pulls labor out of agriculture. In analyzing whether trade liberalization com-
 plements or works against the above role of agricultural and modern-sector
 productivity, much will depend on how this liberalization affects agricultural
 and nonagricultural prices.
    We investigate the importance of the above factors by estimating the fol-
 lowing econometric specification:
 ∆θjst = α3 + β2 ln (VAPW )jst–1 + β3 ln (VAPW )jst–1 × Zst–1 + φst + φj + εjst  (3)
where (VAPW )jst–1 denotes one-period lagged value-added per worker
(which is a measure of labor productivity) at the level of industry (sector)
by state. Zst–1 is a vector of state-level variables that are also lagged by one
                     CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  65




period. It includes the one-period lagged labor productivity of the agricul-
ture sector in state s, the one-period lagged labor productivity of the mod-
ern sector in state s, the one-period lagged relative labor productivity of the
modern sector (modern sector productivity / agriculture sector productiv-
ity) in state s, or the one-period lagged state tariffs. Note that these measures
vary only by state and time and not by sector. As a result, we have omitted
the level effects of Zst–1 from equation (3) because of its collinearity with
the state and year interaction fixed effects.
    Our results suggest that agricultural productivity did not have a statis-
tically discernible effect on structural change (column 1, Table 1A.2). But
there is strong evidence (column 2, Table 1A.2) for the positive role of
modern-sector productivity in fostering desirable structural change (that is,
increasing employment shares in favor of the relatively productive sectors).
We also see a positive role of the relative labor productivity of the modern
sector (versus the agriculture sector) in stimulating structural change, once
again in favor of high-productivity sectors (column 3, Table 1A.2). In other
words, these results suggest that labor pull factors were a much more import-
ant determinant of positive structural change in India than labor push fac-
tors. However, the postliberalization period tells a story slightly different
from the previous subperiod, in that now there is a strong positive role for
not only absolute modern-sector productivity and relative modern-sector
productivity but also agricultural productivity (columns 4–6, Table 1A.2). It
is important to note that while both coefficients are statistically insignificant
in column 1, and also some coefficient estimates are insignificant in the other
columns of Table 1A.2, in each of those other columns there is at least one
important coefficient estimate (of the level and/or interaction terms(s)) that
is statistically significant.

Trade Liberalization, Flexible Labor Markets, and Education
Help, Too
Another key factor to evaluate is trade liberalization, by using state-level
employment-weighted tariffs as an inverse measure of the state’s labor force
exposure to foreign competition (with time-invariant state-level industry
employment weights—that is, of the year 1993—applied upon the national
industry tariff vector varying from one year to another). We find that in
states where the labor force is relatively more exposed to foreign compe-
tition, more productive sectors experience a relatively larger increase in
employment share (column 1, Table 1A.3). We also have some fairly strong
evidence that labor market flexibility increases the positive structural
66 Chapter 1




change effect of trade liberalization (column 3, Table 1A.3), which is con-
sistent with McMillan and Rodrik (2011). Also, at higher values of the
share of workers with primary education, we have a more positive relation
between the changes in the shares of employment and labor productiv-
ity (column 4, Table 1A.3). The impact of the share of the educated work-
ers itself changes from negative to positive as the value-added per worker
increases. As for the role of higher road density, our results show a possible,
but weak, improvement (column 5, Table 1A.3). All together, these results
suggest that trade restrictions, restrictive labor regulations, the lack of basic
education, and possibly low road density can act as impediments to positive
structural change.
    What if we focus on just the manufacturing sector? Here, too, we find that
the change in the employment share of the manufacturing sector increases
with value-added per worker in that sector (column 1, Table 1A.4), which
indicates that structural change is of the desirable kind. We also again find
that trade liberalization enhances this positive relationship between employ-
ment share change and labor productivity, especially in states with relatively
flexible labor markets (column 4, Table 1A.4). In states where the labor force
is more exposed to foreign competition, we see that labor regulations that
make for a more flexible labor market strengthen the positive relationship
between labor productivity and the change in the employment share of the
manufacturing sector (column 6, Table 1A.4).

But Informality Is Not a Big Factor
As for the level of casualization (also known as informality) of the work force,
we see a slight increase during the period 1987–2004 from almost 41 percent
to 42–43 percent, with manufacturing having roughly the same degree of
informality as the overall economy (Table 1.7). However, there is quite a wide
variation across sectors. Agriculture and construction have a much higher
degree of informality (91–94 percent) than FIREBS and public utilities
(below 10 percent). Is this variation correlated with certain industry character-
istics? We do see a negative, albeit weak, correlation between the change in the
proportion of casual workers and labor productivity (column 1, Table 1A.5)—
that is, the greater increase in informality is taking place in the relatively low-
er-productivity sectors. But this negative impact is stronger (larger) in the
preliberalization period than during the postliberalization period (column 2,
Table 1A.5), possibly reflecting the fact that globalization requires firms to be
much more agile and respond to shocks quickly by hiring or firing workers,
which is easier to do with informal workers than with formal workers under
                               CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  67




Table 1.7  Informality is up slightly

                             Casualization of the labor force by year and by sector
Year and sector                                                                     Percentage casual worker
Panel A: By year
 1987                                                                                            40.6
 1993                                                                                            42.3
 1999                                                                                            43.2
 2004                                                                                            42.9
Panel B: By sector
 Agriculture                                                                                     91.7
 Mining                                                                                          63.9
 Manufacturing                                                                                   42.4
  Public utilities                                                                                8.6
 Construction                                                                                    94.0
  Wholesale and retail                                                                           27.6
  Transport and storage                                                                          30.3
  Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services                                          6.9
 Community and social services                                                                   15.6
Source: Constructed from India’s employment survey data from the National Sample Survey Organisation.
Note: Percentage casual worker refers to the percentage of wage workers in each state and sector who are not regular
employees. All household employees were excluded when constructing this measure.



the Indian labor laws. Our results also suggest that labor market flexibility
does not affect the relationship between labor productivity and changes in the
share of casual workers (columns 3 and 4, Table 1A.5).
    The bottom line is that the sectors where employment expansion is not
taking place (because of their relatively lower productivity) seem to be the sec-
tors where informality is growing, relatively speaking, while the expanding
sectors (which are the relatively high value-added sectors) are seeing either a
decline in informality or a relatively small increase in informality. Thus, this
evidence indicates that the structural change in informality is probably not a
cause for concern. The macro numbers, on the other hand, show an increase
in informality. It is quite possible that other variables not included in our
regressions are driving the aggregate numbers.


Ways to Drive “Desirable” Structural Change
Encouragingly, we find that structural change has been of the desirable kind
in India. In other words, the contribution of structural change to produc-
tivity growth has been mainly positive, with negative (growth-reducing)
68 Chapter 1




structural change concentrated mainly in the 1970s. In the postreform period
(1991–2004), structural change has contributed slightly less than a fourth
of the overall productivity growth rate of slightly more than 4.0 percent. In
the 2000s, structural change was a small fraction of the overall productivity
growth rate of 6.5 percent.
    At the sectoral level, while FIREBS was the leading contributor to
structural change in the postreform period, manufacturing was the lead-
ing contributor to within-sector growth in the 2000s. Yet despite its high
rate of productivity growth, manufacturing’s role has not grown in terms
of either output or employment. We argue that labor regulations are a big
impediment in this regard and that labor-market reforms are needed, espe-
cially because the future potential of agriculture and services in generating
overall growth is limited (beyond a point) at India’s stage in the develop-
ment process.
    On average, more productive sectors have gained in employment shares
relative to the less productive sectors, at both the national and the state levels.
This structural change has been aided by trade liberalization (especially in
states that have labor regulations that make for a relatively flexible labor mar-
ket) and by the greater exposure of the labor force to foreign competition (an
inverse measure of which is the employment-weighted tariff). Thus, we see
the importance of less distortionary policies in leading to a more efficient allo-
cation of resources. We also see the value of the right kind of domestic poli-
cies and institutions in reaping the gains from globalization. And we find that
investing in infrastructure—such as improving the road density and invest-
ing in social services like education—can help generate desirable structural
change. In other words, the state can play a critical role in ensuring that posi-
tive structural change occurs.
    We also see that there is some—albeit somewhat weak—evidence that the
greater increase in informality is taking place in the relatively low-productivity
and slow-growing sectors (during our entire sample period). This evidence
suggests that the structural change in informality is probably not a cause for
concern. On the other hand, the macro numbers show an increase in infor-
mality. It is quite possible that some other variables not included in our statis-
tical analysis are driving the aggregate numbers. However, it is important to
note that the negative relationship mentioned above between a sector’s labor
productivity and the change in its informality has been weaker (smaller in
size) in the postliberalization phase, probably driven by the need to hire casual
workers to rapidly respond to shocks in the presence of global competition.
                    CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  69




The solution to this problem, we feel, is the reform of labor laws to make labor
markets more flexible.
    Very complementary to our work is the work by Hasan, Lamba, and Sen
Gupta (2013), who show that growth-enhancing structural change has played
an important role in poverty reduction in India. They have argued that this
kind of structural change can be brought about by policies that make the busi-
ness environment more competitive, make labor markets more flexible, and
eliminate financial market imperfections. In turn, these policies become an
important part of the toolkit to fight poverty.
    The recent work by Hnatkovska and Lahiri (2013) has shown the impor-
tance of technological progress and urbanization in dealing with the rural–
urban divide. In that context, education—especially rural education—has
an important role to play. Our work also shows that both urbanization and
investment in education may have a role to play in determining the type of
structural change that takes place—that is, whether it has a positive or nega-
tive impact on the growth of overall labor productivity (and, therefore, of per
capita income).
    Thus, while urbanization can help draw some of the underemployed rural
labor force from agriculture to higher-productivity manufacturing, for this
to actually happen the rural labor force has to have the requisite education to
make that transition. That is one of the main reasons why rural education has
such an important role to play, making education and urbanization comple-
mentary forces for desirable structural change.


Appendix 1A: Data for Our Disaggregated Analysis
of Labor Reallocation
We combine National Accounts Statistics data from the Central Statistical
Office (CSO) with employment survey data from the National Sample Survey
Organisation (NSSO). The CSO dataset provides us with real value-added
data for nine broad sectors separately for the 15 major Indian states. The
sectors are agriculture, forestry, and fishing; mining and quarrying; man-
ufacturing; public utilities; construction; wholesale and retail trade; trans-
port, storage, and communications; FIREBS; and government services and
community, social, and personal services. The included states are Andhra
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh,
and West Bengal. Note that these are not all the Indian states, but are the
70 Chapter 1




15 major states (out of a total of 28 states and seven union territories). Thus,
the total value-added by summing up the value-added from these states
will be somewhat lower than for the overall country value-added from the
Groningen Growth and Development Centre dataset (when both sets of data
are converted into common base year prices). While the value-added in the
Groningen data is in 1993–1994 Indian rupees, these state-level data are in
2004–2005 Indian rupees.
    Next, the NSSO dataset provides us with employment data for the same
nine broad sectors and 15 major Indian states. We use these data, in conjunc-
tion with the above state-level sectoral value-added data, to construct a value-
added per worker series for the years 1987, 1993, 1999, and 2004. These are
the years in which the NSSO conducted its surveys. Additionally, we use this
series to construct our measures of agricultural and modern-sector labor pro-
ductivity. The NSSO data also allow us to create sectoral employment shares
(in state employment), structural change at the state level, and within- state
growth in labor productivity. In addition, we can use the NSSO data to create
the sector- and state-level measures of the fraction of casual workers, the frac-
tion of workers with a primary education, and the fraction of rural workers.12
    For our labor laws measure, we use a partitioning of states that has
recently been constructed and used by Gupta, Hasan, and Kumar (2009).
This partitioning updates the classification constructed by Besley and
Burgess (2004) with information from Bhattacharjea (2006) and OECD
(2007), while focusing attention on characterizing state-level differences
in Chapter VB of the Industrial Disputes Act (IDA) (which relates specifi-
cally to the requirement for firms to seek government permission for layoffs,
retrenchments, and closures), and considering both the content of legislative
amendments as well as judicial interpretations. Bhattacharjea (2006) also
independently assesses legislative amendments, as opposed to the standard
approach of relying on the assessments of Besley and Burgess (2004). The
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) study
uses a very different approach and relies on a survey of key informants to
identify the areas in which states have made specific changes to the imple-
mentation and administration of labor laws (including not only the IDA but
other regulations as well). The OECD study aggregates the responses on

12	 Note that the NSSO provides information on whether each worker surveyed operates in a rural
   or urban location, in addition to providing information on sector, state, casual/regular status,
   education level, and so forth. Thus, for example, the fraction of rural workers in a sector within
   a state would be the number of workers labeled as rural within a sector-state unit divided by the
   total number of workers in that sector-state unit.
                     CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  71




each individual item across the various regulatory and administrative areas
into an index that measures the reduction in transaction costs vis-à-vis labor
issues brought about by procedural changes. Gupta, Hasan, and Kumar
(2009) use the three studies to partition states into those with flexible, neu-
tral, or inflexible labor regulations.
    Our state-level trade protection measure used in our state-level analysis is
from Hasan et al. (2012), who follow Topalova (2010) and Hasan, Mitra, and
Ural (2007). They construct weighted state-specific measures of country-level
ISIC two-digit industry trade protection. In particular, they weight two-digit
industry-level tariff rates within the agriculture, mining, and manufacturing
sectors by state- and industry-specific employment shares in 1993. Similar
employment-weighted protection measures have been used in quite a few
recent studies. Two such examples are Topalova (2010) and Edmonds, Pavcnik,
and Topalova (2010). The idea here is that there is an interaction between
the industry-level tariff vector and the employment vector in the determina-
tion of various outcomes. This measure of state-level protection has been the-
oretically justified by Kovak (2013) using a multiregion, multi-industry trade
model with sector-specific factors and labor that is mobile across sectors, with
all factors being totally immobile across regions. It is important to note in this
context that the employment vector (that interacts with the time-varying tar-
iff vector) is time invariant and is chosen for a particular base year. Since we
will use the within-state variation to identify the effect of our state-level pro-
tection variable, it will be the time-varying tariff vector and not the time-in-
variant employment vector that will play the key role in our statistical analysis.
However, the impact of the tariff vector will vary by the type of the employ-
ment vector. In other words, changes in state-level outcomes will be affected
by changes in national industry-level tariffs in interaction with 1993 state-
level industrial composition. Last, our road density measure is from Cain,
Hasan, and Mitra (2012).
Table 1A.1  Determinants of desirable structural change

                                                                   (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)                (7)                (8)
Dependent Variable                                                                                                      Δ (employment share)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 72 Chapter 1




Ln (value-added per worker)                                       2.090***                                                                 –0.180
                                                                 (0.489)                                                                    (0.601)
Fraction casual                                                                    –4.480**                                                                  –0.850
                                                                                    (1.749)                                                                   (1.842)
Fraction with primary education                                                                      –1.200                                                                     –5.840**
                                                                                                      (2.333)                                                                    (2.789)
Fraction rural                                                                                                          –1.900                                                                       3.830
                                                                                                                         (1.760)                                                                    (2.470)
Ln (value-added per worker) × liberalization                                                                                                2.700***
                                                                                                                                           (0.476)
Fraction casual × liberalization                                                                                                                             –3.910***
                                                                                                                                                              (1.099)
Fraction with primary education × liberalization                                                                                                                                  7.600***
                                                                                                                                                                                 (1.954)
Fraction rural × liberalization                                                                                                                                                                    –6.670***
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (1.559)
Constant                                                        –7.780***           2.800              0.180              1.920             1.330              2.840*             1.280            –3.010
                                                                 (1.464)           (1.719)            (1.050)            (2.099)           (1.882)            (1.691)            (0.842)            (2.372)
Observations                                                      405                403                404                404               405                403                404               404
R-squared                                                        0.528              0.501              0.493             0.494              0.596              0.534              0.529             0.547
Source: Authors’ econometric estimations using data described in Appendix 1A.
Note: The dependent variable is the change in each sector’s share in its state employment. The liberalization variable takes the value of 1 for all rounds of data beginning in 1993 and is 0 otherwise. All
independent variables, except liberalization, are lagged by one period. All regressions include state and year interaction fixed effects and industry fixed effects. All regressions are also weighted by each
sector’s share of national employment. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the sector-state level. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.
Table 1A.2  Labor pull versus labor push

                                                                                                       (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)
Dependent variable                                                                                                                       Δ (employment share)
Ln (value-added per worker)                                                                          0.490            –7.070**            0.350              1.690*          –0.380              2.000**
                                                                                                    (1.089)            (2.970)           (1.037)            (1.010)           (2.069)           (0.923)
Ln (value-added per worker) × ln (agriculture sector labor productivity)                             0.340                                                 –0.250
                                                                                                    (0.280)                                                 (0.277)
Ln (value-added per worker) × ln (modern sector labor productivity)                                                    1.890***                                                0.030
                                                                                                                      (0.629)                                                 (0.394)
Ln (value-added per worker) × (relative modern labor productivity)                                                                        0.920*                                               –1.530***
                                                                                                                                         (0.469)                                                (0.462)
Ln (value-added per worker) × liberalization                                                                                                               –1.150*
                                                                                                                                                            (0.586)
Ln (value-added per worker) × agriculture sector productivity × liberalization                                                                               0.360***
                                                                                                                                                            (0.136)
Modern sector productivity × liberalization                                                                                                                                  –2.890***
                                                                                                                                                                              (0.598)
Ln (value-added per worker) × modern sector productivity × liberalization                                                                                                      0.560***
                                                                                                                                                                              (0.096)
Relative modern productivity × liberalization                                                                                                                                                  –7.750***
                                                                                                                                                                                                (1.833)
Ln (value-added per worker) × relative modern productivity × liberalization                                                                                                                      1.830***
                                                                                                                                                                                                (0.395)
Constant                                                                                           –8.840***          –8.720***         –9.330***          –6.640**            1.480           –0.860
                                                                                                    (2.493)            (2.401)           (2.443)            (2.877)           (2.244)           (2.198)
Observations                                                                                          360                405               405                360               405               405
R-squared                                                                                            0.265              0.550             0.534              0.296             0.594             0.588
Source: Authors’ econometric estimations using data described in Appendix 1A.
Note: The dependent variable is the change in each sector’s share in its state employment. The liberalization variable takes the value of 1 for all rounds of data beginning in 1993 and is 0 otherwise.
Modern sectors include all nonagriculture sectors. Ln (value-added per worker) is lagged by one period. All regressions include state and year interaction fixed effects and industry fixed effects. All
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  73




regressions are also weighted by each sector’s share of national employment. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the sector-state level. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.
Table 1A.3  The role of trade liberalization, flexible labor markets, and education

                                                                                      (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)                    (5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    74 Chapter 1




Dependent variable                                                                                                       Δ (employment share)
Ln (value-added per worker)                                                          4.360***               2.150***               4.350***                0.760                  1.640
                                                                                    (0.551)                (0.498)                (0.504)                 (0.819)                (1.146)
Ln (value-added per worker) × state tariffs                                        –5.080***                                      –4.890***
                                                                                    (0.719)                                        (0.660)
Ln (value-added per worker) × labor laws                                                                    0.190                  1.000**
                                                                                                           (0.169)                (0.422)
Ln (value-added per worker) × state tariffs × labor laws                                                                          –1.500**
                                                                                                                                   (0.724)
Ln (value-added per worker) × fraction with primary education                                                                                              3.470***
                                                                                                                                                          (1.284)
Fraction with primary education                                                                                                                        –20.580***
                                                                                                                                                        (6.486)
Ln (value-added per worker) × road density                                                                                                                                        0.080
                                                                                                                                                                                 (0.190)
Constant                                                                         –14.760***               –6.650***             –17.160***               –0.400                 –5.920***
                                                                                  (1.927)                  (1.708)               (2.149)                  (2.705)                (1.568)
Observations                                                                          405                    405                    405                    404                     405
R-squared                                                                            0.638                  0.529                  0.646                  0.549                   0.528

Source: Authors’ econometric estimations using data described in Appendix 1A.
Note: The dependent variable is the change in each sector’s share in its state employment. The labor laws variable takes the value of 1 for states that have flexible labor laws and is 0
otherwise. Ln (value-added per worker) is lagged by one period. All regressions include state and year interaction fixed effects and industry fixed effects. All regressions are also weighted by
each sector’s share of national employment. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the sector-state level. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.
Table 1A.4  The role of trade liberalization, flexible labor markets, and education in manufacturing

                                                                              (1)                 (2)                  (3)                  (4)                 (5)                  (6)
Dependent variable                                                                                                    Δ (employment share)
Ln (value-added per worker)                                                  6.880***            6.500***             6.700***            5.640***             7.160***            7.810***
                                                                            (1.426)             (1.783)              (1.442)             (1.600)              (1.632)             (1.528)
Ln (value-added per worker) × liberalization                                                     0.350                                    1.060
                                                                                                (0.959)                                  (0.881)
Ln (value-added per worker) × labor laws                                                                              0.970                                                      –2.130
                                                                                                                     (1.047)                                                      (1.727)
Ln (value-added per worker) × liberalization × labor laws                                                                                 0.310***
                                                                                                                                         (0.106)
Ln (value-added per worker) × state tariffs                                                                                                                  –0.650              –1.240
                                                                                                                                                              (1.514)             (1.428)
State tariffs                                                                                                                                                  3.520               5.010
                                                                                                                                                              (6.771)             (6.306)
Ln (value-added per worker) × state tariffs × labor laws                                                                                                                         –0.830**
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.356)
Constant                                                                 –29.460***           –26.700***          –29.520***           –23.260***          –30.860***           –31.470***
                                                                          (6.437)              (7.140)             (6.453)              (6.407)             (7.235)              (6.670)
Observations                                                                  45                   45                  45                   45                  45                   45
R-squared                                                                   0.643                0.645               0.654                0.734               0.647                0.726

Source: Authors’ econometric estimations using data described in Appendix 1A.
Note: The dependent variable is the change in the share of manufacturing employment in each state’s overall employment. The liberalization variable takes the value of 1 for all rounds of data
beginning in 1993 and is 0 otherwise. The labor laws variable takes the value of 1 for states that have flexible labor laws and is 0 otherwise. Ln (value-added per worker) is lagged by one
period. All regressions include state and year fixed effects. All regressions are also weighted by each sector’s average share of national employment over the sample period. Robust standard
errors in parentheses are clustered at the sector-state level. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  75
76 Chapter 1




Table 1A.5  Informality and structural change

                                                                 (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)
Dependent variable                                                          Δ (casual employment share)
Ln (value-added per worker)                                   –1.810            –3.380**          –1.960             –3.720***
                                                               (1.249)           (1.361)           (1.244)            (1.343)
Ln (value-added per worker) × liberalization                                      1.870**                              2.050**
                                                                                 (0.942)                              (0.850)
Ln (value-added per worker) × labor laws                                                          –0.480               0.550
                                                                                                   (0.311)            (0.784)
Ln (value-added per worker) × liberalization                                                                         –1.320
× labor laws                                                                                                          (1.023)
Constant                                                        6.260             5.410             8.310*             8.610*
                                                               (4.240)           (4.211)           (4.673)            (4.838)
Observations                                                     402               402               402               402
R-squared                                                       0.320             0.326             0.321             0.329

Source: Authors’ econometric estimations using data described in Appendix 1A.
Note: The dependent variable is the change in each sector’s ratio of casual workers to all wage workers. The	 liberalization
variable takes the value of 1 for all rounds of data beginning in 1993 and is 0 otherwise. The labor laws variable takes the
value of 1 for states that have flexible labor laws and is 0 otherwise. Ln (value-added per worker) is lagged by one period.
The interaction between the liberalization and labor laws indicator is omitted because of its collinearity with the state and
year interaction fixed effects. All regressions include state and year interaction fixed effects and industry fixed effects. These
regressions are also weighted by each sector’s share of national employment. The standard errors are clustered at the
sector-state level. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.




References
Besley, T., and R. Burgess. 2004. “Can Regulation Hinder Economic Performance? Evidence from
       India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1): 91–134.
Bhattacharjea, A. 2006. “Labour Market Regulation and Industrial Performance in India: A
       Critical Review of the Empirical Evidence.” Indian Journal of Labour Economics 49 (2):
       211–232.
Cain, J. S., R. Hasan, and D. Mitra. 2012. “Trade Liberalization and Poverty Reduction: New
       Evidence from India States.” In India’s Reforms: How They Produced Inclusive Growth, edited
       by Jagdish Bhagwati and Arvind Panagariya, 91–185. New York: Oxford University Press.
Datta-Chaudhuri, M. 1996. Labor Markets as Social Institutions in India. IRIS-India Working
       Paper 10. College Park, MD: University of Maryland, Center for Institutional Reform and
       the Informal Sector.
Drèze, J., and A. Sen. 2013. An Uncertain Glory: India and Its Contradictions. Princeton, NJ:
       Princeton University Press.
                         CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  77




Dutta, R. 2003. “Labor Market, Social Institutions, Economic Reforms and Social Cost.” In
     Labour Market and Institution in India: 1990s and Beyond, edited by Shuji Uchikawa. New
     Delhi: Manohar.
Edmonds, E. V., N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova. 2010. “Trade Adjustment and Human Capital
     Investments: Evidence from Indian Tariff Reform.” American Economic Journal: Applied
     Economics 2 (4): 42–75.

Ghosh, S. 2012. “An Analysis of the State of Education in Gujarat.” In Dynamics of Development
     in Gujarat, edited by I. Hirway, S. P. Kashyap, and A. Shah, 180–198. New Delhi: Concept
     Publishing Company.

Groningen Growth and Development Centre database. www.rug.nl/research/ggdc/.

Gupta, P., R. Hasan, and U. Kumar. 2009. “Big Reforms but Small Payoffs: Explaining the Weak
     Record of Growth in Indian Manufacturing.” In India Policy Forum 2008/09, Vol. 5, edited
     by S. Bery, B. Bosworth, and A. Panagariya. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution; New
     Delhi: National Council of Applied Economic Research.

Hasan, R., and K. R. L. Jandoc. 2013. “Labor Regulation and Firm Size Distribution in Indian
     Manufacturing.” In Reforms and Economic Transformation in India, edited by J. Bhagwati
     and A. Panagariya, 15–48. New York: Oxford University Press.

Hasan, R., S. Lamba, and A. S. Gupta. 2013. “Growth, Structural Change and Poverty Reduction:
     Evidence from India.” Asian Development Bank, India Resident Mission, South Asia
     Regional Department. Mimeo.

Hasan, R., D. Mitra, P. Ranjan, and R. Ahsan. 2012. “Trade Liberalization and Unemployment:
     Theory and Evidence from India.” Journal of Development Economics 97 (2): 269–280.

Hasan, R., D. Mitra, and A. Sundaram. 2013. “What Explains the High Capital Intensity of Indian
     Manufacturing?” Indian Growth and Development Review 6 (2): 212–241.

Hasan, R., D. Mitra, and B. P. Ural. 2007. “Trade Liberalization, Labor-Market Institutions and
     Poverty Reduction: Evidence from Indian States.” In India Policy Forum 2006/07, Vol. 3,
     edited by S. Bery, B. Bosworth, and A. Panagariya. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution;
     New Delhi: National Council of Applied Economic Research.

Heston, A., R. Summers, and B. Aten. 2012. “Penn World Table Version 7.1.” Philadelphia: University
     of Pennsylvania, Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices.

Hnatkovska, V., and A. Lahiri. 2013. “Structural Change and the Rural-Urban Divide.” Vancouver:
     University of British Columbia. Mimeo.

Kochhar, K., U. Kumar, R. Rajan, A. Subramanian, and I. Tokadlidis. 2006. “India’s Pattern of
     Development: What Happened, What Follows?” NBER Working Paper 12023. Cambridge,
     MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
78 Chapter 1




Kovak, B. 2013. “Regional Effects of Trade Reform: What Is the Correct Measure of Liberalization?”
     American Economic Review 103 (5): 1960–1976.

Kuznets, S. 1971. “Modern Economic Growth: Findings and Reflections.” Nobel Prize Lecture to
     the memory of Alfred Nobel. www.nobelprize.org.

Lalitha, N., and A. Orza. 2002. “Employment Trends in the Manufacturing Sector of Gujarat.”
     In Dynamics of Development in Gujarat, edited by L. Hirway, S. P. Kashyap, and A. Shah,
     322–339. New Delhi: Concept Publishing Company.
Matsuyama, K. 2008. “Structural Change.” In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, edited by
     L. E. Blume and S. N. Durlauf. 2nd ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
McMillan, M., and D. Rodrik. 2011. “Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity Growth.”
     In Making Globalization Socially Sustainable, edited by M. Bachetta and M. Jansen. Geneva:
     International Labour Organization and World Trade Organization.
Nagaraj, R. 2002. Trade and Labour Market Linkages in India: Evidence and Issues. Economic
     Study Area Working Paper 50. Honolulu: East-West Center.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2007. OECD Economic
     Surveys: India, Vol. 2007/14. Paris.
Panagariya, A. 2008. India: The Emerging Giant. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ramaswamy, K. V. 2003. “Liberalization, Outsourcing and Industrial Labour Markets in India:
     Some Preliminary Results.” In Labour Market and Institution in India: 1990s and Beyond,
     edited by Shuji Uchikawa. New Delhi: Manohar.
Rodrik, D., and A. Subramanian. 2005. “From Hindu Growth to Productivity Surge: The Mystery
     of the Indian Growth Transition.” IMF Staff Papers 52 (2): 193–227. Washington, DC:
     International Monetary Fund.
Sen, A., and C. Mallik. 2012. “Understanding Gujarat’s Agricultural Growth in a Liberalizing
     Environment: Signs of a Redefined Margin.” In Poverty Amidst Prosperity: Essays on the
     Trajectory of Development in Gujarat, edited by A. Sood, 88–127. New Delhi: Aakar Books.
Sivadasan, J. 2009. “Barriers to Competition and Productivity: Evidence from India.” The B.E.
     Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 9 (1): 1935–1962.
Sood, A., ed. 2012. “Rousing Growth Amidst Raging Disparities.” In Poverty Amidst Prosperity:
     Essays on the Trajectory of Development in Gujarat, edited by A. Sood, 1–38. New Delhi:
     Aakar Books.
Topalova, P. 2010. “Factor Immobility and the Regional Impacts of Trade Liberalization: Evidence
     on Poverty from India.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2: 1–41.
                         CAN THE WHOLE ACTUALLY BE GREATER THAN THE SUM OF ITS PARTS?  79




Verma, R. 2010. “The Service Sector Revolution in India.” In The Rise of China and India: Impacts,
     Prospects and Implications. UNU-WIDER Studies in Development Economics and Politics.
     New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
—. 2012a. “Can Total Factor Productivity Explain Value Added Growth in Services?” Journal
     of Development Economics 99 (1): 163–177.
—. 2012b. “Structural Transformation and Jobless Growth in the Indian Economy.” In The
     Oxford Handbook of the Indian Economy, edited by C. Ghate. New York: Oxford University
     Press.
World Bank. 2014. World Development Indicators database. http://data.worldbank.org/
     data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
                                                                                   Chapter 2


                                  MOVING OUT OF AGRICULTURE:
                               STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN VIET NAM

                                                            Brian McCaig and Nina Pavcnik




D
      uring the past 20 years, Viet Nam underwent an economic transforma-
      tion, featuring high rates of economic growth—real GDP increased at
      an average annual growth rate of 7 percent from 1986 to 2008 and GDP
per capita in PPP terms tripled—and a sharp drop in poverty rates.1 These
changes catapulted Viet Nam out of the poorest quintile of countries (ahead
of Cambodia and Bangladesh, but behind Laos and Kenya) in 1986, when its
GDP per capita in PPP (2005 international dollars) was around only $800.
At that point, the highly agrarian nature of Viet Nam’s economy placed it in
the top quintile of countries with the largest share of agriculture in GDP and
among the top 10 percent of countries with the highest share of workers in
agriculture throughout the 1990s.
   Viet Nam’s economic expansion was accompanied by a drastic shift in the
composition of GDP, as economic activities moved away from agriculture
toward services and manufacturing (Figure 2.1a).
 •	   Agriculture’s share of GDP decreased continuously from 34 percent in
      1986 to 17 percent in 2009.
 •	   Manufacturing’s share initially fell from 17 percent in 1986 to 14 percent
      in 1990—as many state-owned enterprises (SOEs), which dominated man-
      ufacturing at the time, closed (Dodsworth et al. 1996)—but then climbed
      steadily to 25 percent in 2009, surpassing agriculture’s share in 2003.
 •	   The service sector accounted for the largest share of GDP, with its contri-
      bution increasing from 46 to 54 percent over the 1986–2008 period.
 •	   Mining and quarrying never accounted for more than 6 percent of GDP.


 1	 The information on real GDP, real GDP per capita in PPP terms, and poverty is from the General
      Statistics Office of Vietnam; the Penn World Tables 7.1 (Heston, Summers, and Aten 2012); and
      the World Development Indicators (WDI) database (World Bank, various years), respectively.



                                                                                                      81
82 Chapter 2




   At the same time, Viet Nam experienced a large expansion of its labor
force, as employment increased at an average annual rate of 2.4 percent,
accompanied by a drastic change in the structure of employment across eco-
nomic sectors (Figure 2.1b). In 1990, more than 70 percent of workers were
in agriculture, with the remaining workers employed in services (18 percent),
manufacturing (8 percent), and mining (1 percent). But by 2008, the employ-
ment share of agriculture had shrunk drastically to 54 percent, with workers
reallocating toward services and manufacturing. The employment share of
services grew to 32 percent and that of manufacturing grew to 14 percent,
although mining and quarrying never accounted for more than 1 percent of
overall employment.
    The movement of Viet Nam’s workforce away from agriculture to manu­
facturing and services is consistent with a long tradition in development
economics in which poor countries need to undergo a process of structural
change, where labor reallocates from traditional, low-productivity sectors of
the economy toward modern, high-productivity sectors to achieve high levels
of aggregate productivity (Lewis 1954; Fei and Ranis 1964; Chenery 1979).
More recently, McMillan and Rodrik (2011) document significant gaps in
labor productivity among agriculture, manufacturing, mining, and services
in a large set of developing countries, and substantial differences in the contri-
bution of structural change to the aggregate economic performance of these
economies during the past four decades. Reallocation of labor across sectors
enhanced aggregate labor productivity in Asian economies, while decreasing it
in Latin American and African economies within the McMillan and Rodrik
(2011) sample.
   What contributed to Viet Nam’s economic transformation? This is an
important question, given that the transformation was swifter than in many
other developing countries and consequently contributed more to rising
labor productivity and growth (see other countries covered in this book and
McMillan and Rodrik 2011). In this chapter, we explore the role of struc-
tural change in Viet Nam’s economic development in the 1990s and 2000s,
starting with quantifying the contribution of structural change to growth
in overall labor productivity.2 We then describe a set of reforms—known as
Doi Moi, or “renovation”—that were launched in 1986 to gradually trans-
form the economy from central planning to a regulated market economy.

 2	 Ideally, we would examine the role of structural change over a period of time encompassing
   several decades. There are no publicly available data on employment and GDP by sector prior
   to 1990, even at a high level of aggregation. Viet Nam is also not included in the Groningen
   Growth and Development Centre database used by McMillan and Rodrik (2011).
                                          Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   83



FIGURE 2.1a  Big move out of agriculture in terms of GDP . . .


                                              Percentage of GDP by broad sectors, 1986–2009
           60

           50       SER

           40
                    AGR
 Percent




           30
                    MAN
           20

           10
                    MIN
            0



           20 9




           20 3
              04

           20 5
              06

           20 7
              08
              09
              00
           19 6
           19 7
              88

           19 9
              90

           19 1
              92

           19 3

           19 5
              96

           19 7
              98




           20 1
              94




              02
              0




              0
              8




              9




              9




              0
              8




              9

              9




              0
              9
              8




           19




           19




           20




           20
           19




           20
           19

           19




           20
           19




           20
           19

FIGURE 2.1b  . . . and in terms of employment share


           80                           Percentage of employment by broad sectors, 1990–2008

           70

           60
                                                                                                                         AGR
           50
 Percent




           40
                                                                                                                         SER
           30

           20
                                                                                                                         MAN
           10
                                                                                                                         MIN
            0
                                                                            9
                    1
                           2
                                  3


                                                5
                                                       6
                                                              7
                                                                     8


                                                                                 00
                                                                                      01
                                                                                           02
                                                                                                03
                                                                                                     04
                                                                                                          05
                                                                                                               06
                                                                                                                    07
                                                                                                                          08
                0




                                         4
                     9




                                                               9
                            9
                                   9


                                                 9




                                                                      9
                                                                             9
              9




                                          9


                                                        9
                  19




                                                            19




                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                    20
                                              19




                                                                                           20




                                                                                                          20
                         19
                                19




                                                                   19




                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                         20
                                                                          19
           19




                                       19


                                                     19




                                                                                 20




                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                               20




Source: Authors’ own calculations based on data from the General Statistics Office of Viet Nam.
Note: AGR = agriculture; GDP = gross domestic product; MAN = manufacturing; MIN = mining; SER = services. The employ-
ment shares match well with Vietnamese census estimates from 1989, 1999, and 2009.



Next, we review the role of key reforms in agriculture, the enterprise sec-
tor, and integration of Viet Nam into the global economy, before document-
ing labor reallocation across different types of firms. We then highlight
industries that contributed most to the observed expansion of manufactur-
ing employment during the 2000s and briefly compare Viet Nam’s growth
ex­perience with that of other countries that started the 1990s at similar lev-
els of economic development.
84 Chapter 2




    Overall, we find that structural change accounted for 38 percent of the
growth in aggregate labor productivity during 1990–2008, which averaged
5.1 percent per year. Not surprisingly, the reallocation of employment
away from agriculture toward service industries and manufacturing—all
sectors with relatively higher labor productivity—played an important role.
Manufacturing experienced particularly rapid growth in labor productivity
and a large expansion in employment. We find that manufacturing indus-
tries that experienced greater declines in employment in SOEs and greater
increases in employment in foreign-owned firms expanded their relative
employment, contributing more to the rapid expansion of the manufacturing
sector. We also document significant reallocation within sectors away from
low-productivity informal firms to higher-productivity formal firms, which
contributed to labor productivity growth within sectors. But despite all of
these achievements, large productivity gaps remain both among and within
sectors, indicating that there is still room for reallocating resources away from
the household business sector to the enterprise sector.


Patterns of Structural Change
We start by asking to what extent the large shifts of labor out of agriculture
contribute to aggregate productivity growth. To answer this question, we use
the framework from McMillan and Rodrik (2011), which decomposes the
aggregate change in labor productivity into two components: (1) “within,”
which captures growth within sectors, and (2) “structural change,” which
captures growth resulting from labor reallocation across sectors that differ
in their labor productivity (see the Overview in this book for details on the
methodology).3 We use data provided by the General Statistics Office (GSO)
of Viet Nam on output and employment for nine broad sectors (defined in
McMillan and Rodrik 2011) from 1990 to 2008. Output is expressed in 1994


 3	 Algebraically, the decomposition is:
                                              N                      N
                                     Δ Pt =   ∑θ
                                              i–1
                                                    i,t−k Δ pi,t +   ∑p
                                                                     i–1
                                                                           i,tΔθi,t

	   where Δ Pt is the change in aggregate labor productivity between period t−k and t. The ﬁrst term
    is the “within-sector” component, which is a weighted average of the change in labor produc-
    tivity in each of the N sectors, with the weight for sector i being the labor share of that sector in
    period t−k, measured by θi,t−k . The second term is the “structural change” component, which is
    a weighted average of the change in labor shares in the N sectors, with the weights captured by
    the labor productivity of the sector in period t.
                                           Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   85



FIGURE 2.2  Structural change played a greater role in the 2000s than in the 1990s


                                          Components of labor productivity growth, 1991–2008
            8
                                                                                Within         Structural         Total

            6
  Percent




            4


            2


            0
                1

                     2

                            3

                                   4

                                          5

                                                 6

                                                        7

                                                               8

                                                                      9
                                                                           00

                                                                                01

                                                                                     02

                                                                                          03

                                                                                                04

                                                                                                      05

                                                                                                            06

                                                                                                                 07

                                                                                                                      08
               9




                                                         9
                      9

                             9



                                           9




                                                                9
                                    9



                                                  9




                                                                       9
            19




                                                      19




                                                                                20




                                                                                                                 20
                   19

                          19



                                        19




                                                                                     20

                                                                                          20



                                                                                                    20
                                                             19




                                                                                                                      20
                                 19



                                               19




                                                                    19
                                                                           20




                                                                                               20



                                                                                                            20
Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from the General Statistics Office of Viet Nam and decomposition described in
the text.



Vietnamese dong. Labor productivity is measured as real output per worker in
a sector.4
    Our results show that aggregate labor productivity grew on average by
5.1 percent annually, with within-sector change accounting for the majority
(62 percent) of the growth during this period (Figure 2.2). At the same time,
productivity growth was quite uneven across sectors (Table 2.1). While produc-
tivity levels more than doubled in mining, manufacturing, and public utilities,
they stayed relatively unchanged for the wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and
restaurants sector, and for financial services. In agriculture, productivity grew
impressively (at an average annual rate of 3.5 percent), but remained low relative
to other sectors. Even so, agriculture contributed 15.1 percent to aggregate labor
productivity growth, owing to its large share of total employment. In compar-
ison, manufacturing productivity grew at an average annual rate of 5.1 percent
and contributed 22.1 percent to aggregate labor productivity growth.
    If we break up the period, we find that aggregate productivity grew mar-
ginally slower in the 2000s than in the 1990s, by 4.9 versus 5.2 percent,


 4	 These labor productivity measures capture average productivity rather than marginal productiv-
      ity. As discussed in McMillan and Rodrik (2011), comparisons of average productivity gaps across
      sectors can be misleading if the production function is not Cobb-Douglas and if labor shares of
      value-added differ across sectors. McMillan and Rodrik (2011) and Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh
      (2012) argue that large gaps in average labor productivity between agriculture and manufacturing
      likely reflect large gaps in marginal productivity. In addition, in imperfectly competitive indus-
      tries, these productivity measures may in part capture differences in market power across indus-
      tries, to the extent that aggregate price deflators do not fully control for this issue.
86 Chapter 2




Table 2.1  Huge productivity gaps among sectors

                           Labor productivity by broad sectors, 1990, 2000, and 2008
                                                     Productivity (million dong,                  Annual average
                                                   1994 prices/person employed)                productivity growth (%)
                                                                                         1990 to      1990 to   2000 to
Sector                                               1990         2000        2008        2008         2000      2008
Agriculture, hunting, forestry, and fishing            1.96        2.54         3.66           3.5       2.6       4.7
Mining and quarrying                                 17.41        84.04       48.85           5.9       17.0      –6.6
Manufacturing                                          8.07       16.05       19.81            5.1       7.1       2.7
Public utilities (electricity, gas, and water)       27.79        79.71       66.08           4.9       11.1      –2.3
Construction                                         11.92        22.00       17.84           2.3        6.3      –2.6
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and              15.63        15.77       16.00            0.1       0.1       0.2
restaurants
Transport, storage, and communications                 8.87       11.55       17.21           3.8        2.7       5.1
Finance, insurance, real estate, and                   61.3       91.71       59.79           –0.1       4.1      –5.2
business services
Community, social, personal, and                       7.01       10.96       12.56           3.3        4.6       1.7
government services
Economywide                                            4.49        7.46       10.92            5.1       5.2       4.9
Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from the General Statistics Office of Viet Nam.
Note: The sectors are defined as in McMillan and Rodrik (2011).


respectively. However, a clear feature of Figure 2.2 is that within-sector
productivity growth contributed less to productivity growth in the 2000s,
accounting for only 45 percent of the growth during this period, as productiv-
ity growth within many sectors slowed, in contrast to 81 percent for the 1990s.
For example, manufacturing labor productivity grew on average by 7.1 percent
per year during the 1990s and by 2.7 percent per year during the 2000s. This
trend in part accounts for the lower contribution of sectoral productivity
growth to aggregate growth in the 2000s than in the 1990s.5
    As for structural change, it accounts for the remaining 38 percent of
growth in aggregate labor productivity and was a consistent positive contrib-
utor over the period 1990–2008. That said, its role was relatively small in the
early 1990s, and then became increasingly important, eventually surpassing
the within-sector component in 2001. Indeed, structural change increased
from accounting for only 19 percent of growth in the 1990s to 55 percent

 5	 With the exception of construction, the sectors that experienced a decline in productivity
    between 2000 and 2008 (mining and quarrying; public utilities; and finance, insurance, real
    estate, and business services) had employment shares below 1 percent. A fall in labor productiv-
    ity from 2000 to 2008 in these very small sectors may reflect measurement error in employment
    in either 2000 or 2008. For example, employment share estimates for mining and quarrying and
    for public utilities from the 2009 census differ by about a third from the GSO estimates.
                        Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   87




of growth in the 2000s. The significant contribution of growth-enhancing
structural change for Viet Nam confirms the trends in McMillan and Rodrik
(2011) for other Asian countries during this period. From 1990 to 2005,
they found that Asian countries experienced, on average, 3.9 percent annual
labor productivity growth, of which 16 percent can be attributed to struc-
tural change. However, Viet Nam’s productivity growth exceeded the average
growth for Asian economies (5.1 percent versus 3.9 percent, respectively) and
more strongly depended on the structural change component (38 percent ver-
sus 16 percent, respectively).
    What was behind Viet Nam’s strong structural change? The biggest influ-
ences were the predominantly agrarian nature of the Vietnamese economy in
1990, persistent productivity gaps across sectors, and a drastic move of employ-
ment out of agriculture over the two decades. Indeed, the dominant role of
agriculture as the source of initial low aggregate productivity in Viet Nam is
starkly illustrated in Figure 2.3a, which plots sectoral productivity as a per-
centage of average economywide productivity against the sector’s share in total
employment in 1990. Agriculture, with nearly 75 percent of employment, had
the lowest labor productivity of all—less than 50 percent of the economy-
wide productivity. At the same time, manufacturing’s productivity was sub-
stantially higher, although it accounted for only 8 percent of employment.
However by 2008, almost 30 percent of workers had moved out of agriculture,
and as shown in Figure 2.3b, although agriculture’s productivity was still sig-
nificantly lower than in the rest of the economy, its share of employment had
shrunk to 53 percent. Thus by 2008, nearly half of the employed population
worked in sectors with relative productivity more than onefold and less than
twofold the aggregate productivity.
    For the period as a whole, we can visualize the big move from low-
toward higher-productivity sectors in Figure 2.4, which summarizes these
shifts in employment across sectors by plotting the initial sectoral produc-
tivity against the sectoral employment growth. The size of the circle reflects
the sector’s share of total employment in 1990, and the positive slope of the
scatter plot illustrates this movement. A decrease of more than 20 percent-
age points in agriculture’s share of employment was accompanied by about
an 8 percentage point expansion in the share of employment in wholesale
and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants; a 6 percentage point expansion in
manufacturing’s share; and about a 3 percentage point expansion in con-
struction’s share.
    One possible explanation for the accelerated pace of structural change
in the 2000s could be the low initial levels of economic development in Viet
  88 Chapter 2



  FIGURE 2.3a  Low-productivity agriculture dominates employment in the 1990s . . .


                                                    Labor productivity gaps in Viet Nam, 1990                               1366
                             1400
                                                                                                                 ﬁre 0.5%
                             1200
Sectoral productivity as %
 of average productivity




                             1000

                             800                                                                                  pu 0.3%
                                                                                                         wrt 6%             619
                             600
                                                                                                       con 2%min 1%
                                                                                                   tsc 2%         388
                             400                                                                                 348
                                                                                               man 8%       266
                                                                                      cspsgs 7%           198
                             200        agr 73%                                                  156 180
                                                           44
                                0
                                    0                                                                                             1
                                                           Share of total employment


  FIGURE 2.3b  . . . and 2000s, although its role is decreasing


                                                    Labor productivity gaps in Viet Nam, 2008
                             700
                                                                                                                  pu 0.5%
                                                                                                                              605
                             600
                                                                                                                  ﬁre 1% 548
Sectoral productivity as %
 of average productivity




                             500
                                                                                                                min 1% 447
                             400
                                                                                            con 5%
                             300
                                                                                                          man 14%
                                                                               wrt 14% tsc 3%
                             200                                                                                     181
                                                                 cspsgs 7%
                                                                                            147      158 163
                                                                                115
                              100        agr 53%
                                                   34
                                0
                                    0                                                                                             1
                                                           Share of total employment

  Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from the General Statistics Office of Viet Nam.
  Note: agr = agriculture; con = construction; cspsgs = community, social, personal services, and government services; fire =
  finance, insurance, real estate, and business services; man = manufacturing; min = mining and quarrying; pu = public utilities
  (electricity, gas, and water supply); tsc = transport, storage, and communication; wrt = wholesale and retail trade. Numbers in
  percent show sectoral share in total employment.


  Nam and the adoption of drastic domestic reforms at the end of the 1980s.
  Poor economic conditions in the 1980s induced policy makers to implement
  wide-ranging reforms in agriculture, the enterprise sector, and international
  integration—reforms that likely contributed to higher agricultural productiv-
  ity and greater productivity in manufacturing and services during the 1990s.
                                                                                      Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   89



FIGURE 2.4  Big move from low- to high-productivity sectors over two decades


                                                                            Initial sectoral productivity and the change in employment share, 1990–2008
                                                                1.4
 Log of sectoral productivity/aggregate productivity in 1990




                                                                1.2
                                                                                                                                     ﬁre
                                                                1.0

                                                                0.8                                                                pu

                                                                0.6                                                                min
                                                                                                                                                     wrt
                                                                0.4                                                                        con
                                                                                                                            tsc                   man
                                                                0.2

                                                                0.0                                                               cspsgs

                                                               –0.2

                                                               –0.4                     agr
                                                                                                                                         y = 3.0091x + 0.4296
                                                               –0.6                                                                            R 2 = 0343
                                                               –0.8
                                                                  –0.30   –0.25    –0.20      –0.15      –0.10     –0.05      0.00         0.05     0.10    0.15
                                                                                                  Change in employment share

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from the General Statistics Office of Viet Nam.
Note: The circle size indicates the share of total employment in 1990. agr = agriculture; con = construction; cspsgs = com-
munity, social, personal services, and government services; fire = finance, insurance, real estate, and business services; man =
manufacturing; min = mining and quarrying; pu = public utilities (electricity, gas, and water supply); tsc = transport, storage, and
communications; wrt = wholesale and retail trade.


These initial improvements in sectoral productivity could have also contrib-
uted to subsequent reallocation of workers from agriculture to manufactur-
ing and services. That is because higher agricultural productivity means that
fewer workers are required to maintain food production and leads to higher
agricultural incomes, which, combined with an income elasticity greater than
one for nonagricultural goods, generates increased demand for nonagricul-
tural goods. Both of these factors would have enabled the subsequent release
of agricultural labor. Likewise, productivity gains in nonagriculture sectors
during the 1990s and increased demand for Vietnamese nonagricultural
goods on the world markets could have subsequently pulled agricultural labor
to nonagricultural activities. In both cases, structural change would have fol-
lowed sectoral productivity improvements.
   Another possible explanation might be demographic changes. These
changes could have accelerated the decline in the relative share of agricultural
employment by increasing the employment share of younger cohorts who
90 Chapter 2




entered the workforce directly into high-productivity sectors (such as manu­
facturing) and by the exiting of older cohorts (who are more likely to work
in agriculture) from the labor force. Keep in mind that shifts in the sectoral
composition of the workforce owing to demographics are arguably subject to
smaller mobility costs than shifts across sectors among cohorts in the work-
force, and that between 2000 and 2008, the workforce grew from an esti-
mated 36.7 million to 44.9 million workers.
    However, we believe that demographic changes in Viet Nam can account
for only a small part of the story. Over time, younger generations of workers
have become less likely to work in agriculture, particularly in 2009 relative
to 1989 and 1999 (Table 2.2, Panel A). However, we also find that workers
within cohorts left agriculture. For example, 68.2 percent of workers age
20–24 worked in agriculture in 1999, but the share of workers within this
cohort in 2009 (who were then age 30–34) fell to 47.2 percent. Thus, the
reduction in employment in agriculture is not simply owing to the entry and
exit of cohorts from the workforce. In addition, if we decompose the reduc-
tion into within and between cohort effects, we find that between 1999 and
2009 (when most of the movement out of agriculture occurred), more than
80 percent of the reduction in the share of agricultural employment reflects
the changes within cohorts rather than changes between cohorts (Table 2.2,
Panel B).6
    Yet another possible reason for the acceleration in structural change during
the 2000s may be the higher level of internal migration—apparently driven by
economic reasons (UNPF 2007; Fukase 2013)—which has led to a rapid shift
in the distribution of employment across regions within Viet Nam. In partic-
ular, the workforce in Southeast Viet Nam grew from 15.7 to 19.0 percent of
the national workforce between 1999 and 2009, according to our estimates
using census data. This region has the lowest share of workers in agriculture
but the highest share in manufacturing.


 6	 The decomposition is based on the formula

                                        Δ St =   ∑ Δs E + ∑ ΔE s
                                                 c
                                                     ct c
                                                            c
                                                                ct c

	where sct is the share of workers in cohort c working in agriculture at time t, Ect is the share of
 cohort c ’s employment in total employment at time t, Sc = 0.5(sct + sct –1), and Ec = 0.5(Ect + Ect –1).
 The “within” effect is the first summation term, which captures changes within cohorts, hold-
 ing the relative size of cohorts constant, and the “between” effect is the second summation term,
 which captures changes in the relative sizes of cohorts, holding the prevalence of agriculture
 employment within the cohort constant. For cohorts that are entering the workforce, we assign
 a size of 0 prior to entering; and for cohorts that are exiting the workforce, we assign a size of 0
 after exit.
                                    Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   91




Table 2.2  Demography plays only a small role in the exit from agriculture

Panel A: Percentage of employment in agriculture, by cohort
Cohort age (years)                        1989                           1999                          2009
15–19                                      83.0                          79.0                           64.5
20–24                                     71.9                           68.2                           47.5
25–29                                      66.8                          65.7                           43.2
30–34                                      63.3                          67.2                           47.2
35–39                                      63.0                          66.9                           50.2
40–44                                      63.8                          65.8                           54.4
45–49                                     70.6                           67.1                           56.3
50–54                                      76.1                          71.8                           59.9
55–59                                      80.2                          78.4                           68.2
60–64                                      82.5                          84.8                           76.4
Total                                     70.5                           69.1                           53.0
Panel B: Decomposition of decline in agricultural employment into “within” and “between” cohort
components (percentage points)
Period                                   Within                        Between                         Total
1989–2009                                 –7.9                           –9.6                         –17.5
1989–1999                                 –1.6                            0.1                          –1.4
1999–2009                                –13.2                           –2.8                         –16.1
Source: Authors’ calculations based on population census data from MPC, IPUMS International (2015).
Note: Panel A reports the share of agriculture in total employment by cohort and census. Panel B decomposes the change in
the share of agricultural employment into “within” and “between” cohort components.




Stark Difference in Regional Trends
At the regional level, labor movements out of agriculture toward sectors like
manufacturing were quite uneven between 1989 and 2009, although all of
the eight major geographical regions experienced a drop in agriculture’s share
(Table 2.3).7 For major economic centers, such as in the Southeast centered
around Ho Chi Minh City, there was a significant shift of employment out of
agriculture into manufacturing and services, while other regions, such as the
Northwest, continued to feature almost complete employment of workers in
agriculture. The Southeast, which had the lowest share of agricultural workers
in 1989 at 45 percent, experienced one of the largest reductions in agricultural


 7	 Viet Nam is composed of eight major geographical regions: the Red River Delta, the Northeast,
    the Northwest, the North Central Coast, the South Central Coast, the Central Highlands, the
    Southeast, and the Mekong River Delta. These regions differ along important physical and eco-
    nomic dimensions. For example, the Red River Delta and the Southeast contain Viet Nam’s two
    most important economic centers—Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, respectively; and the Northeast,
    Northwest, and Central Highlands are mountainous and populated by many ethnic minorities.
92 Chapter 2




employment—19 percentage points—so that by 2009, only about a quarter
of its workers were in agriculture. In comparison, the Northwest, which had
the highest share of agricultural workers in 1989 at 85 percent, saw the small-
est reduction—3.4 percentage points—so that more than 80 percent of its
workers continue to work in the sector with the lowest labor productivity.
    The regions also faced uneven changes in the prevalence of manufactur-
ing jobs (Table 2.3). The Southeast and South Central Coast areas started
off with the largest manufacturing employment base in 1989, with 24 and
14 percent of workers in manufacturing, respectively. Over the two decades,
the manufacturing base expanded relative to total employment in only three
regions, and these increases were especially pronounced in the Southeast
and the Red River Delta. By 2009, the share of manufacturing employment
was noticeably higher than the 14 percent national average in the Southeast
(28.9 percent), somewhat higher in the Red River Delta (16.6 percent), and
somewhat lower in the South Central Coast (12.2 percent). These same
regions also feature the highest share of workers engaged in service industries.
    What may explain these regional disparities in the movement of labor?
We see that the regions that originally relied less on agriculture and more on
manufacturing and that are closer to the major seaports experienced larger
movements of labor out of agriculture toward manufacturing and services—
no doubt helped by the seaports and the early establishment of industrial
zones. Even so, the benefits of Viet Nam’s economic growth were distributed
throughout the country, as demonstrated by the fall in poverty in all regions.
For example, despite the slow movement of workers out of agriculture and the

Table 2.3  Big differences among regions in labor movements

                Share of workers in agriculture and manufacturing by region, 1989 and 2009
                                             Agriculture                                 Manufacturing
                                 1989           2009          Change           1989           2009        Change
Region                            (%)            (%)         (% points)         (%)            (%)       (% points)
Red River Delta                  71.9            48.6          –23.3           11.9            16.6         4.7
Northeast                        77.9            68.2           –9.7             9.1            8.2        –0.9
Northwest                         84.7           81.3           –3.4             2.9            2.5        –0.4
North Central Coast              74.3            66.8           –7.5           12.2             7.1        –5.1
South Central Coast               67.1           54.1          –13.1           14.2            12.2        –2.0
Central Highlands                83.0            76.2           –6.8             5.0            3.7        –1.3
Southeast                        45.1            26.1          –19.0           24.3            28.9         4.6
Mekong River Delta               77.6            58.2          –19.4             7.5           10.4         2.9
Source: Authors’ calculations based on population census data from IPUMS International (MPC 2015).
                        Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   93




extremely small manufacturing employment base in the Northwest, the pov-
erty rate dropped from 81 percent in 1993 to 46 percent in 2008 (VASS 2011).
This may reflect better agricultural productivity and a growth in crop output
(Benjamin et al. 2009).

Overhauling the Vietnamese Economy
What contributed to structural change in Viet Nam? The major reforms
began in the late 1980s with a package of policies, collectively known as Doi
Moi or “renovation,” aimed at gradually transforming the economy. Not only
was Viet Nam a very poor and highly agrarian country at the onset of reforms,
it also faced low economic growth, famine, large budget deficits, hyper­
inflation, a trade embargo from the United States, and drastic cuts in Soviet
aid. In fact, Dollar and Litvack (1998) and the World Bank (2011) argue that
the Communist Party implemented the reforms—which covered agriculture,
enterprises, and international integration—in response to the extremely poor
economic conditions during the 1980s.

Agricultural Reforms
The agriculture sector was, and continues to be, the largest employer in Viet
Nam, employing 53 percent of the workforce in 2009. It was also one of the first
sectors to experience substantial reform. Prior to Doi Moi, agriculture in Viet
Nam was organized through collectives. The reforms in 1987 and 1988 legal-
ized private economic activity and exposed farms to markets and competition by
eliminating price controls and the state procurement system (Dollar and Litvack
1998; Glewwe 2004). The elimination of price controls had dramatic impacts
on producer prices. For example, the official procurement price of rice was
approximately one-tenth of the market price in 1988 (Dollar and Litvack 1998).
    The reforms replaced farming based on collectives with household farms
as the main units of production. The land was divided among the member
households (Decree No. 10 in April 1988), who received a 15-year lease for
their plots and could sell agricultural output produced on the plot for mar-
ket prices (Glewwe 2004). The 1993 Land Law (Decree No. 5) strengthened
household land property rights by increasing tenure to 20 years for annual
cropland (50 years for perennial cropland), and by giving households the
right to exchange, transfer, lease, inherit, and mortgage their land-use rights
(Glewwe 2004). Viet Nam also started the process of land titling, so that by
1997 half of all land had been titled (Benjamin and Brandt 2004).
    During the 1990s, agricultural reforms further relaxed restrictions on
external and internal trade of agricultural goods and inputs, such as fertilizers.
94 Chapter 2




Rice market liberalization played a particularly influential role, thanks to the
dominance of rice in agricultural production at the onset of reforms—with
70 percent of Vietnamese households producing rice (Minot and Galetti
2000), and 77 percent of cultivated land devoted to rice paddies in 1992
(Wiens 1998). At the time, a quota limited exports of rice, and farmers and
private traders could not freely trade rice within Viet Nam. These policies
depressed the domestic price of rice, especially in the South, and weakened the
incentives of farmers to produce rice.
    Between 1992 and 1997, Viet Nam increased the quota on rice exports
from 1.0 to 4.5 million metric tons and removed restrictions on internal trade
in rice (Benjamin and Brandt 2004), leading to a 30 percent increase in the
price of rice relative to the consumer price index between 1992 and 1998.
Moreover, the government lifted some restrictions on imports of fertilizers,
which reduced their price and increased their use, potentially improving labor
productivity in agriculture (Benjamin and Brandt 2004).
    The mix of these domestic and external reforms contributed to the takeoff
in agricultural labor productivity growth. Between 1985 and 1995, rice pro-
duction increased dramatically, growing at an average annual rate of 4.6 percent
(Minot and Galetti 2000), and yields increased from 3.33 to 4.90 tons per hect-
are between 1992 and 2006 (Benjamin et al. 2009). However, the associated
improvements in rural incomes were uneven across regions, benefiting the South
and the Red River Delta, where most of the rice is grown, relatively more than
the North (Benjamin and Brandt 2004). Even so, all regions experienced an
increase in agricultural output, with crop output growing by 2.5–16.0 percent
per year between 1992 and 2006 across Viet Nam’s major regions (Benjamin et
al. 2009). Indeed, the fastest growth was in the Central Highlands, Northeast,
and Northwest—regions that are not specialized in rice. Instead, these regions
experienced faster growth in crops, such as vegetables and beans (particularly
in the Central Highlands); perennials, such as tea and coffee; and fruit (partic-
ularly in the Northeast). The widespread gains from agricultural growth may
reflect initially fairly equitable allocation of land across households during the
Land Law reforms (Ravallion and van de Walle 2008) and the increased oppor-
tunity for regions to specialize along lines of comparative advantage.
    As for the possible role of “labor push,” we are not aware of any study that
formally examines this explanation for the observed movement of labor out of
agriculture in Viet Nam. The reasoning goes that people in low-productivity
agriculture remain in agriculture to produce a sufficient amount of food for
subsistence, but can be released from agriculture to more productive activi-
ties once agricultural productivity increases above the subsistence threshold.
                        Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   95




However, the drastic expansion of rice production subsequent to the reforms
in the late 1980s and 1990s suggests that Viet Nam’s agricultural productiv-
ity reached a sufficiently high level for agriculture to exceed the subsistence
level and release labor to more productive activities (as suggested in the struc-
tural transformation model by Gollin, Parente, and Rogerson 2007). In fact,
following the implementation of the major economic reforms, Viet Nam
shifted from subsistence agriculture and importation of rice during the 1980s
to being the second-largest exporter of rice on world markets by 1997 (Dollar
and Litvack 1998; Minot and Goletti 2000).

Enterprise Reforms
At the same time, Viet Nam also experienced several reforms in the enterprise
sector that have likely contributed to observed increases in nonagricultural pro-
ductivity, and thus provide the “labor pull” explanation for structural change.
Prior to Doi Moi, SOEs were the dominant means of production outside of
agriculture. Dodsworth et al. (1996) report that in 1989, SOEs produced about
29 percent of overall output and about half of output in industry and services,
while employing 16 percent of the Vietnamese labor force and about half of the
Vietnamese nonagricultural labor force.
    As in agriculture, the Doi Moi reforms decentralized decision making and
gave enterprises autonomy over production, pricing, and trading. The govern­
ment also implemented policies that further introduced competition and pri-
vate enterprise activities, including the entry of foreign-owned firms. The
Foreign Investment Law of 1987 opened all sectors of the economy other
than defense to foreign investors, allowed for 100 percent foreign ownership
of firms, and offered foreign firms generous tax concessions and duty exemp-
tions (Dodsworth et al. 1996). Foreign investment was further encouraged by
forming economic zones, such as export-processing zones and industrial parks
(see Decree No. 332-HDBT in October 1991). The first export-processing
zone was established near Ho Chi Minh City in November 1991. These
zones often offered firms reduced tax rates and exemptions on import and
export duties (for example, see Articles 51 and 52 of Decree No. 332-HDBT
and Article 15 of Decree No. 192-CP, issued in 1994). More generally, vari-
ous reforms—such as uniform rules of taxation, the freedom for enterprises to
form their own trading relationships, and exposure to foreign competition—
aimed to level the playing field among SOEs, foreign enterprises, and private
enterprises (World Bank 2011).
    Another set of reforms implemented in 1988–1989 directly targeted SOEs.
As discussed in Dodsworth et al. (1996), the SOEs received autonomy over
96 Chapter 2




the production process and price setting, and were allowed to lay off workers.
Notably, SOEs had to begin operating subject to hard budget constraints and
could no longer rely on export subsidies.
    The combination of these early reforms immediately changed the produc-
tion incentives within the SOEs, increasing their exposure to market forces,
and led to a drastic consolidation of the sector. Excluding oil production, SOE
value-added declined by 7 percent between 1989 and 1991 (Dodsworth et al.
1996), and between 1989 and 1992 about 800,000 SOE employees (about one-
third) were laid off (Glewwe 2004). The number of SOEs declined dramati-
cally from 12,000 in 1988 to about 6,500 in the mid-1990s (Dodsworth et al.
1996). The consolidation was accomplished mainly through closures (which
disproportionately affected the local government SOEs, as opposed to cen-
tral government SOEs) and mergers, while privatization was rare (Dodsworth
et al. 1996). The consolidation of the SOE sector slowed down during the
rest of the 1990s, and much of it was achieved through selling of equity in
the SOEs (World Bank 2002). By 2000, about 5,700 SOEs were active, and
by 2010, only 3,364 SOEs remained in operation (World Bank 2011)—less
than a fourth of the SOEs that operated in 1989. Despite the drastic reform
of the sector during the 1990s, its relative contribution to GDP has not
changed much—around 36–37 percent from 1991 to 2009 (Minh et al. 2010).
Nonetheless, although the SOE share of output was stable and SOE restruc-
turing slowed in the second part of the 2000s (World Bank 2002, 2011),
SOEs now employ less than 10 percent of the workforce, compared with
16 percent in 1989, suggesting significant labor allocation out of the sector.
    The liberalization of FDI led to a large inflow of capital in the 1990s and
2000s, with FDI as a percentage of GDP increasing from 2.8 percent in 1990
to 11.9 percent in 1994, and then fluctuating between 3.5 and 10.5 percent
between 1995 and 2010.8 This was accompanied by a significant change in
the relative share of output produced by the FDI sector, mainly at the expense
of the private, nonstate domestic sector. The FDI share grew from 6.4 percent
over 1994–1995 to 18.0 percent during 2006–2009, with an accompanying
fall in the share of GDP produced by the nonstate domestic sector (Minh et
al. 2010).
    Another important reform for the private sector has been the 2000
Enterprise Law, which made it easier for private enterprises to register and
operate across most industries (World Bank 2002). In Viet Nam, private firms

 8	 The estimates of FDI as a percentage of GDP are from the World Development Indicators data-
   base (World Bank, various years).
                        Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   97




operate either as a household business (or a farm) or as an officially registered
enterprise. The Enterprise Law reduced the time required to register an enter-
prise, leading to 50,000 new registered enterprises between January 2000 and
October 2002—about three-quarters of the total number of enterprises then
registered. Most of the newly registered enterprises were fully privately owned
and very small. In fact, the World Bank (2002) reports that those registered
in 2002 had an average registered capital of only US$90,000. The 2000
Enterprise Law also contributed to the growth in private enterprise firms by
making it more likely that they would start operations in the enterprise sec-
tor, as opposed to in the household business sector, and helping firms transi-
tion more quickly from the household business sector to the enterprise sector
(Malesky and Taussig 2009).
    Today, Viet Nam’s business environment is dramatically different from that
of the 1990s, thanks to the enterprise reforms. According to Doing Business
2013 (World Bank 2013), Viet Nam is ranked 99th out of 185 countries on the
ease of doing business—only slightly behind China (ranked 91st) and ahead of
such countries as Indonesia and Bangladesh. The current ranking reflects signif-
icant improvements over time in some business environment characteristics tied
directly to enterprise sector reforms. For example, the number of days needed
to start a business fell from 59 to 38, and the percentage of income per capita
required to start a business decreased from 31.9 to 12.1 between 2003 and 2010
(World Bank 2004, 2013).
    Overall, the restructuring of SOEs, expansion of private enterprises,
inflows of new investment and technology, and better incentive structures
for production decisions have all contributed to higher labor productivity in
nonagriculture sectors. These sectoral productivity gains not only directly
affected the gains in aggregate productivity, but in principle also could have
induced labor to move out of agriculture. Agriculture started with lower labor
productivity in 1990 and experienced lower subsequent productivity growth
than nonagriculture sectors, such as manufacturing. An increase in nonagri-
cultural productivity is predicted to lead to rising wages in the nonagriculture
sector, particularly within enterprises, thus inducing workers to move out of
agriculture. However, the magnitude of the contribution of these “pull” fac-
tors relative to the “push” factors for moving workers out of agriculture, dis-
cussed in the previous chapter, remains an open empirical question.

International Integration
Strongly connected to the reforms in agriculture and enterprises was Viet
Nam’s gradual integration with the global economy. To appreciate the vastness
98 Chapter 2




of the reforms undertaken as part of this integration, one must understand
how controlled and closed Viet Nam was at the beginning of the Doi Moi
period in comparison with its current openness.
    Prior to the reforms, foreign trade in Viet Nam was subject to central deci-
sions and could be carried out only by a small number of state trading monop-
olies. Exports were discouraged through the overvaluation of the exchange
rate and the use of export duties, imports had to proceed through an exten-
sive system of quotas and licenses, and exports had to fulfill partner obliga-
tions within the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance before they could
be sold to the convertible currency area (Dodsworth et al. 1996). Additionally,
Viet Nam faced a trade embargo with the United States that was lifted only
in 1994.
    But already in 1989, still early in Doi Moi, extensive reforms were
undertaken to open up the economy. These included unifying and devalu­
ing the exchange rate, relaxing import and export quotas, eliminating all
budget subsidies for exports, simplifying licensing procedures for import
and export shipments, and delisting items from export duties and reducing
the rates for remaining products—all in 1989; allowing private enterprises
to engage directly in international trade in 1991; and removing import
permit requirements for most remaining items in 1995 (Dodsworth et
al. 1996).
    These domestic reforms were quickly followed by international trade agree-
ments and partnerships. In 1992, Viet Nam signed a preferential trade agree-
ment with the European Economic Community (Glewwe 2004). In 1995,
Viet Nam became a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) and its associated ASEAN Free Trade Area, which bound Viet
Nam to reduce tariffs on imports from ASEAN members to 5 percent or less
by 2006 for the vast majority of goods (Athukorala 2006). In 1995, Viet Nam
also initiated the application process to join the World Trade Organization
(WTO). In December 2001, the U.S.–Viet Nam Bilateral Trade Agreement
came into effect, leading to a huge increase in Vietnamese exports to the
United States, predominantly in light manufactured products (such as cloth-
ing, textiles, and footwear) (McCaig 2011). The culminating act was WTO
membership in 2007 (World Bank 2011).
    The vast array of trade reforms significantly increased the ability of firms
to export and import. According to Doing Business 2013 (World Bank 2013),
Viet Nam ranks better (74th) on trading across borders than on overall ease of
doing business, just behind China (68th). In Viet Nam, fewer documents are
                                   Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   99




needed to export, but more to import, than in China, and container costs are
similar. The trading across borders rankings put Viet Nam well ahead of other
Asian countries, such as Cambodia (118th), Bangladesh (119th), and India
(127th).
    These policy changes contributed to a dramatic increase in overall exports
and imports as a percentage of GDP between 1986 and 2011. In the mid-
1980s, imports and exports averaged about 15 and 5 percent of GDP, respec-
tively. But starting in the late 1980s and early 1990s, imports and exports
both began a rapid and continuous increase, reaching 88 and 78 percent of
GDP, respectively, by 2010 (Figure 2.5). Between 1990 and 2010, imports and
exports grew in value by an average of 18.7 and 18.5 percent per year, respec-
tively (based on data from the GSO).
    The trade reforms not only increased the overall value of trade and its
importance to the economy, but also altered the composition of trade in two
important dimensions: the types of goods being traded and the ownership of
the firms involved in trading. On the export side, the composition of goods
shifted significantly away from agricultural and aquaculture products, such
as rice and fish, and crude petroleum (within mineral fuels, lubricants, and
related materials) to manufactured exports, such as clothing and footwear
(within miscellaneous manufactured products) and office machinery (within

FIGURE 2.5  Viet Nam has swung from a closed economy to an open one


                100               Imports and exports as a percentage of GDP, 1986–2011



                80


                60
                                               Imports % GDP
      Percent




                40                                          Exports % GDP


                20


                  0
                  1985         1990               1995                2000    2005        2010
                                                               Year

Source: World Development Indicators database (World Bank, various years).
100 Chapter 2




machinery and transport equipment) (Figure 2.6a). While exports of pri-
mary products constituted more than 60 percent of exports in 1995, by 2010,
they had fallen to about 30 percent—in large part because of relative declines
in rice and crude petroleum exports.9 Data constraints prevent us from con-
structing a consistent series stretching further back in time, but Chu and
Dickie (2006) report that in 1992, manufactured exports accounted for only
6 percent of exports. On the import side, the major compositional shift was
away from miscellaneous manufactured goods—primarily owing to a fall in
the share of clothing and footwear imports—toward manufactured goods
classified chiefly by materials (such as iron and steel and nonferrous metals)
(Figure 2.6b).
    These reforms and changes in the composition of traded products likely con-
tributed to reallocating labor from agriculture (including aquaculture) to manu-
facturing, as agricultural exports became relatively less important over time. In
fact, Viet Nam dramatically expanded exports of unskilled labor-intensive man-
ufactured goods, such as clothing, footwear, and office machinery, which grew
at average annual rates of 16.8, 13.9, and 67.5 percent, respectively, from 1997
to 2010.10 At the same time, the share of light manufactured goods in imports
declined. This expansion of net exports and the changes in the composition of
manufacturing trade likely contributed to higher demand for labor within man-
ufacturing, where employment expanded at an average annual rate of 7.5 percent
during this period, and changes in the structure of employment across manufac-
turing industries.
    Additionally, the liberalization of foreign investment and SOE reforms
interacted in important ways with trade reforms and affected the composi-
tion of ownership of firms involved in international trade. By 2010, foreign-
invested firms were responsible for more than 50 percent of all exports,
compared with only about 25 percent of exports in 1995, while imports by
foreign firms rose from 18 to 44 percent of total imports during the same
period.11 Thus, Viet Nam’s trade reforms likely also influenced the structure
of the workforce across firms of different ownership type.


 9	 Data from the UN Comtrade database suggest that rice (Standard International Trade
    Classification (SITC) 42) dropped from 9.5 percent of exports in 1997 to 4.5 percent of exports
    in 2010. Crude petroleum exports (SITC 333) declined from 15.6 to 6.9 percent of total exports
    during the same period.
10	 Authors’ own calculation based on data from UN Comtrade and on nominal prices.
11	 The data series are “Exports of goods by kind of economic sector and by commodity group”
    and “Imports of goods by kind of economic sector and by commodity group” from the
    GSO’s website.
                                    Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   101



FIGURE 2.6a  Exports of manufactured goods have risen . . .


                                 Share of exports by commodity group, 1995 and 2010
                               1995                                                  2010

                          7.7%                                                7.9%
                                                                                            18.6%

                                           37.9%
                24.1%
                                                                                                11.0%
                                                                      34.8%

                                                                                              11.7%
      1.6%        6.4%
                                22.2%                                                15.9%



                                  Food and live animals
                                  Mineral fuels, lubricants, and related materials
                                  Manufactured goods classiﬁed chieﬂy by materials
                                  Machinery and transport equipment
                                  Miscellaneous manufactured articles
                                  Other


FIGURE 2.6b  . . . while the types of manufactured goods being imported have changed


                               Share of imports by commodity group, 1995 and 2010
                             1995                                                2010


                      12.4%       11.1%                                                9.6%
                                                                         15.1%

                                                                  5.0%                        14.7%
             13.5%                        15.8%



                                                                     29.1%
                                        18.5%                                               26.5%
                   28.7%




                                Mineral fuels, lubricants, and related materials
                                Chemical and related products not elsewhere speciﬁed
                                Manufactured goods classiﬁed chieﬂy by materials
                                Machinery and transport equipment
                                Miscellaneous manufactured articles
                                Other

Source: General Statistics Office of Vietnam.
102 Chapter 2




How Labor Moved Across Firm Types within
Sectors
Over the past two decades, movements of labor away from agriculture toward
services and manufacturing have contributed significantly to Viet Nam’s eco-
nomic growth. Extensive literature emphasizes why the allocation of labor
across different types of firms within sectors is an important source of overall
productivity (see, for example, Hsieh and Klenow 2009; Melitz 2003; Melitz
and Redding 2014; Pavcnik 2002; Restuccia and Rogerson 2008). In fact, the
sectoral labor productivity improvements noted in Table 2.1 could in part
stem from such a reallocation of labor from less productive to more productive
firms within each sector. To explore this issue further, we begin with a look at
how workers have been allocated between household businesses and firms in
the formal enterprise sector, before turning to how they have been allocated
across SOEs and firms in the private domestic and foreign sectors.

Moving Out of Household Businesses toward Registered Firms
A large share of workers in low-income countries work for informal house-
hold businesses or farms—which is usually associated with lower produc-
tivity (McMillan and Rodrik 2011; La Porta and Shleifer 2008; McCaig
and Pavcnik 2014) and lower wages than similar workers in the formal sec-
tor (Goldberg and Pavcnik 2003, 2007). If firms in the formal sector are
more productive than firms in the informal sector, a reallocation of labor
toward formal firms could, in principle, contribute to growth in aggre-
gate productivity.
    Did this happen in Viet Nam? We explored this issue using the
Vietnamese Household Living Standards Survey (VHLSS) conducted
between 2002 and 2008 to allow for a consistent definition of informal
employment based on the ownership sector in which the individual worked.
The surveys identify whether the individual is self-employed on a household
farm or business; working for another household’s farm or business; or work-
ing in the state, collective, private, or foreign sector. Our definition of house-
hold business employment encompasses workers who are either self-employed
or working for another household’s farm or business.12 Firms in the state, col-
lective, private, or foreign sector are registered as an enterprise with the gov-
ernment. Household farms and businesses (henceforth household businesses)
are not officially registered with the government as an enterprise. As such,

12	 The censuses cannot be used in a similar manner because the required definitions were not con-
   sistently applied over time.
                                  Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   103




they are subject to looser regulations on employment conditions for workers.
Our focus on household businesses thus conforms to an important distinction
across different types of businesses in Viet Nam as per national legislation.
   We found that, as in many less developed economies, a large share of
Viet Nam’s labor force works for household businesses or farms (Table 2.4),
although the share has decreased over time. In 2002, despite Viet Nam’s rapid
growth during the 1990s, most workers (86.3 percent) continued to work for
a household business, with big differences among sectors. Almost all workers
(98.5 percent) in agriculture, hunting, forestry, and fishing worked for house-
hold businesses. While rates were lower elsewhere, household business employ-
ment still exceeded 80 percent in construction and in wholesale and retail
trade, hotels, and restaurants, and accounted for 66.7 percent in manufactur-
ing. But by 2008, Viet Nam saw a sharp decline of 5.6 percentage points in
the overall share of household business employment. Almost all sectors experi-
enced large drops, but the declines were largest in manufacturing and in min-
ing and quarrying, followed by transport, storage, and communications and
utilities. However, there was no change in agriculture or in finance, insurance,
real estate, and business services.
   This decline in household business employment partly reflects the struc-
tural change in Viet Nam’s workforce. Between 2002 and 2008, workers

Table 2.4  Most workers are still in informal businesses

                          Share of workers in household businesses, 2002 and 2008
                                                                     2002                2008             Change
Sector                                                                (%)                 (%)            (% points)
Agriculture, hunting, forestry, and fishing                           98.5               98.7                  0.1
Mining and quarrying                                                  57.9               45.0              –12.9
Manufacturing                                                         66.7               54.4              –12.3
Public utilities (electricity, gas, and water)                       12.5                 5.9                –6.6
Construction                                                          82.7               80.5                –2.1
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                   93.4               89.6                –3.8
Transport, storage, and communications                                75.1               67.7                –7.3
Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services                27.6               28.5                 0.9
Community, social, personal, and government services                  26.3               23.8                –2.5
Total                                                                 86.3               80.7                –5.6
Source: Authors’ calculations based on Vietnamese Household Living Standards Surveys data.
Note: The reported numbers are the shares of workers in household businesses in a sector. The sample is restricted to
workers age 15 and older. The estimates are population estimates based on using sampling weights. The sectors are defined
as in McMillan and Rodrik (2011).
104 Chapter 2




tended to move away from sectors with a high incidence of household business
employment (such as agriculture) toward those with a lower incidence (such
as manufacturing). This relationship is strongly influenced by the agriculture,
hunting, forestry, and fishing sector, which contracted sharply as a share of
total employment and features a high prevalence of household business jobs.
In fact, about half of the decline in the aggregate share of employment in
household businesses in the first half of the 2000s is driven by movements of
labor between industries—notably away from agriculture and aquaculture
toward other industries (McCaig and Pavcnik 2014).13 The remaining half
is driven by the reallocation of workers from household businesses to firms
in the enterprise sector within an industry. This latter mechanism could
have contributed to the productivity increases in such sectors as manufac-
turing (Table 2.1), because household businesses tend to have substantially
lower labor productivity than firms in the enterprise sector (McCaig and
Pavcnik 2014). The difference in productivity between household businesses
and enterprises persists, even when state and foreign enterprises are excluded.
For example, estimates from the 2006 VHLSS suggest that private enter-
prises report average revenue per worker of 46.3 million dong, compared with
17.7 million dong for household businesses across all industries; within manu-
facturing, the figures are 78.9 million and 18.0 million dong, respectively.
    Within industries, Viet Nam’s greater access to export markets contributed
to the observed declines in household business employment. Recent trade the-
ory based on Melitz (2003) highlights the reallocation of labor toward more
productive firms within an industry in response to declines in trade costs.
The reductions in trade costs benefit the large, high-productivity firms, since
they are able to produce and sell exported goods to cover the fixed costs of
exporting. In contrast, small, low-productivity firms are not able to profitably
export. This shifts workers to high-productivity firms as they expand in size
in response to new export opportunities. Although informal and formal firms
differ in a variety of ways aside from productivity, informal firms tend to be
less productive than formal firms, and thus labor is predicted to move toward
formal firms within an industry because of new export opportunities.
    More generally, if trade increases the opportunity cost of working in a house-
hold business by increasing the relative profitability of firms in the formal enter-
prise sector, workers are expected to reallocate away from household businesses
toward larger, more formal employers, and these effects are expected to be more

13	 The findings are based on a decomposition of the aggregate decline in household business
   employment into between- and within-industry shifts across 60 distinct industries.
                      Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   105




pronounced in industries that face increased export opportunities. Indeed, fol-
lowing the 2001 US–Viet Nam Bilateral Trade Agreement, Vietnamese exports
to the US market reduced the probability of household business employment
(McCaig and Pavcnik 2014), especially in Vietnamese industries that experi-
enced the largest US tariff cuts. The effect was larger for workers in younger
cohorts and in provinces closer to major seaports. These findings imply that
industry tariff cuts on manufacturing exports could account for up to 40 percent
of the decline in household business employment in manufacturing between
2001 and 2003. In addition, greater access to export markets, which dispro­
portionately benefits larger, more productive firms in the enterprise sector,
helped boost manufacturing productivity during the 2000s.

Moving Out of SOEs toward the Private Sector
The major enterprise reforms exposed SOEs to market competition and eased
the entry and growth of private domestic and foreign-owned enterprises, set-
ting the stage for the potential reallocation of resources, such as labor away
from SOEs toward firms in the private sector.
    At the onset of reforms in 1989, employment in SOEs was the most
prevalent form of employment in services (such as finance, insurance, real
estate, and other business services at 88.0 percent and construction at
68.0 percent), and was also significant in transport, storage and communica-
tions (48.0 percent) and manufacturing (37.5 percent). The exception is com-
munity and government services, where virtually all employment was in state
jobs. But as Table 2.5 shows, the reforms had reduced the number of workers
at SOEs in absolute numbers from 4.4 million in 1989 to 3.8 million in 1999.
This decline occurred in all sectors, except community, social, personal, and
government services, and finance, insurance, real estate, and other business
services. Overall, between 1989 and 1999, the share of the Vietnamese labor
force working for SOEs declined from 15.7 to 10.7 percent. While all indus-
tries observed a shrinking share of SOE employment, the most notable
declines occurred in construction; transport, storage, and communications;
and wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants.
    Labor was clearly being reallocated from the SOE sector toward the grow-
ing private sector in the decade following the initial reforms, in part thanks
to FDI. But while Viet Nam attracted employment in foreign-owned firms
during the 1990s, the expanding foreign-owned sector employed fewer than
200,000 workers by 1999 and accounted for less than 1 percent of the econo-
mywide workforce. That said, these overall numbers mask differences in FDI
exposure across broad industrial sectors. Notably, by 1999, 87 percent of the
Table 2.5  Workers increasingly moved to the growing private sector, especially in manufacturing

                                                Employment in state and foreign-owned firms by sector, 1989, 1999, and 2009 censuses
                                                                          1989                               1999                                                            2009
Sector                                                            Total          State        Total          State       Foreign                            Total            State           Foreign
                                                                                                                                                                                                       106 Chapter 2




Panel A: Number of workers (000s)
Agriculture, hunting, forestry, and fishing                            19,809             407           24,854              252               4            25,710              183               12
Mining and quarrying                                                        0               0              184               84               1               294              112                3
Manufacturing                                                           3,391           1,273            3,179              969             165             6,545              583            1,465
Public utilities (electricity, gas, and water)                              0               0               82               73               0               167              132                1
Construction                                                              585             398              929              213               3             2,620              154               20
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                     2,102             628            3,265              221               8             6,444              152               62
Transport, storage, and communications                                    587             282              947              210               1             1,510              269               13
Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services                    132             117              207              154               4               671              243               43
Community, social, personal, and government services                    1,380           1,278            2,134            1,668               3             3,661            2,740               22
Total                                                                  27,986           4,383           35,782            3,843             190            47,622            4,569            1,642
Panel B: Percentage of workers within the sector
Agriculture, hunting, forestry, and fishing                                                2.1                               1.0             0.0                               0.7              0.0
Mining and quarrying                                                                                                        45.6             0.3                              38.1              1.2
Manufacturing                                                                             37.5                              30.5             5.2                               8.9             22.4
Public utilities (electricity, gas, and water)                                                                              89.0             0.6                              79.3              0.8
Construction                                                                              68.1                              22.9             0.4                               5.9              0.7
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                                       29.9                               6.8             0.3                               2.4              1.0
Transport, storage, and communications                                                    48.0                              22.2             0.1                              17.8              0.9
Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services                                    88.0                              74.1             1.8                              36.2              6.4
Community, social, personal, and government services                                      92.6                              78.2             0.2                              74.9              0.6
Total                                                                                     15.7                              10.7             0.5                               9.6              3.4
Source: Authors’ calculations based on census data.
Note: The 1989 census did not separately identify mining and quarrying and public utilities from manufacturing; thus, manufacturing includes all three sectors in 1989. The 1989 census also did not
separately identify employment in foreign-owned firms.
                            Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   107




workers in the FDI sector were employed in manufacturing—the only sector
where employment in foreign-owned firms exceeded 5 percent.
    In the state sector, while the number of workers increased by 1.7 million
between 1999 and 2009, in aggregate terms it was neither expanding nor con-
tracting as a share of total employment, accounting for about 10 percent of
overall employment. This mainly reflects the growth of state employment in
community, social, personal, and government services. For other sectors, the
share of SOE employment dropped by 30 percent between 1989 and 1999,
and by 16 percent between 1999 and 2009. The declines were particularly
pronounced in manufacturing (from 30 to 9 percent), construction (from
23 to 6 percent), and finance, insurance, real estate, and other business ser-
vices (from 74 to 36 percent).14 SOE employment actually dropped in abso-
lute numbers in manufacturing; construction; and wholesale and retail trade,
hotels, and restaurants.
    In the private sector, FDI employment played an increasingly important
role in the 2000s. Further expansion of private investment and jobs may
have been spurred by implementation of several additional reforms, such as
the Domestic Investment and Promotion Law in 1998 and the Common
Investment Law in 2006. During this period, the number of workers in
foreign-owned firms increased by almost 1.5 million, although the share of
individuals employed by these firms continues to be low economywide (about
3.4 percent in the 2009 census). FDI’s impact was mainly felt in manufac-
turing, where foreign-owned firms employed 22 percent of workers, and in
finance, insurance, real estate, and business services, where foreign-owned
firms employed 6.4 percent of workers. No other sector saw its share of
workers in foreign-invested firms grow by more than a few percentage points.
   This drastic shift of workers away from SOEs toward private firms, includ-
ing foreign-owned firms, could have contributed to aggregate productivity
improvements, given that firms in the state sector tend to be less productive
than private establishments (World Bank 2011). In addition, most of the
closed or merged SOEs were smaller, less productive, and unprofitable (Tuan,
Long, and Phuong 1996). As a result, reallocation of labor away from SOEs
toward private or foreign-owned firms may have contributed to the growth in
sectoral productivity, especially in such sectors as manufacturing; wholesale
and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants; and construction.

14	 Some of the reductions in state employment may reflect the formation of joint ventures with for-
   eign firms, in which case the firm would become classified as a foreign-invested firm. Thus, the
   reduction in state employment may not translate one-to-one into job losses. Nonetheless, these
   reductions show the declining importance of SOEs.
108 Chapter 2




    However, a recent World Bank report (2011) indicates that the process of
SOE restructuring slowed down between 2005 and 2009. SOEs now employ
less than 10 percent of the workforce, but they remain an important sector
in terms of production, accounting for about 35 percent of GDP in 2009.
They still have a virtual monopoly on production in such sectors as fertilizer,
coal, electricity and gas, telecommunications, water supply, and insurance
(World Bank 2011). SOEs also tend to have better access to capital and land
markets, receiving about 27 percent of domestic credit in 2009, and capital
accumulation among the SOEs accelerated during the 2000s (World Bank
2011). Even so, the labor productivity of SOEs lags relative to private enter-
prises. These observations suggest that Viet Nam could increase aggregate
productivity either by further implementation of reforms in the SOE sec-
tor or by reallocation of resources, especially capital, from SOEs to the pri-
vate sector.


Digging Deeper in the Manufacturing Sector
during the 2000s
Zeroing in on manufacturing, we see a large expansion of employment and
output over the past two decades, rising from 8 percent to 14 percent of the
Vietnamese workforce between 1990 and 2008 (Figure 2.1b). But what was
behind this dramatic increase? Here, we can gain insights from information
on employment patterns across 23 manufacturing industries from the 1999
and 2009 Vietnamese census data (data constraints preclude this analysis for
the 1990s).
    In 1999, four industries employed 61 percent of manufacturing workers
in Viet Nam, with clothing accounting for 25 percent of manufacturing
employment, followed by food products and beverages (16 percent), furniture
(12 percent), and footwear (8 percent).15 Over the next 10 years, manufactur-
ing employment grew at an average annual rate of 7.5 percent, absorbing about
3.3 million workers, with the vast majority of manufacturing jobs added in the
initially largest industries (Table 2.6). The four largest industries expanded

15	 Employment in the furniture industry also includes manufacturing not elsewhere classi-
   fied (industry 36 in ISIC revision 3). Employment in furniture accounts for 81 percent of total
   employment in the industry based on estimates from the 1999 census; thus, for brevity, we sim-
   ply refer to this industry as furniture. Similarly, employment in footwear also includes employ-
   ment in tanning and dressing of leather and manufacturing luggage, handbags, saddlery, and
   harnesses (industry 19 in ISIC revision 3), but employment in footwear is the dominant com-
   ponent at 88 percent of total employment in the industry according to estimates from the 1999
   census; thus, we simply refer to this industry as footwear.
                                      Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   109




Table 2.6  Most manufacturing jobs were added in the top four industries

                                Employment in manufacturing industries, 1999 and 2009
                                                 Total number of workers          Number of workers in enterprises
                                                        (thousands)                         (thousands)
                                                             Annual                                 Annual
                Industry                  1999 2009 Change growth (%)            2000 2008 Change growth (%)
Food products and beverages                496      993     497        7.2         268     501      233          8.1
Tobacco products                            10       13       3        2.7          12      14         2         1.7
Textiles                                   169      289    120         5.5         126     179        53         4.5
Clothing                                   790 1,387        597        5.8         233     758      525        15.9
Footwear                                   268      709     441       10.2         297     632      336         9.9
Wood and products of wood and              226      498     273        8.2          60     130       70        10.2
cork, except furniture; articles of
straw and plaiting materials
Paper and paper products                    37      117      81       12.3          37      81        44       10.4
Publishing, printing, and                   51       80      29        4.5          23      58        35       12.4
reproduction of recorded media
Coke, refined petroleum products,            4        9       6       10.0            1       1        0        2.3
and nuclear fuel
Chemicals and chemical products             80      139      59        5.6          66     112        46        6.8
Rubber and plastic products                 55      142      87       10.0          51     162      111        15.5
Other nonmetallic mineral products         216      435    219         7.2         128     252      124         8.8
Basic metals                                32       68      36        7.7          29      60        31        9.6
Fabricated metal products, except          213      418     205        7.0          51     191      141        18.0
machinery and equipment
Machinery and equipment not                 40       68      28        5.6          31      68        37       10.2
elsewhere classified
Office, accounting, and computing            1       22      21       33.7            3     25        22       29.7
machinery
Electrical machinery and apparatus          26       68      41        9.9          38     109        72       14.3
not elsewhere classified
Radio, television, and                      23      101      78       16.1          18      66        48       17.3
communications equipment and
apparatus
Medical, precision, and optical              6       16      10        9.8            7     17       10        12.2
instruments; watches and clocks
Motor vehicles, trailers, and               12       58      46       16.7          14      44        31       15.9
semi-trailers
Other transport equipment                   44      199     155       16.2          41     127        86       15.1
Furniture                                  376      708     332        6.5          65     352      287        23.5
Recycling                                    3        8       5       10.9            0       2        2       27.7
Total                                     3,179 6,545     3,366        7.5       1,598 3,943      2,345        11.9

Source: The numbers for 1999 and 2009 are population estimates calculated from the 1999 and 2009 censuses. The
sample is restricted to workers age 15 and older. The numbers of workers in enterprises are based on the 2000 and 2008
enterprise surveys.
110 Chapter 2




the most in terms of number of employees and continued to dominate manu-
facturing jobs. These are all industries in which Viet Nam, as a relatively low-
skilled, labor-abundant country, has a comparative advantage; indeed, Viet
Nam exports significant quantities of clothing, footwear, and furniture. For
example, almost 600,000 new workers joined the clothing industry, account-
ing for 18 percent of the total growth in manufacturing employment.
    Viet Nam also appears to be transitioning into industries that tradition-
ally did not account for much of its manufacturing labor force. Some initially
very small industries experienced very rapid growth in employment—includ-
ing motor vehicles, trailers, and semi-trailers; other transport equipment;
and radio, television, and communications equipment and apparatus. In fact,
employment grew the fastest in office, accounting, and computing machinery
industry, rising to an astounding average annual rate of 33.7 percent, although
the industry still accounts for a relatively small share of total manufacturing
employment at just 0.3 percent in 2009.
    Much of this employment expansion occurred in the officially registered
enterprises, which tend to be substantially larger and have higher labor pro-
ductivity than nonregistered household businesses (McCaig and Pavcnik
2014).16 Between 2002 and 2008, registered manufacturing sector employ-
ment added 2.3 million workers, representing an average annual growth
of 12 percent. The registered sector observes similar patterns in employ-
ment expansion as the overall manufacturing sector, highlighting the dom-
inant role of larger firms in manufacturing expansion. The initially largest
industries, such as clothing, experienced the largest increases in the num-
ber of workers, but some initially smaller industries, such as office, account-
ing, and computing machinery, experienced faster growth rates. Clothing
was a key industry for employment growth, as it added about 525,000 work-
ers, accounting for more than 20 percent of total job growth in the formal
manufacturing sector. Other industries that experienced large expansions
in absolute terms include footwear, furniture, and food products and
beverages, as they all added more than 200,000 employees. The fastest
growth was observed in office, accounting, and computing machinery and


16	 The household surveys used in “Moving out of household businesses toward registered firms”
   also collect information on whether the individual worked for an enterprise. These unreported
   estimates are very similar to those from the enterprise data. For example, the employment
   shares are highly correlated: 0.971 using the 2001 enterprise data and the 2002 VHLSS house-
   hold survey data, and 0.963 using the 2005 enterprise data and the 2006 VHLSS household sur-
   vey data. Thus, both data sources depict broadly similar employment patterns among officially
   registered firms.
                             Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   111




in furniture, which both experienced average annual growth rates above
20 percent.17
    The observed changes in the structure of employment across manufactur-
ing industries relate to changes in the relative importance of SOE employ-
ment and FDI employment within an industry during the 2000s. Industries
that observed the biggest declines in the share of state sector employment
and the biggest increases in the share of FDI employment expanded relative
to other manufacturing industries between 1999 and 2009. These patterns
in relative employment changes are documented in Figure 2.7a, which plots
the change in an industry’s share of manufacturing employment against the
change in prevalence of SOE jobs, and in Figure 2.7b, which plots the change
in an industry’s share of manufacturing employment against the change in
the prevalence of FDI jobs. The correlation between 1999 and 2009 in the
change in the share of workers within an industry working for a state firm
and the change in the industry’s share of manufacturing employment is –0.26.
Between 1999 and 2009, the correlation between the change in an industry’s
share of manufacturing employment and the change in the share of workers in
FDI firms within an industry is 0.18. These relationships suggest either that
foreign investors have selectively targeted sectors with the greatest employ-
ment growth potential or that these sectors grew because they attracted for-
eign capital.


Viet Nam’s Structural Change in International
Perspective
How does Viet Nam’s experience of positive structural change compare with
other less developed economies during the last two decades? We know from
McMillan and Rodrik (2011) that structural change increased aggregate pro-
ductivity in Asian countries but decreased in Latin American and African
countries within their sample. In addition, they find that reallocation of labor
across sectors tended to enhance aggregate productivity in countries with a
comparative disadvantage in natural resources, an undervalued exchange rate,
and a more flexible labor market.
    We briefly compare Viet Nam’s growth experience with other countries
of similar initial economic development in 1990 and discuss the potential
role of the factors identified by McMillan and Rodrik (2011) in enhancing

17	 Recycling also grew at an average annual rate above 20 percent, but it started from an extremely
   small base of just a few hundred workers.
112 Chapter 2



FIGURE 2.7a  Moving away from state-owned enterprises goes hand in hand with bigger
industry size . . .

                                                                                         Changes in relative industry size and the share of SOE workers
                                                                                              in manufacturing industries (percent), 1999–2009
                                                                                                                                              19
         Change in the industry's share of manu employment




                                                                      0.02
                                                                                                                              35

                                                                                           32                                                                                20
                                                                                                                  34    21
                                                                                                                             25         30
                                                                               31                                                                                            16   37
                                                                      0.00                 23           33                                        27
                                                                                                                       29    26
                                                                                                                                                  22
                                                                                                                                       15                             28
                                                                                    24                                 17
                                                                                                                                                                                       36

                                                                     –0.02



                                                                                                                                                                             18
                                                                     –0.04
                                                                                    –0.4                     –0.3                 –0.2                      –0.1                       0.0
                                                                                              Change in the share of SOE workers within the industry

FIGURE 2.7b  . . . as does attracting foreign direct investment

                                                                                         Changes in relative industry size and the share of FDI workers
                                                                                            in manufacturing industries (percentage), 1999–2009
                                                                                                                                                                 19
                 Change in the industry's share of manu employment




                                                                      0.02
                                                                                                             35

                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                   32
                                                                                                 21                                                    34   30
                                                                                                                        25
                                                                             37          23
                                                                      0.00          26                  27                                                              33
                                                                                                                              29                            31
                                                                             16         28                        24
                                                                                    15 22
                                                                                                                  36
                                                                                                   17

                                                                     –0.02



                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                     –0.04
                                                                             0.0                 0.1                   0.2                  0.3                   0.4                  0.5
                                                                                                Change in the share of FDI workers within the industry


Source: Authors’ calculations based on the 1999 and 2009 population censuses.
Note: The circle size indicates the share of manufacturing employment in 1999. Industry codes are International Standard
Industrial Classification revision 3. The y-axis measures the change in the share of industry employment in total manufacturing
employment. FDI = foreign direct investment; SOE = state-owned enterprise.
                                                                      Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   113




Viet Nam’s ability to expand its manufacturing and service sectors relative to
other low-income countries. This grouping predominately includes countries
in Africa (such as Zambia, Lesotho, and Kenya) and Asia (such as Cambodia,
China, and Laos).
    First, Viet Nam experienced remarkable economic growth between 1990
and 2010 (Figure 2.8). Indeed, it moved from the middle of the pack to the
fourth-richest country, trailing only Bosnia and Herzegovina, China, and
Equatorial Guinea.
    Second, Viet Nam experienced a relatively fast movement of workers out of
agriculture, even compared with many other agrarian economies. As already
noted, slightly more than a third of Viet Nam’s growth can be attributed to
structural change induced by movements of labor from low-productivity agri-
culture toward more productive manufacturing and services. The relatively
large contribution of structural change in Viet Nam may in part be the result
of Viet Nam’s high initial concentration of workers in low-productivity agri-
cultural activities—in fact, its workforce was more agrarian in 1990 than

FIGURE 2.8  Viet Nam leapfrogged over many peers


                                                                GDP per capita in 1990 and 2010 for initially low-income countries
                                                          GNQ                                                  Fitted values
 ln 2010 GDP per capita (2005 PPP prices)




                                            8,000
                                                                                                                                  CHN
                                                                                                                                 BIH

                                            4,000

                                                                                                 VNM        LAO
                                                                KHM
                                            2,000
                                                                                               ZMB
                                                                      TCD     BGD   LSO                                        NGA     SEN
                                                                NPL
                                                                            TZA                                  BEN                 KEN
                                            1,000         MLI                                                             AFG
                                                                RWA                                      SLE
                                                    BFA                 GIN                              TGO                   GNB
                                                                                                MDG
                                                                CAF
                                             500                 SOM
                                                      650                           820                        1,030                         1,300
                                                                              ln 1990 GDP per capita (2005 PPP Prices)

Source: Data are based on Penn World Tables 7.1 (Heston, Summers, and Aten 2012).
Note: Gross domestic product (GDP) per capita is expressed in 2005 purchasing power parity (PPP) prices. The sample
includes all countries with GDP per capita within $300 of Viet Nam’s 1990 GDP per capita. AFG = Afghanistan; BEN = Benin;
BFA = Burkina Faso; BGD = Bangladesh; BIH = Bosnia and Herzegovina; CAF = Central African Republic; CHN = China;
GIN = Guinea; GNB = Guinea-Bissau; GNQ = Equatorial Guinea; KEN = Kenya; KHM = Cambodia; LAO = Laos; LSO = Lesotho;
MDG = Madagascar; MLI = Malawi; NGA = Nigeria; NPL = Nepal; RWA = Rwanda; SEN = Senegal; SLE = Sierra Leone;
SOM = Somalia; TCD = Chad; TGO = Togo; TZA = Tanzania; VNM = Viet Nam; ZMB = Zambia.
114 Chapter 2




would have been predicted based on its initial level of income. However, as
Figure 2.9 shows, the 20 percentage point drop in the share of agricultural
employment in Viet Nam between 1990 and 2008 is not solely owing to the
initially highly agrarian nature of Viet Nam’s economy, given that many other
highly agrarian countries experienced a much slower reallocation of workers
out of agriculture and slower overall economic growth. For example, the share
of workers in agriculture dropped by only 4 percentage points between 1994
and 2005 in Burkina Faso and by only 8 percentage points between 1991 and
2006 in Tanzania. Both countries also experienced notably slower growth
than Viet Nam between 1990 and 2010 (Figure 2.9).
   Why were Vietnamese workers who left agriculture and less productive
employers absorbed fairly quickly into more productive sectors and firms in
manufacturing and services? The expansion of manufacturing employment is


FIGURE 2.9  Viet Nam outperformed many other agrarian economies


                                                          Agricultural employment and initial GDP per capita, 1990–2008

                                              90          RWA
                                                   BFA
                                                                                     LAO                 Fitted values
                                                           TZA TCD
    Percentage of employment in agriculture




                                              80         MDG
                                                              GNQ    KHM
                                                         GIN     NPL
                                              70                             ZMB           VNM
                                                         SLE
                                                                   BGD
                                                                                     KEN
                                              60
                                                                               LSO
                                                                TGO
                                              50                                                                 CHN
                                                                                           SEN     NGA
                                                                      MLI            BEN
                                              40
                                                   600                                1,300                              2,600
                                                                   PPP converted GDP per capita (2005 prices)

Source: The percentage of employment in agriculture is from the World Development Indicators database (World Bank,
various years), and gross domestic product (GDP) per capita is from the Penn World Tables 7.1 (Heston, Summers, and Aten
2012).
Note: For Viet Nam, the percentage of employment in agriculture is first reported for 1996. For each country, we plot the
closest observation by year to 1996 for which the employment information is available. Purchasing power parity (PPP)-
converted GDP per capita is plotted for the same year as employment in agriculture. AFG = Afghanistan; BEN = Benin;
BFA = Burkina Faso; BGD = Bangladesh; BIH = Bosnia and Herzegovina; CAF = Central African Republic; CHN = China; GIN =
Guinea; GNB = Guinea-Bissau; GNQ = Equatorial Guinea; KEN = Kenya; KHM = Cambodia; LAO = Laos; LSO = Lesotho;
MDG = Madagascar; MLI = Malawi; NGA = Nigeria; NPL = Nepal; RWA = Rwanda; SEN = Senegal; SLE = Sierra Leone;
SOM = Somalia; TCD = Chad; TGO = Togo; TZA = Tanzania; VNM = Viet Nam; ZMB = Zambia.
                            Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   115




the beneficiary of Viet Nam’s comparative advantage in labor-intensive manu­
facturing industries, rather than in natural resource sectors, which tend to
be more capital intensive and appear to deter growth-enhancing structural
change (McMillan and Rodrik 2011).
    Third, Viet Nam’s exports benefited from relatively greater openness and
a competitive exchange rate. Viet Nam’s labor-intensive manufacturing indus-
tries, which accounted for an increasing share of Viet Nam’s exports in the
2000s, were important recipients of FDI and accounted for a large share of
Viet Nam’s employment expansion. The country’s export performance also
benefited from relatively lower administrative barriers to trade (for example,
measured by fewer documents needed to export goods and lower domestic
costs of exporting) than in comparison with such countries as Zambia, Laos,
and Lesotho (World Bank 2013). And the traded sector benefited from the
undervalued exchange rate, which tends to be positively associated with
structural change (McMillan and Rodrik 2011). Indeed, as Figure 2.10a
shows, Viet Nam’s exchange rate was significantly undervalued, by more than
80 percent (a positive value indicates undervaluation), and was well above the
trend line, suggesting that Viet Nam was ranked high in terms of its competi-
tiveness relative to the comparison countries.18
    Fourth, Viet Nam reaped the rewards of relatively more flexible labor mar-
kets and better education among this group of low-income countries. The flex-
ibility of Viet Nam’s labor markets is similar to that of China (Figure 2.10b).
And Viet Nam’s relatively more educated labor force (90 percent literacy
rate)—versus around 70 percent literacy rates in Laos, Madagascar, and
Zambia—may further contribute to a more rapid transition of labor toward
more productive sectors and employers.19
    Although this analysis is purely descriptive, it seems that relative to other
initially low-income countries, Viet Nam possesses characteristics that tend
to be associated with a positive contribution of structural change to aggre-
gate productivity growth (McMillan and Rodrik 2011). These characteristics
include a comparative advantage in labor-intensive manufacturing, low trade
costs, a significantly undervalued currency, and flexible labor markets—all of
which may help account for a relatively fast transition of labor toward more
productive sectors and employers and subsequent overall growth.


18	 Bems and Johnson (2012) show that Viet Nam’s real effective exchange rate, which takes into
    account its position in global production chains, is less undervalued than the conventional
    exchange rate measure.
19	 Based on data from the World Development Indicators database (World Bank, various years).
116 Chapter 2



FIGURE 2.10a  Viet Nam was helped by a competitive exchange rate . . .


                                      Undervaluation (positive value) of the exchange rate and initial GDP per capita
                                1.0
                                                                                                             Fitted values
                                                                                  VNM
                                                       GIN
                                                    NPL
                                0.5                             BGD                                            CHN
        In undervaluation




                                                                                           LAO
                                              KHM RWA                                    SLE
                                                                       LSO
                                      BFA                                                                          KEN
                                           SOM           TCD                                          AFG
                                0.0    MLI
                                                                                MDG            BEN       GNB        SEN
                                      GNQ                      TZA
                                                  CAF                                   TGO
                                                                                  ZMB
                                                                                                             BIH
                          –0.5                                                                                 NGA
                                      650                          820                     1,030                          1,300
                                                             GDP per capita in 1990 (PPP 2005 prices)

FIGURE 2.10b  . . . and flexible labor markets


                                                          Labor market rigidity and initial GDP per capita
                                                             TZA                MDG
                                60    BFA                                                                           SEN

                                                         NPL
                                50
                                                          TCD                                                BIH
        Labor market rigidity




                                                  KHM
                                40                                                             BEN
                                            MLI
                                                                BGD              ZMB
                                30
                                                                                 VNM
                                                                       LSO                                    CHN
                                20                                                                              KEN


                                10
                                        Fitted values                                                          NGA
                                      650                           820                    1,030                          1,300
                                                        PPP converted GDP per capita in 1990 (2005 prices)

Source: Figure 2.10a: The data for undervaluation of exchange rate are from Rodrik (2008) and are the average for 1990–
2004. The data for gross domestic product (GDP) per capita are the 1990 value from World Tables 7.1 (Heston, Summers,
and Aten 2012). Figure 10b: The data for labor market rigidity are from the World Bank Doing Business database, as reported
in the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report 2008–2009 (Schwab and Porter 2008). The data on GDP per
capita are 1990 values from Penn World Tables 7.1 (Heston, Summers, and Aten 2012).
Note: A higher index number of labor market rigidity corresponds to higher rigidity. Gross domestic product (GDP) per capita
is expressed in 2005 purchasing power parity (PPP) prices. AFG = Afghanistan; BEN = Benin; BFA = Burkina Faso; BGD =
Bangladesh; BIH = Bosnia and Herzegovina; CAF = Central African Republic; CHN = China; GIN = Guinea; GNB = Guinea-
Bissau; GNQ = Equatorial Guinea; KEN = Kenya; KHM = Cambodia; LAO = Laos; LSO = Lesotho; MDG = Madagascar; MLI =
Malawi; NGA = Nigeria; NPL = Nepal; RWA = Rwanda; SEN = Senegal; SLE = Sierra Leone; SOM = Somalia; TCD = Chad;
TGO = Togo; TZA = Tanzania; VNM = Viet Nam; ZMB = Zambia.
                       Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   117




Room for Still More Labor Reallocation
Like most less developed countries, Viet Nam is characterized by large pro-
ductivity gaps across sectors, especially between agriculture and manufac-
turing and some services. During the 1990s and 2000s, Vietnamese workers
moved out of low-productivity agriculture toward higher-productivity manu-
facturing and services. These movements of workers from less to more produc-
tive sectors accounted for more than a third of the average annual 5.1 percent
aggregate productivity growth. An analysis that focused solely on the man-
ufacturing sector would miss this important role of economywide worker
re­allocation when assessing the sources of aggregate labor productivity growth
in Viet Nam. Our discussion suggests that reforms in agriculture, the enter-
prise sector, and international integration all likely contributed to the move-
ment of labor out of agriculture toward manufacturing and services.
    Viet Nam’s aggregate labor productivity growth also is the result of improved
sectoral productivities, which account for almost the remaining two-thirds of
the growth. Resource reallocation from less to more productive firms within sec-
tors in part contributed to these sectoral labor productivity improvements, as
workers reallocated from less productive household businesses toward more pro-
ductive registered firms in the enterprise sector, and from SOEs toward more
productive private domestic and foreign-owned firms.
    Manufacturing stands out as a sector that experienced a large increase in
productivity during this period, averaging an annual growth rate in labor pro-
ductivity of 5.1 percent, and a large expansion of its employment base at an
annual growth rate of 7 percent. Moreover, in the 2000s, manufacturing ex­pe-
rienced a large expansion of exports and a growing presence of foreign-owned
enterprises. The beneficiaries of expanding relative employment tended to be
those manufacturing industries with greater declines in the share of employ-
ment in SOEs and a greater inflow of employment to foreign firms.
    Despite all of these achievements, however, large productivity gaps remain
both among and within sectors. Recent reports point to lagging productivity
performance of the SOE sector, accompanied by preferential access of SOEs
to credit and capital markets (McKinsey Global Institute 2012; World Bank
2011). Our own research emphasizes the potential importance of further real-
locating resources from the household business sector to the enterprise sec-
tor. Although employment in household businesses dropped substantially
during the 2000s, it continues to account for 80 percent of economywide jobs
and 54 percent of manufacturing employment in 2008. And estimates from
the 2006 VHLSS suggest substantially lower labor productivity in household
businesses than in private enterprises.
118 Chapter 2




    How could this next wave of reallocation be facilitated? Two possible ave-
nues stand out: either workers would need to leave household businesses to
join firms operating in the enterprise sector or household businesses would
have to register as enterprises. Recent research suggests that the first avenue
would more likely lead to the reallocation of labor away from low- to high-
productivity firms, as few household businesses become registered enterprises,
whereas workers are shifting to the enterprise sector in response to new export
opportunities (Pavcnik and McCaig 2013; McCaig and Pavcnik 2014). This
has the potential to raise aggregate productivity, as workers increasingly work
in higher-productivity firms within the enterprise sector.
    To help understand the role that policy could play in promoting future struc-
tural change, more research could be devoted to examining the relationship
between policy and structural change during the 1990s and 2000s. As we noted,
at the start of Doi Moi, Viet Nam’s economy was plagued by policy-induced dis-
tortions that likely caused an inefficient allocation of resources and lowered the
incentives to invest. The removal of various distortions (such as price controls,
export limits for rice, and restrictions on FDI) no doubt contributed to Viet
Nam’s rapid growth and structural transformation by both releasing workers
from agriculture and increasing the demand for workers outside of agriculture.
However, because of the removal of many distortions during these two decades
and the length of time required to adjust, it is very difficult to determine empir-
ically which policy changes were the most important for promoting structural
change. Careful research has shown that the rise in the price of rice, after the
removal of internal and external barriers to rice trade, was associated with a shift
of labor to the wage market (Edmonds and Pavcnik 2006), but many other pol-
icy changes and their impacts on structural change remain underexplored. Viet
Nam’s economy continues to feature large distortions (in particular, access to
land and capital) that may be hindering both the transition of workers out of
agriculture and further improvements in agricultural productivity.
    Finally, a word of caution is required regarding the expected pace of struc-
tural change. Viet Nam experienced rapid structural change during the 1990s
and 2000s, but more than 50 percent of workers remained in agriculture by
2008. Although many workers within cohorts moved out of agriculture—
and new cohorts are more likely to work outside of agriculture upon entering
the workforce—some workers are likely to remain in agriculture until exit-
ing the workforce. For example, McCaig and Pavcnik (2015) show that rural,
poorly educated, older workers are very unlikely to transition from the infor-
mal to the formal sector. The same frictions likely exist in the stock of agricul-
tural workers.
                        Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   119




Appendix 2A: Data Description

Employment and GDP Data by Broad Sectors
The analysis in this chapter’s section “Patterns in Structural Change” uses
data on employment, GDP (in constant 1994 prices), and labor produc-
tivity (also in constant 1994 prices), disaggregated into economic sectors.
Our source of data is the GSO, available at http://www.gso.gov.vn/, which
provides data on employment and GDP in current Vietnamese dong and
1994 dong disaggregated into 19 economic activities. We categorize these
19 activities into the sectors used by McMillan and Rodrik (2011), as shown
in Table 2A.1.
    The employment series shows a break in trend between 2002 and 2003.
For example, the percentage of workers employed in agriculture fell by
5.9 percentage points, compared with 1.1 and 1.5 percentage points during
2001–2002 and 2003–2004, respectively. We thus omit the decomposition
between 2002 and 2003 in our decomposition of productivity growth in
Figure 2.3. Despite the apparent change in estimation procedure used in the
GSO employment data between 2002 and 2003, the overall employment
trends are very consistent with those estimated using census data.

Population Censuses
 Samples of the 1989, 1999, and 2009 population censuses are publicly avail-
 able through IPUMS-International (MPC 2015). Each census asked individ-
 uals some basic questions related to their working status. The 1989 census
 provides the industry of affiliation at a relatively aggregate level, whereas the
1999 and 2009 census industry codes are adaptations based on three-digit
 ISIC revision 3 and ISIC revision 4. Thus, while we can use the 1999 and
 2009 censuses to look at the growth of employment within various manufac-
 turing industries, we cannot use the 1989 census for this purpose. However,
 the 1989 census can be used for verifying the aggregate trends described in
“Patterns in Structural Change.” Additionally, the censuses contain informa-
 tion on the type of ownership (for example, self-employed, working for the
 state) for each employee, which we use for looking at the changing role of
 SOEs and foreign-invested enterprises.

Household Surveys
We use four nationally representative household surveys conducted in 2002,
2004, 2006, and 2008. The GSO conducted these surveys with technical
advice from the World Bank. Each survey contained modules on education,
120 Chapter 2




Table 2A.1  Mapping between GSO sectors and McMillan and Rodrik sectors

McMillan and Rodrik sector                     Abbreviation                         GSO sectors
Agriculture, hunting, forestry, and                  agr        Agriculture and forestry
fishing                                                         Fishing
Mining and quarrying                                min         Mining and quarrying
Manufacturing                                       man         Manufacturing
Public utilities (electricity, gas, and              pu         Electricity, gas, and water supply
water)
Construction                                        con         Construction
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and              wrt        Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles,
restaurants                                                     motorcycles and personal and household goods
                                                                Hotels and restaurants
Transport, storage, and communications               tsc        Transport, storage, and communications
Finance, insurance, real estate, and                 fire       Financial intermediation
business services                                               Scientific activities and technology
                                                                Real estate, renting, and business activities
Community, social, personal, and                   cspsgs       Public administration and defense; compulsory
government services                                             social security
                                                                Education and training
                                                                Health and social work
                                                                Recreational, cultural, and sporting activities
                                                                Activities of party and of membership organizations
                                                                Community, social, and personal service activities
                                                                Private households with employed persons

Source: General Statistics Office of Viet Nam and McMillan and Rodrik (2011).


health, income and production activities, expenditures, and employment.
The employment modules collected information on the industry of affili-
ation, wage payments if applicable, and the type of ownership for the indi-
vidual’s primary job during the past 12 months. Although the surveys also
collected information on additional jobs, we restrict our focus to the individ-
ual’s primary job. Like the censuses, the surveys use industry codes based on
adaptations of ISIC revisions 3 and 4 and are available at the two-digit level.
The ownership variable includes information on whether the individual was
self-employed, working for another household, working in the formal pri-
vate sector, working in a collective, working in the state sector, or working in
the foreign-invested sector. In our analysis on informality, we make use of the
ownership sector to define informal employment as being either self-employed
or working for another household. One caveat to this definition is that the
2002 household survey did not distinguish between self-employment in a
                           Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   121




household business versus in a private enterprise, whereas the other three sur-
veys did. Thus, our estimate of informality is a slight overestimate, since we
include all self-employment as informal, even those self-employed in a private
enterprise. The subsequent surveys demonstrate that this leads to only a slight
overestimate. For example, in 2004, we estimate that 83.1 percent of workers
were working informally. Removing workers who are self-employed in private
enterprises reduces this to 82.7 percent. Therefore, including self-employed
workers in private enterprises will not significantly alter our results and allows
us to use a consistent definition across all of the household surveys and thus
have a longer period to study.

Enterprise Surveys
Beginning in 2000, the GSO has been conducting annual surveys of all for-
mally registered enterprises in Viet Nam. Basic information, such as industry
and employment, is collected for all enterprises, regardless of the size or the
sector. We use information on the industry of the firm (we rely on the primary
industry of the firm for multi-industry firms) and the number of employees.
The industry codes are based on an adaptation of ISIC revision 3 and thus are
easily matched with information from the household surveys and the other
two censuses. This allows us to cross-check our results for consistency across
various sources.


References
Athukorala, P. 2006. “Trade Policy Reforms and the Structure of Protection in Viet Nam.” World
     Economy 29 (2): 161–187.
Bems, R., and R. Johnson. 2012. Value-Added Exchange Rates. NBER Working Paper 18498.
     Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Benjamin, D., and L. Brandt. 2004. “Agriculture and Income Distribution in Rural Viet Nam under
     Economic Reforms: A Tale of Two Regions.” In Economic Growth, Poverty, and Household
     Welfare in Viet Nam, edited by P. Glewwe, N. Agrawal, and D. Dollar. Washington, DC:
     World Bank.
Benjamin, D., L. Brandt, B. Coelli, B. McCaig, L-H. Nguyen, and T. Nguyen. 2009. Crop Output
     in Viet Nam, 1992 to 2006: An Analysis of the Patterns and Sources of Growth. Working Paper
     64270. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Chenery, H. B. 1979. Structural Change and Development Policy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
     University Press.
122 Chapter 2




Chu, T. T. H., and P. M. Dickie. 2006. Economic Transition in Viet Nam: Doi Moi to WTO.
     ADB-PPTP Study Series 1/2006. Manila: Asian Development Bank, Public Policy Training
     Program.
Dodsworth, J. R., E. Spitäller, M. Braulke, K. Hyok Lee, K. Miranda, C. Mulder, H. Shishido, and
     K. Srinivasan. 1996. “Viet Nam: Transition to a Market Economy.” IMF Occasional Paper
     135. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Dollar, D., and J. Litvack. 1998. “Macroeconomic Reform and Poverty Reduction in Viet Nam.” In
     Household Welfare and Viet Nam’s Transition, edited by D. Dollar, P. Glewwe, and J. Litvack.
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
Edmonds, E., and N. Pavcnik. 2006. “Trade Liberalization and the Allocation of Labor between
     Households and Markets in a Poor Country.” Journal of International Economics 69 (2):
     257–295.
Fei, J. C. H., and G. Ranis. 1964. Development of the Labor Surplus Economy: Theory and Policy.
     Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Fukase, E. 2013. “Foreign Job Opportunities and Internal Migration in Viet Nam.” World Bank
     Policy Research Working Paper 6420. Washington, DC.
Glewwe, Paul. 2004. “An Overview of Economic Growth and Household Welfare in Viet Nam
     in the 1990s.” In Economic Growth, Poverty, and Household Welfare in Viet Nam, edited by
     P. Glewwe, N. Agrawal, and D. Dollar. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Goldberg, P., and N. Pavcnik. 2003. “The Response of the Informal Sector to Trade Liberalization.”
     Journal of Development Economics 72 (2): 463–496.
—. 2007. “Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing Countries.” Journal of
     Economic Literature 45 (1): 39–82.
Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. Waugh. 2012. “The Agricultural Productivity Gap in Developing
     Countries.” Williamstown, MA: Williams College. Mimeo.
Gollin, D., S. L. Parente, and R. Rogerson. 2007. “The Food Problem and the Evolution of
     International Income Levels.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (4): 1230–1255.
GSO (General Statistics Office of Vietnam). www.gso.gov.vn/.
Heston, A., R. Summers, and B. Aten. 2012. “Penn World Table Version 7.1.” Philadelphia:
     University of Pennsylvania, Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income
     and Prices.
Hsieh, C-T., and P. Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India.”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1403–1448.
La Porta, R., and A. Shleifer. 2008. “The Unofficial Economy and Economic Development.”
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 39 (2): 275–352.
                            Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Viet Nam   123




Lewis, W. A. 1954. “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor.” Manchester
     School of Economic and Social Studies 22 (2): 139–191.
Malesky, E., and M. Taussig. 2009. “Out of the Gray: The Impact of Provincial Institutions on
     Business Formalization in Viet Nam.” Journal of East Asian Studies 9: 249–290.
McCaig, B. 2011. “Exporting Out of Poverty: Provincial Poverty in Viet Nam and U.S. Market
     Access.” Journal of International Economics 85 (1): 102–113.
McCaig, B., and N. Pavcnik. 2014. “Export Markets and Labor Reallocation in a Poor Country.”
     NBER Working Paper 20455. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
—. 2015. “Informal Employment in a Growing and Globalizing Low-Income Country.”
     American Economic Review 105 (5): 545–550.
McKinsey Global Institute. 2012. Sustaining Viet Nam’s Growth: The Productivity Challenge.
     Washington, DC.
McMillan, M., and D. Rodrik. 2011. “Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity Growth.”
     NBER Working Paper 17143. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Melitz, M. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
     Productivity.” Econometrica 71 (6): 1696–1725.
Melitz, M. J., and S. J. Redding. 2014. “Heterogeneous Firms and Trade.” In Handbook of
     International Economics, edited by E. Helpman, K. Rogoff, and G. Gopinath. 4th ed.
     Amsterdam: North-Holland (Elsevier).
Minh, D. H., T. Q. Long, D. T. Hang, and P. T. Hoang. 2010. Beyond Investment-Led Growth:
     First Report of the Research on “Restructuring the Viet Nam Economy through Right Investment
     Incentives and Improved Macro Management.” www.vnep.org.vn/Upload/beyond%20
     investment%20led-growth.pdf.
Minot, N., and F. Goletti. 2000. “Rice Market Liberalization and Poverty in Viet Nam.” IFPRI
     Research Report 114. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
MPC (Minnesota Population Center). 2015. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, International:
     Version 6.4 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Pavcnik, N. 2002. “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence from
     Chilean Plants.” Review of Economic Studies 69 (1): 245–276.
Pavcnik, N., and B. McCaig. 2013. International Trade and Household Businesses: Evidence from
     Viet Nam. Washington, DC: US Department of Labor, Bureau of International Affairs.
     www.dol.gov/ilab/reports/pdf/ILAB-ICARE%20Report-Final%20Full%20Report-08-09
     -2013l.pdf.
Ravallion, M., and D. van de Walle. 2008. “Does Rising Landlessness Signal Success or Failure for
     Viet Nam’s Agrarian Transition?” Journal of Development Economics 87: 191–209.
124 Chapter 2




Restuccia, D., and R. Rogerson. 2008. “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with
     Heterogeneous Plants.” Review of Economic Dynamics 11 (4): 707–720.
Rodrik, D. 2008. “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth.” Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity 2: 365–412.
Schwab, K., and M. E. Porter. 2008. The Global Competitiveness Report 2008–2009. Geneva:
     World Economic Forum.
Tuan, N. Ngoc, N. T. Long, and H. Phuong. 1996. “Restructuring of State Owned Enterprises
     towards Industrialization and Modernization in Viet Nam.” In State Owned Enterprise
     Reform in Viet Nam: Lessons from Asia, edited by C. Yuen, N. J. Freeman, and F. H. Huynh.
     Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
UN Comtrade database. http://comtrade.un.org/.
UNPF (United Nations Population Fund). 2007. Internal Migration in Viet Nam: The Current
     Situation. Hanoi: UNFPA Viet Nam.
VASS (Viet Nam Academy of Social Sciences). 2011. Poverty Reduction in Viet Nam: Achievements
     and Challenges. Hanoi.
VHLSS (Vietnamese Household Living Standards Survey). gso.gov.vn/default_en.aspx?tabid=483&.
Wiens, Thomas B. 1998. “Agriculture and Rural Poverty in Viet Nam.” In Household Welfare and
     Viet Nam’s Transition, edited by D. Dollar, P. Glewwe, and J. Litvack. Washington, DC:
     World Bank.
World Bank. 2002. Viet Nam Development Report 2003: Delivering on Its Promise. Washington, DC.
—. 2004. Doing Business in 2004: Understanding Regulation. Washington, DC.
—. 2011. Viet Nam Development Report 2012: Market Economy for a Middle-Income Viet Nam.
     Washington, DC.
—. 2013. Doing Business 2013: Smarter Regulations for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises.
     Washington, DC.
—. Various years. World Development Indicators database. http://data.worldbank.org/
     data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
                                                                                   Chapter 3


         STUCK IN THE MIDDLE? STRUCTURAL CHANGE
           AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA

Brian McCaig, Margaret McMillan, Íñigo Verduzco-Gallo, and Keith Jefferis




I
  n 1966 when Botswana gained independence, it was one of the poorest
  countries in the world. But by 1986, Botswana had achieved middle-income
  status, and in 2005, the World Bank classified it as an upper-middle-income
country. The only other country to enjoy such rapid economic growth over
such a long period is China—an average of 9 percent between 1968 and 2010.
Botswana has also maintained democracy throughout its recent history, and
this combination of economic and political success has earned it the reputa-
tion of an “African success story” (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2002).
    Botswana’s rapid economic growth has nonetheless left many individuals
behind. Unemployment is a major issue, particularly among the young. Income
inequality is extremely high, as is poverty. As such, it is important to under-
stand the sources of Botswana’s economic growth to better appreciate where it
may come from in the future and what prospects it has for being more inclusive.
    Historically, diamonds played a significant role in fueling this economic
growth, although this has changed in recent years. Between 1968 and 2010,
the landscape of Botswana’s economy changed dramatically (Figure 3.1a), as
economic activity shifted out of agriculture first to mining and later to ser-
vices. Between 1968 and 2010:
 •	   Agriculture’s share of value-added fell from 27.4 percent to 2.7 percent.
 •	   Services’ share of value-added increased from 40.4 percent to 64.4 percent.
 •	   Manufacturing’s share of value-added climbed from 3.6 percent to
      7.7 percent.
 •	   Mining and quarrying rose rapidly from 11.7 percent to 57.7 percent in
      1984, before gradually declining to 17.7 percent in 2010.1
 •	   Construction peaked at 24.5 percent in 1972, and then gradually declined
      to around 7.5 percent by 2010.

 1	 Part of the sharp decline in the share of value-added in mining in 2009 and 2010 is attributed to
      the global recession.

                                                                                                  125
126 Chapter 3




   Although diamonds contributed significantly to value-added, they never
directly accounted for more than 3.2 percent of total employment, given the
highly capital-intensive nature of diamond extraction. Thus, although there
were dramatic shifts in Botswana’s occupational structure (Figure 3.1b), this


FIGURE 3.1a  Services now dominates in value-added . . .


                                    Percentage of value-added by sector, 1970–2010
            80
                        agr
                        con
                        man
            60          min
                        ser
  Percent




            40



            20



             0
                 1970      1975        1980        1985        1990       1995        2000        2005        2010
                                                             Year

FIGURE 3.1b  . . . and in terms of employment


                                    Percentage of employment by sector, 1970–2010
            80                                                                                             agr
                                                                                                           con
                                                                                                           man
                                                                                                           min
            60                                                                                             ser
  Percent




            40



            20



             0
                 1970      1975        1980        1985        1990       1995        2000        2005        2010
                                                             Year

Source: Authors’ calculations with data from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre Africa Sector Database.
Note: agr = agriculture; con = construction; man = manufacturing; min = mining; ser = services.
                               STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  127




did not involve movements in and out of mining. Instead, between 1964
and 2010:
 •	   Agriculture’s share of employment fell from 87.5 percent to 38.6 percent.
 •	   Services’ share of employment increased from 8.5 percent to 50.6 percent.
 •	   Manufacturing’s share of employment rose from 1.4 percent to 6.6 percent.
 •	   Mining and quarrying’s share of employment inched up from 1.1 percent
      to 1.5 percent.
 •	   Construction’s share of employment rose from 1.2 to 12.9 percent in 1991,
      but then slowly fell back to 2.8 percent in 2010.
    Like many less developed countries today, Botswana’s economy was char-
acterized by large productivity gaps between different parts of the econ-
omy when it first gained independence. Sir Arthur Lewis (1954) was one
of the first to recognize that these large productivity gaps in less developed
countries could be an important engine of growth. The idea is that when
labor and other resources move from less productive to more productive
activities, the economy grows even if there is no productivity growth within
sectors. More recently, McMillan and Rodrik (2011) document significant
gaps in labor productivity between sectors for a large set of developing coun-
tries, and substantial differences in the contribution of structural change—
that is, the movement of workers among sectors, as opposed to changes
in productivity “within” sectors—to the overall economic performance
of these economies between 1990 and 2005. Structural change enhanced
growth in Asian economies, while it decreased growth in Latin America
and Africa. However, the story for Africa switches to a positive role for
structural change when a large sample of African countries is examined for a
more recent time period—between 2000 and 2010 (McMillan, Rodrik, and
Verduzco Gallo 2014).2
    How does Botswana fit into this African story? Here we should note that
it was not included in either of these studies because of data issues. This chap-
ter, using newly obtained data, traces the extent to which structural change
played a role in Botswana’s rise to middle-income status, as well as its role in
Botswana’s more recent economic performance. Overall, we find that struc-
tural change accounted for more than half of Botswana’s spectacular labor

 2	 Neither McMillan and Rodrik (2011) nor McMillan, Rodrik, and Verduzco-Gallo (2014)
      include Botswana. This is because a significant amount of work was required to make sense of
      the Botswana data. We discuss these issues later on in this chapter.
128 Chapter 3




productivity growth between 1970 and 1989, averaging 8.6 percent per year.
The reallocation of employment away from agriculture toward service indus-
tries played the most important role. However, between 1990 and 2010,
overall labor productivity growth slowed to 1.9 percent per year, with within-
sector productivity growth much higher at 3.6 percent per year, and structural
change a drag on overall productivity growth. Indeed, there was almost no
change in the agricultural share of employment, and the share of employment
in wholesale and retail trade expanded significantly.
    What contributed to the early period of growth-enhancing structural change
and the more recent experience in which structural change has been reducing
growth? This is an important question, because structural change has played
significant positive and negative roles in Botswana’s growth performance. To
answer this question, we review Botswana’s most salient trade and industrial
policies over these two periods. One event that stands out that has not received
much attention in the literature is Botswana’s exposure to South Africa’s mas-
sive trade liberalization in 1994. Because Botswana is a member of the Southern
African Customs Union (SACU), its tariffs are set by the government of South
Africa, making them effectively exogenous. Thus, Botswana presents an unusual
case for studying the impact of trade liberalization on structural change.
    As for growth-enhancing structural change, we believe it was fueled by the
discovery of diamonds and subsequent policies to expand the public service;
attract the private sector; and invest in education, health, and infra­structure.
However, the triggers for growth-reducing structural change remain a mys-
tery, leaving a big question for researchers and policy makers as Botswana
continues to try to promote economic diversification and inclusion. One pos-
sible trigger that we can rule out is trade liberalization. We found that despite
the large size of the tariff cuts, there was no strong link between them and
changes in the workforce.


The Birth of a Nation
 The term “Batswana” originated from the country’s major ethnic group—the
“Tswana” in South Africa—and refers to the people of Botswana. Botswana
 was originally inhabited by the San from around 17,000 BC, but in the early
1880s during the Zulu war, the Tswana moved into the area from South
Africa, bringing with them the custom of holding “town meetings” for con-
 sultation and consensus on public issues. Prior to European contact, the
 Batswana lived as herders focusing on cattle ranching, because 84 percent of
 land is desert and only 4 percent is arable (Fibaek 2010).
                              STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  129




    The present-day boundaries of Botswana reflect direct appeals by the
Batswana to the British to first establish political boundaries for protection
and subsequently to remain separate from what would become South Africa.
In the late 19th century, antipathy between the Batswana and Boer from the
Transvaal emerged. In response to requests for assistance, the British govern-
ment put “Bechuanaland” under its protection in 1885. Then in 1895, the
southern portion was incorporated into the Cape Colony, while the north-
ern portion remained under direct administration as the Bechuanaland
Protectorate. Residents of the Bechuanaland Protectorate (current Botswana),
Basutoland (current Lesotho), and Swaziland requested that they not be
included in the proposed Union of South Africa. The British agreed, thereby
keeping the Bechuanaland Protectorate outside of the Union of South Africa
formation in 1910. In 1964, Britain agreed to democratic self-government,
and independence was granted in 1966 (ERB, n.d.).
    When Botswana achieved independence from Britain in 1966, it was one of
the poorest countries in Africa, with a GDP per capita of about US$70. In the
following years, and partly owing to the discovery of diamonds in three sites—
Jwaneng, Orapa, and Letlhakane—Botswana’s economy was radically trans-
formed. Between 1960 and 1990, the average GDP growth rate was around
12 percent—the highest sustained real GDP growth rate in the world for that
time. In 2005, Botswana joined the ranks of the upper-middle-income
countries.
    Today, economic diversification is a high priority (BEAC 2008), given that
export revenues continue to be dominated by diamonds, a resource that may
be depleted sometime in the not so distant future (MFDP 2009). Attempts
at industrialization have so far not worked, leaving employment dominated
by agriculture and services (of which the public sector accounts for more than
half). The heavy reliance on mining—employing a tiny fraction of the labor
force (3.5 percent) owing to its highly capital-intensive nature—may partly
contribute to Botswana’s inequality, poverty, and unemployment problems.3
Income inequality is the third highest in the world (UNDP 2010), and the
poverty head count ratio was about 19 percent in 2009 (World Bank 2014).

A Strong Role for Structural Change … Initially
Shortly after independence, Botswana was characterized by large differences
in labor productivity across sectors (Figure 3.2a). In 1970, 82.5 percent of

 3	 Additionally these jobs do not require any particular set of skills, and they are typically
   reserved for men.
130 Chapter 3




the workforce was involved in agriculture—a very low productivity sector
(24.4 percent of overall labor productivity)—but only 1.5 percent of workers
were in higher-productivity manufacturing (with labor productivity more
than three times higher than overall labor productivity), and only 1.7 percent
of workers were in construction (with labor productivity more than 12 times
higher than overall labor productivity). Thus, the reallocation of workers out
of agriculture into higher-productivity sectors could be a key factor in boost-
ing overall growth in labor productivity (Lewis 1954; McMillan and Rodrik
2011). Indeed, in the following decades, as Figure 3.2b shows, the structure of
employment changed greatly as the share of workers in agriculture fell dramat-
ically. By 2010, less than 40 percent of workers were still in agriculture, with
the workforce shifting to higher-productivity sectors.
    How much did the reallocation of workers across sectors contribute to
growth in overall labor productivity? Our methodology for measuring struc-
tural change follows McMillan and Rodrik (2011), and decomposes aggre-
gate changes in labor productivity into two components: (1) “within,” which
captures growth within sectors, and (2) “structural change,” which captures
growth resulting from labor reallocation across sectors that differ in their
labor productivity (see the Overview in this book for details on the methodol-
ogy).4 We use value-added and employment data from the Groningen Growth
and Development Centre (GGDC) Africa Sector Database (ASD). Value-
added is expressed in 2005 pula, and labor productivity is measured as real
output per worker in a sector.
    Our results show that aggregate labor productivity grew on average by
5.0 percent per year between 1970 and 2010, but with significantly higher
growth between 1970 and 1990 than between 1990 and 2010 (Figure 3.3).
Labor productivity grew at 10.8 percent annually between 1970 and 1980,
and then declined significantly in the subsequent three decades. Structural
change accounted for almost three-quarters of the labor productivity growth
in the 1970s, but by the 1990s, it started to become a drag on growth. In
effect, our analysis paints a clear picture of two distinct periods in Botswana’s

 4	 Algebraically, the decomposition is:
                                              N                      N
                                     Δ Pt =   ∑θ
                                              i–1
                                                    i,t−k Δ pi,t +   ∑p
                                                                     i–1
                                                                           i,tΔθi,t

	   where Δ Pt is the change in aggregate labor productivity between period t − k and t. The ﬁrst
    term is the “within” component, which is a weighted average of the change in labor productiv-
    ity in each of the N sectors, with the weight for sector i being the labor share of that sector in
    period t − k, measured by θi,t−k . The second term is the “structural change” component, which is
    a weighted average of the change in labor shares in the N sectors, with the weights captured by
    the labor productivity of the sector in period t.
                                    STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  131



FIGURE 3.2a  After independence, most workers were in low-productivity agriculture . . .


                                                          Botswana 1970
                                                                                                     con 1241%
                                                                                                min 1224%

                                                                                                      wrt 1164%
Sectoral productivity as %
 of average productivity




                                                                                                 ﬁre 666%


                                                                                                   pu 338%
                                                                                             man 313%
                                                                                               gs 233%
                                                                                           tsc 168%
                                           agr 24%                                     csps 42%
             100%

                                                     40                    60                    80                   100
                                                          Employment (%)


FIGURE 3.2b  . . . but today, most workers are in higher-productivity sectors


                                                          Botswana 2010
                                                                                                 min 1207%


                                                                                                         csps, 274%
Sectoral productivity as %
 of average productivity




                                                                                                      con, 273%

                                                                                               ﬁre, 220%
                                                                                          pu, 205%

                                                                            man, 116%
                                                                                          tsc, 179%
                                 agr, 7%          gs, 84%          wrt, 100%

            100%

                               20                    40                    60                   80                    100
                                                          Employment (%)

Source: Authors’ calculations with data from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre Africa Sector Database.
Note: agr = agriculture; con = construction; csps = community, social, personal services; fire = finance, insurance, real
estate, and business services; gs = government services; man = manufacturing; min = mining; pu = public utilities; tsc =
transport, storage, and communications; wrt = wholesale and retail trade.
132 Chapter 3



FIGURE 3.3  From a big role for structural change to a drag on growth


                      Percentage of labor productivity growth decomposition (by decade), 1970–2010

                 10                                                                            Within-sector
                                                                                               Structural
                                                                                               Total

                  5
       Percent




                  0



                 –5
                         1970–1980             1980–1990              1990–2000             2000–2010
                                                              Year

Source: Authors’ calculations with data from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre Africa Sector Database.
Note: Graph shows decomposition of average annual labor productivity growth (value-added in 2005 pula per worker) during
each decade.


growth since independence: 1970–1990 and 1990–2010. During the first
period, a significant portion of Botswana’s growth was driven by structural
change. During the latter period, structural change was growth reducing,
and all of the productivity growth was driven by within-sector productiv-
ity growth.
    At the sectoral level, productivity growth was quite uneven (Table 3.1).
Notably, agriculture contributed very little to within-sector productivity
growth over a period of more than 40 years as a result of very modest produc-
tivity gains. The low contribution of agriculture to value-added reflects, at
least in part, the fact that most of Botswana’s land is not conducive to agri­
cultural production. In addition, most of the agricultural activities outside
of cattle ranching are of a subsistence nature—and because crops are rain-
fed, these activities are subject to frequent disruption as a result of drought.
Another notable trend is the changing driver of within-sector change. In the
first decade, mining accounted for the majority of labor productivity growth
stemming from within-sector productivity improvements and growth in the
share of the workforce in mining, but in the following decades other sectors
also contributed significantly to overall labor productivity growth: construc-
tion and community, social, personal, and government services.
    Why do these two periods look so different? It is relatively easier to under-
stand the patterns in the first period. Botswana’s economy in 1966 was largely
agrarian in nature, and workers in agriculture were the least productive. The
                                   STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  133




TABLE 3.1  Mining initially drove sectoral productivity growth

                                                 Labor productivity compound annual growth rate (percentage)
                                                  1970 to       1970 to        1980 to       1990 to      2000 to
Sector                                             2010          1980           1990          2000         2010
Agriculture, hunting, forestry, and fishing          1.8            4.9           1.6          –3.1         3.8
Mining and quarrying                                 5.0            5.6          10.4           2.3         1.8
Manufacturing                                        2.4          13.6           –6.9           0.9         3.1
Public utilities (electricity, gas, and water)        3.7           1.3           2.3          10.1         1.4
Construction                                          1.1          –7.1          –5.5           1.3        17.5
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and
                                                    –1.3            5.4        –10.0           –0.5         0.6
restaurants
Transport, storage, and communications               5.2            7.7           4.4            6.1        2.6
Finance, insurance, real estate, and
                                                      2.1         10.4           -2.2           0.3         0.5
business services
Community, social, and personal services            10.0          –3.6           22.3            8.1       15.1
Government services                                  2.3          –0.4            6.7          –0.5         3.7
Economywide                                          5.0          10.8            5.7           1.1         2.7

                                                       Change in employment share (percentage points)
                                                  1970 to       1970 to        1980 to       1990 to      2000 to
 
                                                   2010          1980           1990          2000         2010
Agriculture, hunting, forestry, and fishing        –43.9         –22.8         –19.6          –1.9         0.3
Mining and quarrying                                 0.4            2.9         –0.7          –0.8        –1.0
Manufacturing                                        5.2            0.0          4.3            0.6        0.2
Public utilities (electricity, gas, and water)       0.4            0.6          0.4          –0.5        –0.1
Construction                                          1.1           3.5          6.8          –2.9        –6.4
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and
                                                    18.2            1.4          4.7            3.2        8.9
restaurants
Transport, storage, and communications               2.0           –0.1          1.2            0.2        0.8
Finance, insurance, real estate, and
                                                     5.8            0.4          2.0            1.1        2.3
business services
Community, social, and personal services            –1.5            6.7         –1.4          –4.5        –2.3
Government services                                 12.3            7.4          2.2            5.4       –2.6
Source: Authors’ calculations using the Groningen Growth and Development Centre Africa Sector Database.



gaps in productivity between agriculture and the rest of the activities in the
economy provided huge incentives for people to move out of agriculture. This
is exactly what happened from 1968 to 1974 and from 1975 to 1989 (Figures
3.4a and 3.4b). In each period, the share of the labor force in agriculture con-
tracted by about 20 percentage points, while it expanded in all other activi-
ties. This process was facilitated by heavy state involvement via direct hires
into public service and by programs targeted at increasing investments in
134 Chapter 3



FIGURE 3.4a  Starting with a highly agrarian society . . .


                       Correlation between sectoral productivity and change in employment shares (1968–1974)
                              2 β = 8.6797; t-stat = 1.91                                    wrt
                                                                                        ﬁre         con
           productivity/total productivity


                                                                                                                          min
                                                                                                              man
                                                 1
                                                                                                                            gs
                 Log of sectoral




                                                                                                               pu
                                                                                                       tsc
                                                 0
                                                                              Fitted values
                                                –1
                                                              agr
                                                                                                                          csps
                                                –2
                                                 –0.20          –0.15         –0.10           –0.05      0.00              0.05
                                                             Change in employment share (1968–1974) (∆Emp. Share)

FIGURE 3.4b  . . . Botswana becomes less so, then stabilizes at 40 percent for its agrarian
share . . .

                   Correlation between sectoral productivity and change in employment shares (1975–1989)
                                                 3     β = 8.1428; t-stat = 4.04                              min
              productivity/total productivity




                                                 2
                                                                                                              ﬁre
                    Log of sectoral




                                                 1                                                     man          wrt
                                                                                                      tsc                 gs
                                                 0
                                                                                                        pu
                                                                                                                               con
                                                –1
                                                                                   Fitted values             csps
                                                –2
                                                                agr
                                                     –0.3             –0.2            –0.1              0.0                     0.1
                                                              Change in employment share (1975–1989) (∆Emp. Share)

Source: Author’s calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009); McMillan and Rodrik (2011).
Note: β denotes coefficient of independent variable in regression equation: ln(p/P ) = α + βΔEmp. Share; agr = agriculture;
con = construction; csps = community, social, personal services; fire = finance, insurance, real estate, and business services;
gs = government services; man = manufacturing; min = mining and quarrying; pu = public utilities (electricity, gas, and
water); tsc = transport, storage, and communications; wrt = wholesale and retail trade.


education, health, and infrastructure. Programs were also put into place to
facilitate investment by the private sector in all kinds of activities.
    A second possible explanation for the observed patterns in the earlier
decades concerns the repatriation of men who had migrated to South Africa
to find wage labor. It has been well documented that the hut tax imposed by
                                                          STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  135




FIGURE 3.4c  . . . even though productivity is still relatively low


              Correlation between sectoral productivity and change in employment shares (1990–2010)
                                                  β = –4.5845;
                                              2   t-stat = –1.69       min
           productivity/total productivity



                                                                                        ﬁre
                                                              csps                tsc
                                                                         pu
                                                                                                Fitted values
                 Log of sectoral




                                                  con                                                              wrt
                                              0
                                                                               man      gs


                                             –2

                                                                         agr

                                             –4
                                              –0.10           –0.05            0.00           0.05          0.10
                                                         Change in employment share (1990–2010) (∆Emp. Share)

Source: Author’s calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009); McMillan and Rodrik (2011).
Note: β denotes coefficient of independent variable in regression equation: ln(p/P ) = α + βΔEmp. Share; agr = agriculture;
con = construction; csps = community, social, personal services; fire = finance, insurance, real estate, and business services;
gs = government services; man = manufacturing; min = mining and quarrying; pu = public utilities (electricity, gas, and
water); tsc = transport, storage, and communications; wrt = wholesale and retail trade.



the colonial regime on the largely rural Batswana encouraged young men to
migrate to South Africa where they could usually find work in the mines. Two
things happened to precipitate the return of these men. The economy started to
pick up in Botswana with the discovery of diamonds and the subsequent pub-
lic investment. Also, starting in the 1980s, the mines in South Africa started to
retrench, leaving some men with few choices but to return to Botswana. Having
already been employed as wage laborers, it is likely that a disproportionate share
of these men went to Gaborone to seek work rather than returning to the rural
areas. This type of migration would partly explain the large increase in the
employment shares in services and construction, which accounts for much of
the positive contribution of structural change to aggregate productivity growth.
    Another possible explanation may be demographic changes, which could
have accelerated the decline in the relative share of agricultural employment
by increasing the employment share of younger cohorts who entered the work-
force directly into high-productivity sectors (such as manufacturing), and by
ushering older cohorts out of the labor force directly from agriculture. Shifts
in the sectoral composition of the workforce owing to demographics are argu-
ably subject to smaller mobility costs than shifts across sectors among cohorts
in the workforce. This is likely to be part of the story in Botswana, because
it is so difficult to make a decent living in most of agriculture, although
136 Chapter 3




we lack sufficient data for this period to test the relative importance of
this explanation.
    It is more difficult to understand why the share of employment in agricul-
ture stopped contracting around 1990 and subsequently stabilized at around
40 percent (Figure 3.4c), given that relative labor productivity in agriculture
was significantly lower in 2010 than in 1970. Although McMillan and Rodrik
(2011) have identified overvalued exchange rates and labor market rigid-
ity as two possible determinants of structural change, we can dismiss these
in Botswana’s case. To begin with, Botswana has maintained a competitive
exchange rate since independence, as the degree of undervaluation (a positive
value) or overvaluation (a negative value) has been small (Figure 3.5a). In addi-
tion, its labor markets seem to be quite flexible when compared with other
countries at similar levels of income, as estimates of labor market rigidity in
Botswana are consistently below the trendline (Figure 3.5b).
    One explanation for why agricultural workers have not moved points to
the myriad social assistance programs offered by the Botswana government—
that is, productivity differences may not reflect effective differentials in
income and consumption. Another may be the lack of opportunities for low-
skilled workers in urban areas. Each of Botswana’s national development plans
has stressed economic diversification as an important goal. In its efforts to
diversify the economy, the government is pursuing various industrial incentive
schemes aimed at promoting the growth of other sectors, particularly manu-
facturing, tourism, and other service sectors (Table 3.2).
 •	   In 1976, the Local Procurement Program was initiated. Then in 1997, it
      was subsequently replaced as the Local Preference Scheme, which reserves
      35 percent of government purchases for local producers. The government
      has also introduced complementary programs designed to provide techni-
      cal assistance to small-scale entrepreneurs wishing to compete for govern-
      ment projects.
 •	   In 1982, the government initiated the Reserved Sectors Policy, which eco-
      nomically empowers citizens and reduces competition in the market. This
      policy has been flexible in that it allows for joint ventures between citizens
      and foreign investors in the manufacturing sector.
 •	   The Financial Assistance Policy, established in 1982, was Botswana’s larg-
      est incentive system aimed at promoting local production capacity by sub-
      sidizing the use of labor and capital. The policy was terminated in 2000
      because of high failure rates and widespread abuse, but in 2001, it was
                                                                                 STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  137



FIGURE 3.5a  Botswana’s currency has remained competitive . . .


                                                                           Avg. undervaluation of the exchange rate and GDP per capita
                                  1.0
                                                       RWA NGATJKMDA                   ECU                              SLV
                                                                 VNM           HTI                     GRD UKR                TON
                                                        VNM           KGZ                    ECU SLV        SLV            WSM                                                     MHL
                                                                              ARM                                    WSM
                                                                                                                     PER  GTM
                                            TKM                    NGA LAO                 TON                   SYC VUT BLZ
                                                                                                                            KAZ VUT PERUKR BGR
                                                                                                                                              GRD
                                                                                                                                                  JAM                                    HUN RUS
                                                                      HTI    KGZKOR CH2             GTM KIR JPN
                                                  MLI NPL
                                                         KHMLAO  LAO              VNM     ALB
                                                                                           GTM                MEX   ECUJAM   GTM
                                                                                                                              GTM
                                                                                                                             BLRPER          ROM            SYC
                                                                                                                                                             LCA
                                                                                                                                                               TON           POL        ESPBLR
                                                             COM CH2    LKA    BTNGEO IND                                                                               LTU                  LBN
                                  0.5                UGA NPL IND
                                                        RWA COM KIR
                                                       UGA
                                                       ERI
                                                                             PAK
                                                                           UZB
                                                                                 KIR
                                                                               PAK
                                                                                 CHN MNG
                                                                                MDA
                                                                                             BOL
                                                                                            IDN  BOL BTN SLV
                                                                                               HND                           ESP VUT
                                                                                                                        DOM ECU
                                                                                                                                        IRN
                                                                                                                                           TON
                                                                                                                                                JAM
                                                                                                                                                  WSM ITA
                                                                                                                                                       LVA
                                                                                                                                                               MHL
                                                                                                                                                                  JAM AUT JAM
                                                                                                                                                                 CRI                   GRD
                                                      ERI               PAK          TWN                     GEO         DJI ECUBLZ
                                                                                                                                CH2                                                    MEX
                                                        NPL          KHM
                                                                    HTI     LBR
                                                                            PRY                  PRT  BOL       KOR            CHN AZE
                                                                                                                                    CRI
                                                                                                                                  ATG            IRL
                                                                                                                                               MKD                           SUR      JPN
                                                                                               THA LKA            EGY     SLV     MEX
                                                                                                                                  PRT
                                                                                                                                    MNE  GTM                                       GRC IRN
                                                   ETH
                                                          KHMBGD ZMB
                                                         RWA                THA
                                                                            TUN    YEM
                                                                                   LKA
                                                                                 HND
                                                                                  HNDPRYHND
                                                                                MNG            BOL           IRQ ARM          GRC
                                                                                                                              TWN        DOM        GAB    THA ROMCRI     CUB SUR
                                                                                                                                                                              DOMKAZ BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                       POLSUR
                                                    VNM    AFG
                                                            UGA
                                                              GMB   COM IDN
                                                                   SDN
                                                                 PAK
                                                                           PHL
                                                                         KOR   PHL
                                                                                  PNG
                                                                                  MUS          ALB IDN
                                                                                       MUS BOLJOR  EGY  PRYVUT              SGP                         MKDBLZ MEX
                                                                                                                                                      BRA
                                                                                                                                                                           SUR EST BLZ PRT
                                                                                                                                                                     POL CRI                      CUBDNK
                                                BDI TZA
                                                      IDN
                                                     AFGRWA
                                                          GMB
                                                        LSO
                                                         MDG
                                                         THA   IND             ZMB  GUY               ZAF
                                                                                                        KIR
                                                                                                        PRY
                                                                                                         DOM
                                                                                                                                     THA TUR                                   IRL                 LCA
                                                          MDG
LnUnderval




                                                   SOM
                                                    GNB         THA
                                                              BEN
                                                             GHA                                   HND                                                          KOR                    JAM
                                                   MLI BGD
                                                     RWA
                                                     LSO
                                                     NPL
                                                     UGA
                                                    MLI
                                                         NER
                                                       TCD
                                                       MDG
                                                     TCD
                                                          BGDTGO
                                                            CH2
                                                           GNQ
                                                           TZA
                                                            SOM
                                                               TLS
                                                              BEN
                                                             CHN
                                                                   TGO 1970s
                                                                 CMR
                                                                LKA
                                                                IDN  UZB
                                                                     SDN  PRYNICJOR
                                                                                NIC    DOM
                                                                                      SWZ
                                                                                       PHL
                                                                                      AGO
                                                                                          MUS  SWZ
                                                                                                 HND
                                                                                                 TUN   COL
                                                                                                     DZA PRY
                                                                                                            NIC CRI
                                                                                                           JOR       ZAF KNA   HKG
                                                                                                                                      ECU
                                                                                                                                     BIH
                                                                                                                                             MLT
                                                                                                                                             SLV      CUB                   ROM       2000s
                                                                                                                                                                                       BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                      ATG
                                                                                                                                                                                                 TWN
                                                  LSO
                                                  AFGCH2
                                                   GNB
                                                    GHA
                                            TKM 1960s
                                                       BGD
                                                       ZAR
                                                          BFA
                                                        SLE
                                                           IND
                                                          BEN
                                                         MDG
                                                         MWI
                                                           MDG
                                                         BEN
                                                               BTN
                                                                BEN
                                                              TCD
                                                               KEN
                                                             CAF
                                                                    EGY
                                                                    MRT
                                                                   ZMB
                                                                  ZMB   NGA
                                                                        SLBSDN DJI
                                                                               BWA
                                                                         VCT AGO     DJI   FSM
                                                                                         TUN  BIH
                                                                                           FSM JOR  1980sDJI
                                                                                                           SYR
                                                                                                          MUS
                                                                                                         GUY
                                                                                                                  COLTTO
                                                                                                                     PER ALB COL            PER
                                                                                                                                             MNE      COL              TTO SRB             MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                            BWA
                                  0.0            ETH
                                                 GNBGNQ
                                                   MWI BEN
                                                      BFA
                                                     MWI
                                                       MLI
                                                       CH2
                                                       TGO
                                                         GIN
                                                        BGD
                                                          TGO
                                                          MLIKEN
                                                             TGO
                                                             SLE
                                                               KEN MRT
                                                                 SDN
                                                                      TWN
                                                                     LBR
                                                                    MDV GUY DOM  AGO KNA
                                                                               PHL
                                                                                 GUY COL                  BWA DZA JOR               ZAF
                                                                                                                                   TUN     1990s
                                                                                                                                           URY                   FIN                           HKG ARG
                                                     NPL
                                                    BFA
                                                   NER
                                                         AFG
                                                       SLE
                                                         GHA
                                                       BWA
                                                      BGD   ZMB
                                                            SLE COM PHL CMR    ZMB
                                                                              DMA                  CYP
                                                                                                  NIC
                                                                                                   SWZ TUR
                                                                                                  IRN                CYPDZA URY       DZAZAF                       TUR MYS VEN      HRV ISR
                                                  NERBFA
                                                   MWI
                                                    BFA
                                                          PAK
                                                         TCD
                                                        IND
                                                       PAKMRT
                                                          GMB
                                                         GMB
                                                             LSOLSO
                                                               EGY
                                                              KEN MRTSLB
                                                                    SEN CMR
                                                                       CMR      MAR  SYR
                                                                                   CMR           DMA        TUNMDV
                                                                                                            NAM  JOR           TUR              BWA CYP                         MUS         TUR
                                                 LBRMOZ
                                                    IND  TCD
                                                          LKACAF         SLB
                                                                        YEM
                                                                 MRT SWZ EGY  PNG    MDV       NIC
                                                                                               NAM   NAM                  MYS              MUS                   BRA
                                               LBR BFA
                                                 BDICAF
                                                     GHA
                                                     CAF SLECOM SLB              PNG VCT         SYR
                                                                                                MYS
                                                                                                  FSM        PAN         CHL DZA                        ZAF           ARG PAN OMN     URY
                                                  ETH
                                                 ETH      GMB
                                                        LKAEGY          NGA    FJI                                                   PAN           PANBRA
                                                     NER       SEN
                                                         CAFKEN
                                                                   SEN
                                                                  STP
                                                                 SENCPV  MYS           NIC MAR FSM FJICHL          CHL                                   IRN         CHL ARG
                                                                                                                                                                    PRI
                                                                                                                                                                                 VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                 KNA
                                                 ZARNER
                                                  SOM
                                                    KHM
                                                      GNQ
                                                    TZA       KEN
                                                               NGA CIV MAR           MAR
                                                                            SYR COL PANFJI     CPV
                                                                                                 F AGO
                                                                                                   JI
                                                                                                                 NAM
                                                                                                                 PRI
                                                                                                                   FJI        ROMZAF
                                                                                                                                                                     URY
                                                                                                                                                                   VEN
                                                 MOZ
                                                BDITZA   BTN   MAR MYS
                                                                  YEM                           BRA
                                                                                                  NAM VCT                            BRA
                                                                                                                                       ISR
                                                                                                                                     VCT                                          VEN
                                                ETH TZA
                                              ZAR      MDV PHL
                                                      SOM       CIV CIV
                                                               PNG     CIV PAN                TUR CHL                 DMA  URY               IRN VEN
                                                 MWI GIN
                                                GNB          ZAR
                                                             CPV  CPV CIV CPV                                          URY DMA
                                                                                                                                                                                         ISL
                                 –0.5            GNB
                                                 BDI
                                                   CHN COG   ZAR NGA PNG COG
                                                                                COG
                                                                                   COG
                                                                                               SYR
                                                                                              BOL          BGR                                 BGR
                                                                                                                                                      ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                  ARG
                                               MWI         GHA
                                                            ZAR                                                                                                IRQ
                                                   UGA               COGGNQ
                                                CHN UGASTP
                                               BDI               STP                     ALB
                                                CHN MAR
                                                        GHA STP
                                                 MOZ
                                                                                     MNG                                                                                               Botswana
                       –10.0
                                        0                            2,000             4,000                6,000               8,000                                                                           10,000
                                                                    PPP converted GDP per capita (chain series), at 2005 constant prices


FIGURE 3.5b  . . . and its labor markets have remained flexible


                                                                                 Rigidity of employment index and GDP per capita
                                 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                Botswana
                                               NER
                                                 BFA                                                                                                                                            Fitted values
                                                                  COG
                                                  BFA
                                  80          NER
                                                 SLE TCD COG
                                                 TGO
                                                 GNB                   AGO BOL      BOL                                PAN
                                                                                                                      BRA      BLR
                                                                                                                                      VEN VEN
                                                                                                                                                    MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PRT
                                              CAFSLE
                                                  RWA
                                                 TGO                       AGOBOL                                          VEN            VEN
  Rigidity of employment index




                                               MO
                                               CAF Z          CM
                                                             MR  TR              PRY                    UKR
                                                                                                      PER
                                                        TCD                                                            BRA                                   MEX
                                               NER
                                              NER
                                             BDI   TZA    MR
                                                          CIV TCOG
                                                                COG
                                                                  COG      MA  R IRQ AGO SLV                                                    PAN
                                                 SLETZA    STP MD    A A BOL
                                                                    MD
                                                  ML
                                                 GNB
                                                   TZA ITCD                                   AGO GTM                                  ARG PAN            HRV LTU                                         GNQ
                                               MO BFA
                                                  SLE
                                                 MD
                                                 MD ZGTZA
                                                      G
                                                     TZA   SEN
                                                             STP
                                                            STP KGZ                  R AGO
                                                                                   AGO                     UKR
                                             BDI
                                               CAF                      IND MA    R
                                                                                 MA AZE                                   PANPAN           CRI         LVARUS
                                  60           CAF
                                              NER
                                             BDI
                                                MO
                                                MDBFA
                                                  TZA
                                                  GIN
                                                 RWA
                                                  RWA
                                                  GIN
                                                 MD
                                                 TGO
                                                 TGO
                                                 MD
                                                    ZG
                                                     G
                                                      BEN
                                                       TCD
                                                     G CM
                                                          HTI
                                                         MR
                                                           SEN
                                                           STP
                                                             T
                                                             KHM
                                                            MR  T
                                                                PAK
                                                              UZB
                                                                  NIC
                                                                 COG PHL MA
                                                                              IDN
                                                                                  R
                                                                                  PRY
                                                                                 PRY
                                                                                IDN
                                                                                    PRY
                                                                                   PRY EGY
                                                                                      IRQ
                                                                                     PRY
                                                                                 IDN ARM
                                                                                          JOR
                                                                                                    TUN  ECU
                                                                                                               UKR
                                                                                                              COL
                                                                                                                 PER
                                                                                                                  THA
                                                                                                                    COLBRA VEN PAN
                                                                                                                                                  GAB
                                                                                                                                                 GAB                         LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                   SVK
                                                                                                                                                                              HRV HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                        LVA EST             EST EST
                                                             UZB  RVNM HND
                                                                 VNM
                                                                 SDN             GEO                  ECUDZA MK
                                                                                                         PER        UKRPER
                                                  ML
                                                 MO
                                                MOZ
                                                 TGO
                                                  BFAZIBENSEN
                                                          KHM
                                                         CIV LAO    MD
                                                                   MD  AA           CPVEGY
                                                                                  HND         EGY TUN
                                                                                            EGY        TUN           DMK D KAZ TUR       BLRTURTUR                    POL                   HUN                OM N
                                              MWI
                                              ETH SLE
                                                   ML  BEN
                                                     NPL
                                                     NPLI LAO  TJK
                                                                TJKIND
                                                                 NIC  VNM MA   R                          SLV
                                                                                                          DZA
                                                                                                        ECU
                                                                                                          ECU
                                                                                                            ECUCU
                                                                                                                COL
                                                                                                             EMK   ZAFZAF BGR   IRN           ARGGAB             MEX                                      EST
                                             BDI MO
                                                 MD  BGD
                                                   RWA
                                                     Z KHM
                                                     G          LAO
                                                              KHMPAK MN  G          GEO BIH
                                                                                  BTN            BI
                                                                                                  ARM
                                                                                                   H ALB DZA TUN PER
                                                                                                            TUN  D    DOMMK  D                      CHL
                                                                                                                                           IRNIRN TUR                                 HRVHRVH RV
                                                  GIN            NI C IND                                    PER
                                                                                                            DZA                                    ARG MEX LVA     MEX        LTU         LTU LTU                      PRT
                                                     TLS
                                                   COM
                                                  TLS
                                                 AFG  TCD
                                                     NPL  ZM
                                                        BEN
                                                        TCD
                                                        LSO
                                                        CIV  B
                                                            MR
                                                            MRCMT
                                                                T
                                                              KHM R
                                                                  DJI
                                                                 DJI
                                                                DJI
                                                               KHMPAK   PHL         BTN CHN DZA
                                                                                    SYR                   TUN
                                                                                                           DZAUKR BIH
                                                                                                                    BIH
                                                                                                                      UKR
                                                                                                                         MK DBRA SRB LBN BGR
                                              ETH   NPLNGA
                                                  GIN       NGA
                                                              CM  R               IDN
                                                                                 CPV
                                                                                  CPVIDN                                          DOM BGR                                        RUS
                                                                                                                                                                               LTU     RUS EST
                                                                                                                                                                                  RUSLVA
                                                  UGA
                                                   RWA  LSO SDN
                                                      NPL           PAK
                                                                  YEM
                                                                    PAK LKA        HNDNAM GEO BIH BIH THAZAF               ZAF
                                                                                                                            BRA         DOM TUR ARGARG LVA LTU
                                  40           ETH
                                             BDI  GINBEN              MD
                                                                     PHL AIND   BOL
                                                                                 BOL
                                                                                 LKA
                                                                               LKA     IDN
                                                                                       SYR    ALB GTM   GTM  SLV         ZAFDOM       IRN          IRN                                           HUN
                                                                                                                                              004
                                                AFG RWA
                                                   ML   CIV
                                                         ICIV
                                                            NGA  KGZ
                                                               KGZKGZ
                                                                    KGZMD PHL
                                                                          A            BTN
                                                                                        IRQ IRQ
                                                                                              AZE            AZE
                                                                                                           ALB  MK D MN  EEAZE
                                                                                                                        MN  URY
                                                                                                                              SRBSRB
                                                                                                                                  AZE              CRI                                             SVK         SVK
                                                      GHA              VNM
                                                                       MN
                                                                    LAO
                                                                     YEM
                                                                     YEM
                                                                      LAO G HND       SYR
                                                                                    SYR                                          MU SVEN TUR                       MEX         POL          POLPOL HUN
                                                   GHA    BGD
                                                          BGD
                                                        LSO       SDN
                                                                  SDN     PHL
                                                                         PHL                ARM                ZAF
                                                                                                               ALB
                                                                                                                ALB E               JAM BWA 2CRI             ARG                                       HUN OM
                                                                                                                                                                                                              CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                               SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                N SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OM N SVK
                                                                                                                                               006 URY
                                            ZWE
                                            ZWE ETH
                                                ETH
                                               ETH TLS
                                                     GHA
                                                     KEN
                                                     TLS
                                                     GHA
                                                    GHA        ZM
                                                               UZB
                                                              ZM BBUZB
                                                                 UZB   LAO
                                                                     UZB
                                                                     YEMMN  MN
                                                                            G
                                                                           MN MNHND
                                                                                GGG SYR    JOR
                                                                                          NAM              GTM
                                                                                                           VUT MN                                                        POL           POL
                                                                                                                                             DOM         CRI
                                                                                                                                                        CRI
                                             LBR BGD
                                             BDI
                                                      KEN
                                                        KEN
                                                              TJK            IND
                                                                           INDHND SYR JOR          CHNCHN
                                                                                                 ALB ARM
                                                                                                      ARM
                                                                                                        ARM
                                                                                                       VUT
                                                                                                            GTM
                                                                                                             GTM         SRB
                                                                                                                                    URY
                                                                                                                                    MU  USRY 2URY
                                                                                                                                            BWA
                                                                                                                                       BGR DOM LBN
                                                                                                                                                       URY
                                                                                                                                                     BGRBGR
                                                                                                                                                        CRI
                                                                                                                                                                        RUS                     HUN HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CZE
                                                     AFG
                                            ZWEERI LSO    ZM
                                                           GMB
                                                         GMB  B PNG
                                                                  NIC VNM LKA          LKA
                                                                                      LKA  JOR NAM
                                                                                                EGY
                                                                                                 EGY                     CHN
                                                                                                                         COL
                                                                                                                        COL         KAZ        BLR      BLR     RUS
                                                                                                                                                                BLRBLR
                                            ZWEMWIKEN
                                                   AFGBGD
                                                        BGD
                                                          LSO
                                                          HTI
                                                           GMBZM  B VNM
                                                                 NIC                    GUY                     SLV SRB
                                                                                                               CHNCHN
                                                                                                               VUT
                                                                                                              SLV
                                                                                                              VUT
                                                                                                               SLV      COL
                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                        MU0S
                                                                                                                                          MU0S5KAZMYS LBNCHLCHL
                                                                                                                                                LBN
                                                                                                                                                  SUR
                                                                                                                                                SUR  KAZ 08
                                                                                                                                                   SUR
                                                                                                                                                               LBNCHL
                                                                                                                                                             CHL
                                                                                                                                                            KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                     LBN
                                  20          MWI
                                                ERI
                                               ERIBFA KEN  HTI
                                                            SLB
                                                         LSO
                                                          HTI   NGA
                                                                  PNG                  GUYGUY
                                                                                            FJI
                                                                                             FJI NAM
                                                                                               NAM                           0 0 9 BWA  BWA BWA       2
                                                                                                                                                     BWA0KAZ  GRD GRD
                                                                                                                           2                    7       CHL
                                                                                                                                           200
                                                      KEN   SLB SLB
                                                                  PNG           SWZKIRKIR
                                                                                  KIR    KIR
                                                                                          FJI         DM
                                                                                                       DM AA DM  VCT   THA
                                                                                                                   A VCT  THA
                                                                                                                          THA
                                                                                                                           THA                                     KNA      KNA
                                                    UGA                         SWZ FJI                                VCT TON  BLZ BLZ                            LCA KNA                                            SAU
                                                           ZM BSLB   PNGPNG FSM                                  WSM
                                                                                                                WSM
                                                                                                                WSMWSM MH L            JAM
                                                                                                                                       BLZ
                                                                                                                                     JAM                MYSMYS
                                                                                                                                                         MYS MYS                      ATGSVK          ATG
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ATG
                                                    UGA NGA
                                                   UGA           NGA           FSM BTN     MDBGEOGEO
                                                                                              TN
                                                                                              V GEO                       TON
                                                                                                                        TONTON                                        LCA
                                                                                                                                                                      LCA
                                                     UGA                                                                           JAM JAM
                                                                                                                                      JAM  AZE      MYS                          PLW PLW
                                                                                                                                                                                     PLW
                                   0                                                        MDMD
                                                                                              MDVVV                 MH MH
                                                                                                                      MHLLL                                                         PLW

                                        0                                5,000                  10,000                    15,000                                                                              20,000
                                                                   PPP converted GDP per capita (chain series), at 2005 constant prices

Source: Authors’ calculations using data from World Bank’s Doing Business reports (various years) and Penn World Tables
version 7 (Heston, Summers, and Aten 2012).
Note: Figure 3.5a: A negative value for ln (underval) represents an overvalued exchange rate. Figure 3.5b: A higher index
number of labor market rigidity corresponds to higher rigidity. Fitted values correspond to fixed-effects regression of rigidity
of employment index against real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita in purchasing power parity (PPP).
138 Chapter 3




TABLE 3.2  Summary of major incentive schemes

Incentive scheme                               Objective                                      Status
Local Procurement               To give local producers preference in       Revised and superseded by the Local
Program (1976); Local           the supply of goods for government          Preference Scheme in 1997.
Preference Scheme (1997)        contracts.
Reserved Sectors Policy         To promote the participation of             Policy continues with some flexibility
(1982)                          Botswana and Botswana-owned                 having been introduced, especially
                                firms in economic activity by limiting      now that joint ventures are allowed.
                                certain activities to them only.
Financial Assistance Policy     To provide capital and labor grants         Terminated in 2000 following a review
(1982)                          based on labor employed as well as          report by BIDPA in 1999, which found
                                location.                                   a high failure rate as well as large-
                                                                            scale abuse, waste, and high costs per
                                                                            job created.
Selebi-Phikwe Regional          To stimulate economic development           Phased out in 1996.
Development Project             in the area around the copper mining
(1988)                          town.
Citizen Entrepreneurial         To support the development of               Replaced the Financial Assistance
Development Agency              citizen-owned business through              Policy in 2001.
(2001)                          funding, training, and mentoring.
Local Enterprise Authority      To be an implementing agency for            This ongoing reform process involves
(2004)                          the SMME Policy intended to improve         the separation of policy formulation
                                service delivery programs.                  and implementation functions of the
                                                                            SMME Ministry.
Source: Modified from BIDPA and World Bank (2006).
Note: BIDPA = Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis; SMME = small, micro, and medium-sized enterprises.



      replaced with the Citizen Entrepreneurial Development Agency, which
      supports developing locally owned businesses through funding, training,
      and mentoring.
 •	   The Local Enterprise Authority was founded in 2004 as a one-stop shop
      for small and medium-sized enterprises. It runs business skills training and
      management support services for these enterprises (Zizhou 2009).
   Besides these incentive schemes, the government is currently pursu-
ing a range of investor-friendly policies, including the establishment of an
International Financial Services Centre. Also high on the policy agenda are
efforts to reduce unemployment and to mitigate the effects of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic on productivity.
   Another partial explanation has to do with measurement error. The
GGDC ASD tells us that the share of workers in agriculture stopped falling.
But when we verify this trend with individual-level data from the 1995/1996
and 2005/2006 Central Statistics Office Labour Force Surveys (LFSs), we
find that the share of employment in agriculture is likely overestimated in the
                          STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  139




GGDC—in fact, it has more likely continued to fall during the 1990s and
2000s, although much more slowly than in the 1970s and 1980s (Box 3.1).
This slowdown may in part reflect the fact that less educated and older work-
ers are more likely to work in agriculture, and they may find it more difficult
to move into other sectors. Major policy changes took place in the 1990s and
2000s, including significant trade reforms, which have influenced the relative
demand for workers in various sectors—an issue that we turn to next.



   Box 3.1  Is   it possible that the share of agricultural workers has continued
   to fall?
   One difficult-to-explain development in Botswana’s structural change story
   is that after two decades of the share of agriculture contracting dramatically,
   it stabilized around 1990 at 40 percent and has remained there ever since.
   Many explanations are often offered, but what about the possibility that the
   widely used measure is simply wrong?
      To check this, we begin by comparing employment estimates from the
   2005/2006 LFS with those in the GGDC ASD. Seasonality in agriculture is
   a big concern when trying to properly measure employment in Botswana.
   Usual employment (main activity during the past 12 months) in agriculture
   is much higher than current employment (last 7 days) (Table B3.1). The esti-
   mate of agricultural employment in the GGDC ASD is based on the worker’s
   usual activity, whereas employment estimates for all other sectors are based
   on the worker’s current activity. The difference between current and usual
   employment is greatest in agriculture, but using current employment also
   leads to an underestimation of employment in other sectors, and conse-
   quently leads to an overestimation of the employment share of agriculture.
       Therefore, if we use usual (rather than current) employment, we esti-
   mate that for 2005/2006, agricultural employment is 34.3 percent, not 39.3
   as estimated in the GGDC ASD. However, because of a lack of data, we
   cannot estimate the usual industry of employment from data sources other
   than the 2005/2006 LFS. Thus, we are unable to check the sensitivity of the
   estimates of the share of workers in agriculture to differing definitions of
   work (like usual versus current) for other years. Thus, the approach taken
   in the GGDC ASD likely leads to an overestimation of the share of agricul-
   tural employment.
      In sum, it is possible that the share of employment in agriculture has
   actually continued to decrease slightly from the 1990s to the 2000s.

                                                                       (continued)
140 Chapter 3




   Table B3.1  Possible case of measurement error

                                     Comparison of employment estimates
   Sector                     Africa Sector Database         LFS (current activity)        LFS (main activity)
   Agriculture                          236,107                     161,712                      236,270
   Mining                                14,173                       14,289                       14,854
   Manufacturing                         35,973                       35,973                       43,415
   Utilities                              4,163                        4,163                        5,055
   Construction                          27,587                       27,587                       38,312
   Trade services                        92,068                       92,177                     118,243
   Transport services                    16,050                       16,094                      19,109
   Business services                     33,679                       33,724                       38,184
   Government services                 117,404                      117,498                      127,847
   Personal services                     24,291                       36,684                      47,829
   Total                               601,495                      539,901                      689,118
   Source: The Africa Sector Database (ASD) employment estimates are for 2006 from the Groningen Growth and
   Development Centre (GGDC) ASD (de Vries, Timmer, and de Vries 2013). The Labour Force Survey (LFS) estimates
   are the authors’ own calculations using the Botswana Central Statistics Office 2005/2006 LFS. The Groningen
   Growth and Development Centre Africa Sector Database agricultural employment estimates are in part based on
   previous work by some of the authors (McCaig and McMillan 2014).
   Note: Current activity refers to employment during the past 7 days, and main activity refers to employment during
   the past 12 months.




A Growing Workforce and Informality
What was happening to the composition of the labor force as these changes
in labor productivity took place? Using LFS data covering the period
1995/1996–2005/2006, we examine other margins of adjustment not covered
in the GGDC ASD employment estimates: labor force participation, unem-
ployment, and informality. The following patterns stand out.
    More individuals are in the labor force. We begin by examining the
reported activity of working-age individuals—those between the ages of 15
and 60 (Table 3.3). We find that the number of working-age individuals
increased by 24.2 percent, in line with population growth. But surprisingly,
the number of people in the labor force increased much faster, by 43.4 percent.
As a result, the labor force participation rate increased from 55.9 percent to
64.5 percent—that is, by 8.6 percentage points (or 15 percent). If we extend
the conventional definition of the labor force to include workers who are cur-
rently available to work, but not actively searching for a job, then the labor
force participation rate increased from 66.8 percent to 78.4 percent. This
figure does not include those who are sick, which is of interest, given that
                                    STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  141




TABLE 3.3  Higher labor force participation

                                                                                       Percentage of
                                               Number of individuals    Percentage working-age individuals
Activity                                      1995/1996       2005/2006   change   1995/1996 2005/2006
Total working-age individuals                   743,403        923,055           24.2          100.0           100.0
In labor force:                                 415,251        595,402           43.4            55.9            64.5
 Working                                        323,034        483,818           49.8            43.5            52.4
 Actively seeking work                           92,217        111,584           21.0            12.4            12.1
Not in labor force:                             328,152        327,653           –0.2            44.1            35.5
 Not available to work                          247,073        199,610          –19.2            33.2            21.6
  Attending school                              109,821        109,904             0.1           14.8            11.9
   Engaged in household duties                  101,658          38,915         –61.7            13.7             4.2
   Too old                                           876          1,798         105.3              0.1            0.2
  Sick                                           22,570          31,523           39.7            3.0             3.4
  Disabled                                         5,826           4,101        –29.6             0.8             0.4
  Other                                            6,322         13,368         111.4             0.9             1.4
 Available to work, but did not look            81,079        128,043           57.9            10.9            13.9
  for work during past 30 days
   Thought no work available                     41,409          61,101          47.6             5.6             6.6
  Awaiting reply for earlier inquiries             6,089          9,037          48.4             0.8             1.0
  Waiting to start arranged job in                2,598          3,142          21.0             0.3             0.3
   business or agriculture
   Occupied with household duties                25,989          37,331          43.6             3.5             4.0
  Other                                            4,994         17,432         249.1              0.7            1.9
Source: Authors’ calculations using 1995/1996 and 2005/2006 Labour Force Survey data.
Note: The sample is restricted to individuals age 15 to 60. The numbers reported are population estimates using sample
weights. The estimates are based on the individual’s activity during the past 7 days.



HIV prevalence is extremely high in Botswana, at an estimated 17 percent
(Levinsohn and McCrary 2010). That said, the share of the population report-
ing as not being in the labor force because of illness increased only marginally,
from 3 percent in 1995/1996 to 3.4 percent in 2005/2006. This is possibly a
testament to the government’s aggressive campaign to treat individuals who
are HIV positive.
     Unemployment remains high, especially for youths. Outside of agriculture,
unemployment remained high and relatively unchanged—20.2 and 21.2 percent
in 1995/1996 and 2005/2006, respectively (22.2 and 18.7 percent, respectively,
if individuals in agriculture are included). Unemployment is a major concern
for young workers (ages 15–19 and 20–24), who are significantly more likely to
be unemployed than older workers (Table 3.4a). Individuals in the 20–24 age
group participate in the labor force at the same rate as older workers, but the
142 Chapter 3




TABLE 3.4a  High unemployment, particularly for youth …

                                             Unemployment rate (%)                   Labor force participation rate (%)
Excluding agriculture                     1995/1996             2005/2006              1995/1996             2005/2006
All                                           20.2                  21.2                   54.3                  60.2
Males                                         18.1                  19.3                   60.9                  66.8
Females                                       22.2                  22.9                   48.9                  55.4
15–19 years old                               37.1                  39.7                   12.7                  14.6
20–24 years old                               35.9                  38.7                   55.6                  61.4
Urban                                         20.7                  20.1                   64.3                  64.9
Rural                                         19.3                  24.0                   42.3                  50.7
No formal education                           21.4                  20.0                   51.2                  51.9
Primary education                             20.6                  21.9                   60.3                  61.8
Secondary education                           19.4                  21.2                   51.0                  61.0
Source: Authors’ calculations using 1995/1996 and 2005/2006 Labour Force Survey (LFSs).
Note: The sample is restricted to individuals age 15 to 60 and excludes individuals currently working or unemployed and
previously working in agriculture. The numbers reported are population estimates using sample weights. The estimates are
based on the individual’s activity during the past 7 days. Unemployed includes people who were available to work (but did
not work) in the past 7 days, which includes workers who did not actively seek work. The labor force is defined as individuals
who worked during the past 7 days, sought work, or were temporarily absent. The labor force participation rate differs from
Table 3.3 because of the exclusion of agriculture.



TABLE 3.4b  … and rising informality

                                                                   Percentage of informal workers
                                                                                                              Percentage
Industry description (excluding agriculture)                         1995/1996            2005/2006          point change
Public administration                                                       0.1                 0.7                0.5
Foreign missions and international organizations                            0.0                0.0                 0.0
Mining and quarrying                                                        0.0                0.0                 0.0
Manufacturing                                                              27.0               31.3                 4.3
Electricity, gas, and water supply                                          0.0                0.0                 0.0
Construction                                                               17.5               26.5                 9.1
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, restaurants, etc.                      32.4               41.6                 9.3
Transport, storage, and communications                                     27.0               36.0                 9.0
Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services                      3.7                6.9                 3.2
Community, social, household, and personal services                        12.7                 9.2               –3.6
Total                                                                      13.2               17.9                 4.8
Source: Authors’ calculations using 1995/1996 and 2005/2006 Labour Force Survey (LFSs).
Note: The sample is restricted to workers age 15 to 60 outside of agriculture, forestry, hunting, and fishing. Informal workers
are all those workers in the private sector employed at firms with fewer than 10 employees and defined as informal in the
survey by question 30 in the 1995/1996 LFS and question 39 in the 2005/2006 LFS. The numbers reported are population
estimates based on using sampling weights. The estimates are based on the individual’s activity during the past 7 days.
                              STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  143




unemployment rate is almost double the national average, at 38.7 percent in
2005/2006. Although labor force participation is much lower for individuals
age 15–19, reflecting school attendance, 39.7 percent of them are unemployed.5
     Males are the best off. We find that males are less likely to be unem-
ployed and are more likely to be in the labor force than females in either year,
although both genders achieved significantly higher labor force participation
rates between 1995/1996 and 2005/2006 (Table 3.4a). As for schooling, there
is not much difference in either unemployment or labor force participation
rates across individuals with primary or secondary education by 2005/2006,
as the gap in labor force participation in 1995/1996 between individuals with
primary and secondary education closed. However, having some education,
compared with no formal education, is an important determinant of labor
force participation.
     Informality rose. As the workforce expanded and unemployment fell, the
prevalence of informal employment outside of agriculture rose by a significant
4.8 percentage points (or 36 percent) (Table 3.4b).6 Notably, the incidence of
informality in manufacturing increased by 4.3 percentage points, which is
slightly below the overall increase, but may be partly related to the SACU tar-
iff cuts. Many sectors experienced an increase in the share of informal workers.
In fact, the only sector to experience a decrease was community, social, house-
hold, and personal services.
     Major sectoral shifts. We also see some important changes in the distri­
bution of nonagricultural workers across sectors (Table 3.5).7 The share of

 5	 Unfortunately, because of seasonal employment in agriculture, it is difficult to consistently esti-
    mate unemployment for all working-age individuals using the LFS data. The LFSs were not con-
    ducted during similar months in rural areas, leading to concerns about whether agricultural
    workers were more likely to be surveyed during working periods in one survey relative to the
    other. Thus, to obtain consistent estimates of unemployment, we focus on individuals outside
    of agriculture (Table 3.5). This means excluding individuals currently working in agriculture, as
    well as individuals currently unemployed but who most recently worked in agriculture.
 6	 The Labour Force Surveys define informality according to a series of questions related to the
    ownership sector (such as government, parastatal, nongovernmental organization (NGO), or
    private); the number of workers in the business; the location of the business; whether the busi-
    ness is registered; and whether the business keeps a complete set of accounts. The enumerator
    evaluated whether the worker was formal or informal based on these questions. The ques-
    tions about location, business registration, and accounts were asked only for workers in busi-
    nesses with 10 or fewer workers in the private sector. Thus, we do not have a direct indicator
    of formality for workers in larger workplaces in the private sector or workers in other sectors.
    Consequently, for all workers who were not asked the detailed questions related to formality, we
    classify them as formally employed if they worked either in large private firms or in sectors more
    likely to be formal (such as government, parastatal, or NGOs).
 7	 We restrict the analysis to nonagricultural workers because of difficulties in accurately measur-
    ing agricultural employment across the two LFSs.
144 Chapter 3




TABLE 3.5  A major move out of construction and public administration

                                                                Number of workers               Percentage of workers
Industry sector                                              1995/1996       2005/2006        1995/1996        2005/2006
Public administration                                           99,526         114,850             35.6            31.6
Foreign missions and international organizations                    224              895            0.1              0.2
Mining and quarrying                                            15,028           14,289             5.4              3.9
Manufacturing                                                   27,899           34,077            10.0              9.4
Electricity, gas, and water supply                                2,794           4,132             1.0              1.1
Construction                                                    38,759           26,474            13.9              7.3
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, restaurants, etc.           51,973           85,416            18.6            23.5
Transport, storage, and communications                            7,644          15,904             2.7              4.4
Finance, insurance, real estate, and business
                                                                11,379           32,606             4.1              9.0
services
Community, social, household, and personal
                                                                24,572           34,486             8.8              9.5
services
Total                                                         279,798          363,128           100.0            100.0
Source: Authors’ calculations using 1995/1996 and 2005/2006 Labour Force Survey data.
Note: The sample is restricted to workers age 15 to 60 outside of agriculture, forestry, hunting, and fishing. The numbers
reported are population estimates using sample weights.


workers in manufacturing fell, but only by a 0.6 percentage point, and the
share of workers in mining fell by 1.5 percentage points (or 27 percent).
Elsewhere, the share of workers in public administration and construction fell
appreciably, while the number of workers rose in both (1) wholesale and retail
trade, hotels, restaurants, etc.; and (2) finance, insurance, real estate, and busi-
ness services. The remaining sectors experienced only marginal changes in
their shares of the nonagricultural workforce.8


How Trade Reform Influenced Structural Change
Why has it been so difficult to expand the production of traded goods in
Botswana? Many studies note that the country is landlocked with a small
domestic market, reflecting a population of less than 2 million. But Botswana
also has distinct trade advantages. Since 1910, it has enjoyed duty-free access
to markets in South Africa as a member of SACU, which also enables it to
share the revenues generated by tariffs on imported goods coming from out-
side of SACU. The problem is that member countries have typically not been
involved in setting tariffs—a task undertaken by South Africa.

 8	 These changes are broadly consistent with those in the GGDC ASD.
                       STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  145




    In Botswana, SACU matters are handled by the Ministry of Finance
and Development Planning (MFDP), rather than the Ministry of Trade and
Industry. The logic of this arrangement is that for Botswana, the key respon-
sibility associated with the tariffs has been managing resources received
through the revenue-sharing agreement. Historically, the government has paid
limited attention to trade negotiations, both because of the SACU arrange-
ment and because of the country’s historical concentration of trade in two
commodities: diamonds and beef. Diamonds were covered by agreements with
De Beers (and were not subject to tariffs in end markets), while beef exports
enjoyed preferential access to Europe.
    Prior to the end of apartheid in 1994, South Africa pursued a vigorous
policy of import substitution (Edwards 2005), resulting in a wide range
of prohibitive tariffs on imports. But in 1994, the process of trade liberal-
ization gained momentum as a result of South Africa’s commitment to the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Uruguay Round. Export subsidies,
which were incompatible with the WTO, were phased out and finally termi-
nated in 1997. Additionally, between 1994 and 2006, import tariffs on all
traded goods fell significantly. Because levels of initial tariffs varied widely
across products and because the goal was to ultimately harmonize tariffs,
the percentage point decline in tariffs varied widely across products, with
some falling by more than 300 percent. In addition to multilateral liberal-
ization, the government has engaged in a number of bilateral and regional
trade agreements, culminating in South Africa’s implementation of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) Free Trade Protocol
and the implementation of the European Union–South Africa Trade,
Development and Cooperation Agreement (TDCA) in 2000. More recently,
Botswana was granted preferential access to markets in the European Union.
    For Botswana, the period of import substitution would have meant that
prices of imported intermediates were artificially high, making it more diffi-
cult for firms in Botswana to be profitable. At the same time, the protection
afforded to Botswana may have allowed some firms to flourish that would
have been unprofitable otherwise. Thus, South Africa’s trade liberalization
in the 1990s may have influenced the allocation of workers across sectors and
consequently played a role in structural change, reducing labor productivity
growth in the 1990s and 2000s—a possibility that we explore to get a sense
of not only past developments but also the hurdles Botswana may face in its
efforts to diversify its economy. To do this, we examine the changes in trade
flows and employment between 1995/1996 and 2005/2006—years for which
detailed labor force surveys exist and the period that coincides with South
146 Chapter 3




Africa’s trade liberalization and Botswana’s experience of growth-reducing
structural change.
   From a theoretical standpoint, the tariff reductions are expected to have
the following effects:
 •	   Lower the cost of imports directly. This arises because imports from par-
      ties outside of SACU are now taxed at a lower rate.
 •	   Lower the cost of imports indirectly. This arises because most of
      Botswana’s imports come from or through South Africa. The imports
      from third parties will be cheaper so long as some of the tariff reduction
      is passed on to consumers, while the imports of products made in South
      Africa that rely on imported intermediate inputs may also be cheaper if
      some of the lower production costs are passed on to consumers.
 •	   Shrink the size of Botswana’s importables sector. This arises because of the
      increase in imports.
 •	   Expand the size of the nontrading and exporting sectors. General
      equilibrium effects predict the reallocation of resources away from
      import-competing sectors and firms to other uses. Additionally, lower
      costs for imported intermediated goods may lead to further expansion of
      these sectors.
 •	   Possibly erode Botswana’s market share in South Africa, which may reduce
      the number or value of products that Botswana exports to South Africa.
      This may arise because South Africa has been, and still is, the primary des-
      tination for some of Botswana’s nonmineral exports.
   The net effect of these competing forces will determine the impact of
trade liberalization on sectoral shifts in employment and labor productivity
in Botswana.

Changes in Trade Flows and Tariffs
Beginning with trade flows, between 1994 and 2009, import tariffs on all
traded goods fell significantly. Because levels of initial tariffs varied widely
across products and because the goal was ultimately to harmonize tariffs, the
percentage point decline in tariffs varied widely across products, with some
falling by more than 60 percent. In addition to multilateral liberalization, the
government engaged in a number of bilateral and regional trade agreements,
culminating in South Africa’s implementation of the SADC Free Trade
Protocol and the European Union–South Africa TDCA in 2000.
                                               STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  147




    How much did tariffs fall, and what was the impact on Botswana’s trade?
If we take the period between 1988 and 2009, we see that tariffs fell by
16.3 percentage points in manufacturing, 10.3 percentage points in mining, and
4.6 percentage points in agriculture (Figure 3.6a). However, the large reductions
in tariffs are not associated with an obvious response in imports and exports
(Figure 3.6b). Imports as a percentage of GDP fluctuated around 45 percent,
while exports as a percentage of GDP fluctuated around 50 percent. At the
product level, there was strong growth in some import sectors that are likely to
include inputs for businesses in manufacturing (such as machinery and electrical
equipment) (Table 3A.1).
FIGURE 3.6a  Tariffs fell sharply, especially in manufacturing . . .


                                    Average tariffs in agriculture, mining, and manufacturing, 1988–2009
                         30

                         25

                         20                                    Manufacturing
               Percent




                         15

                         10
                                                           Mining
                           5
                                 Agriculture
                          0
                          1988                 1993                 1998                  2003                      2008

FIGURE 3.6b  . . . but import and export volumes held steady


                                           Exports and imports as a percentage of GDP, 1970–2010
                      80
                                    Imports
                      70
                      60
  Percentage of GDP




                      50
                      40
                                 Exports
                      30
                      20
                      10
                         0
                         1970    1975        1980       1985        1990       1995         2000          2005          2010

Source: Edwards (2005); World Bank (various years).
Note: The average tariff within each sector is a simple average of industry-level tariffs, where the industry-level tariffs are a
weighted average of four-digit Harmonized System tariffs using 2000 imports as weights. GDP = gross domestic product.
148 Chapter 3




    Compared with exports, Botswana’s import profile is much less concen-
trated. Oil and motor vehicles, including their parts, were a significant share
of imports in both 1991 and 2005 (Table 3A.2). The one notable change is
that medicine became the fourth most important import in 2005, but was
not among the top 10 in 1991.9 On the export side, there has been some lim-
ited diversification, with diamonds falling from 79.5 percent to 76.6 percent
of total exports from 1991 to 2005; however, mining-based exports still
account for more than 85 percent of total exports. Products that gained in sig-
nificance include copper and apparel, while meat and meat products’ share of
exports declined.
    Furthermore, despite the tariff cuts on products originating outside of
SACU, imports from South Africa still constitute more than 80 percent of
total imports, suggesting that, at an aggregate level, the SACU tariff cuts did
not lead to a significant change in Botswana’s trading partners. Indeed, as
Table 3A.3 shows, the share of imports from South Africa even rose slightly
between 1991 and 2005. Export destinations have not changed significantly,
except for the shift from Switzerland to the United Kingdom, which is driven
by changes in the diamond trade.
    Thus, the SACU tariff liberalization seems to have had limited impacts on
Botswana’s economy. This is consistent with McCaig and McMillan (2014),
who find the relative size of manufacturing industries did not change signifi-
cantly in relation to industry tariff cuts. The effects on agriculture are also
likely to be small, as Botswana continues to import a large fraction of its food
(MFDP 2002, 2009), primarily from South Africa and other SACU members
to which it already had duty-free access. In 2011, 93.6 percent of food, bev-
erage, and tobacco imports came from South Africa and 96.2 came from all
SACU members, respectively (Statistics Botswana 2014). This pattern is rela-
tively unchanged from 2004, when 95.4 percent came from South Africa and
96.4 percent came from all SACU members (CSO 2009).


Looking to the Future
South Africa’s trade liberalization had a modest impact on employment in
Botswana and very little impact on diversification. Employment shares in
industries that were exposed to tariff reductions—agriculture, manufacturing,
and mining—fell slightly. In addition, both unemployment (broadly defined)

 9	 This reflects the impact of HIV/AIDS and the import of antiretroviral medicines for the
   national treatment program.
                       STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  149




and informality increased, although the magnitude of these effects is not
large. Somewhat ironically, Botswana’s lack of diversification appears to have
shielded its workforce from larger adjustment costs.
    Perhaps this outcome is not surprising. Botswana started with a tiny man-
ufacturing sector, so the main impact of the tariff reductions was an increase
in the volume of trade. The composition of tradables was largely unchanged
by the tariff reductions. Imports remained highly diversified and consumer
oriented, while exports continued to be dominated by natural resources. The
increase in the volume of imports likely provided petty traders with greater
opportunities for informal trade. Even though these informal jobs are not
secure, they still provide a much better living than most jobs in the agricul-
ture sector.
    But for a country that has been hailed as an African success story, the
results are dissappointing and demand further explanation, with a large share
of workers still in low-productivity agriculture, high rates of unemployment,
and discouraged workers. Time is of the essence. Botswana’s diamond reve-
nues are currently predicted to decline sharply from the mid-2020s onward.
Even if this were not the case, the current structure of the diamond indus-
try is such that it does not and cannot provide enough jobs to make a dent in
Botswana’s levels of poverty and income inequality. This is not a secret. The
government has launched campaign after campaign targeted at diversification.
The puzzle is: why have these campaigns not been more successful? After all,
Botswana has an impressive track record marked by good governance and pru-
dent macroeconomic and fiscal policy.
    We do not pretend to have the answer to this puzzle, but only note that
understanding why things have stayed the same for so long is key to unlocking
Botswana’s future potential. One hypothesis is that a strong industrial sector
stands to threaten the political and economic power of the longstanding rul-
ing party, the Botswana Democratic Party (BDP) (Robinson 2013). The lack
of diversification has allowed the elites in Botswana to maintain their grip
on the country for 50 years. Although unemployment and inequality would
also threaten the BDP, so far, the government has been able to manage these
threats through myriad social assistance programs.
    An alternative hypothesis points to Botswana’s current structure of pro-
duction, which is highly specialized in a handful of peripheral activities based
on natural resource exports, thereby making (export) diversification a major
challenge (Hausmann and Klinger 2010). Moreover, although Botswana had
been developing its garment sector, these activities are disappearing with the
erosion of trade preferences.
150 Chapter 3




    A complementary explanation is Botswana’s structural problem of a high-
cost base—such as high transport costs—which poses challenges in achieving
competitiveness in the production of exportables. Diversification policies have
failed to address the high costs of production to sufficiently raise productivity.
High levels of public spending on education and training have not succeeded
in alleviating shortages of skills or in producing secondary school graduates
and tertiary education graduates with the attributes needed by the private sec-
tor. Combined with a very large public sector and a restrictive immigration
policy, this combination has led to high costs for the available skilled labor.
Furthermore, public-sector investments in infrastructure have not been well
targeted at addressing economic constraints. For instance, extensive spending
on rural roads and infrastructure has yielded limited economic benefits, while
businesses remain constrained by electricity shortages and inadequate Internet
connectivity and bandwidth. This prioritization in infrastructure spending
may have political roots. The BDP gains its strongest support in rural areas;
hence, rural infrastructure directly benefits its electoral base, rather than the
economy as a whole.
    Several much-needed reforms that would help to address competitive-
ness concerns are politically sensitive and could affect the BDP’s support
base. For instance, the cattle/beef sector has stagnated in recent years, but
improving productivity and competitiveness requires addressing cattle hus-
bandry practices of small-scale farmers on communal land. Addressing the
shortage of land for business requires introducing elements of land markets
in place of traditional, administrative land allocation processes, and allow-
ing noncitizens better access to land. And relaxing immigration restric-
tions to improve the supply of skilled labor and decrease production costs
will reduce the rents earned by those with skills. Hence, addressing the con-
straints to diversification is as much a political economy consideration as a
technical consideration.
    Finally, one obvious reason for persistent poverty is the large share of the
population working in an extremely unproductive agriculture sector. An
important constraint on agricultural productivity in Botswana is the limited
availability of water. Many problems affecting water availability are in the
hands of the government, such as international agreements on the diversion
and use of water sources that cross borders (such as the Zambezi River). Public
investment in scientific research for agriculture, largely in the domain of the
public sector, has also been limited (Hausmann and Klinger 2010). It is curi-
ous that the 10th National Development Plan devotes less than two pages to
the agriculture sector (MFDP 2009).
                             STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  151




   This lack of emphasis on agriculture may reflect just how challenging the
sector is in Botswana. As Lewis (1954) pointed out a long time ago, we know
how to raise agricultural output in tropical areas with adequate rainfall or
access to irrigation water, but arid lands have low yields, and in the absence
of water do not respond to fertilizers or to the potential of high-yielding crop
varieties. Lewis (1954) also noted that this area is where the real poverty exists,
and that unlocking this prison is the greatest challenge to development. For
Botswana, it probably means devoting significantly fewer resources to agricul-
ture. Getting to this point will be a slow process, because so many of the poor
and uneducated are still tied to agriculture.
   Despite these challenges, Botswana has significant potential for diversifi-
cation based on services. It has recently built a new university of science and
technology where students from across Africa can train. Plus, Botswana has
better governance, more effective public services, relatively high educational
attainment, and relatively little crime compared with its neighbors. Thus,
Botswana would be an ideal location as a business service center for Southern
Africa. Firms based in Botswana would have duty-free access to all of the
members of SACU, including South Africa. But for this to happen, the gov-
ernment needs to work harder to provide the necessary telecommunications
and transportation infrastructure at a reasonable cost.


Appendix 3A: Data
For our analysis, we rely on different sources of data: individual-level employ-
ment data from the 1995/1996 and 2005/2006 LFSs, value-added data from
Statistics Botswana, and trade and tariff data at the four-digit Harmonized
System (HS) level. Below, we provide details on each of these data sources,
including the time period covered and the level of aggregation.

Labor Force Survey Data
The 1995/1996 and 2005/2006 LFSs are designed to be a source of nationally
representative information on the size, structure, and main characteristics of
the labor force, and include information on both formal and informal employ-
ment, unemployment, and underemployment. Data for these surveys were
collected throughout the 12 months of the duration of the survey.10 Both the
1995/1996 and 2005/2006 LFSs asked virtually the same questions, with the

10	 Note that unless it was necessary to ensure data accuracy, each household was visited only once
   during the survey.
152 Chapter 3




2005/2006 LFS adding some questions on child employment, so data from
both surveys are comparable.11
   There are two main definitions of employment in the LFSs, each with its
own timeframe. The surveys ask about the main type of work the person has
been doing in the past 12 months (“usual employment”) and the type of work
the person did in the past 7 days (“current employment”). Respondents were
asked, for each month of the year, whether they had worked part or all of the
month, and whether they had been available or unavailable for work. If the
participant had done any work in any month, an additional question asked
was whom the individual was working for (for example, self-employed, govern-
ment, private sector).12 The LFSs classify workers as “usually employed” if they
were economically active (if number of months working and available to work
was 6 or higher) in the past 12 months and they worked for most of the time
for which they were economically active. Additionally, the LFSs ask about
work during the past 7 days. If the respondents did work during this period,
they were asked about whom they were working for, along with employment
status, occupation, and industry.13,14 With the exception of agriculture, we rely
on questions related to the current job (the past 7 days), as the surveys asked
a broader set of questions for this job than for the usual job during the past
12 months.
    Because of the seasonality of agriculture and because the surveys were not
conducted in rural areas during the same months across years, we classify agri-
cultural workers by their usual job.

Value-Added Data
We use data on value-added by sector in constant values that cover the period
1995/1996–2005/2006. The data come from Statistics Botswana (2014) and
are reported by 10 broad sectors at the major division level of the Botswana

11	 The 2005/2006 LFS sample included people 7 years old and older, while the 1995/1996 LFS
    included only people 12 years old and older. Nevertheless, both surveys can be easily compared
    by controlling for age.
12	 The 2005/2006 LFS also asked questions related to occupation and industry for usual employ-
    ment, but these questions were not included in the 1995/1996 LFS.
13	 Both LFSs report industry of work using Botswana Standard Industrial Classification Revision
    3 codes.
14	 Note that if a person reported not having worked in the past 7 days because of a temporary
    absence from work (such as annual leave or sickness) but would resume work in the near future,
    that person was classified as currently employed. People who reported not having worked in the
    past 7 days and not planning on resuming work in the near future were counted as either unem-
    ployed or out of the labor force.
                       STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  153




Standard Industrial Classification. The data are reported for the fiscal year,
which begins on July 1 of each year, and generally coincides with the timing of
the LFSs.

Trade Data
Bilateral trade data for 1990–2008 were provided by the Botswana Institute
for Development Policy Analysis (BIDPA). This dataset consists of yearly bilat-
eral imports and exports disaggregated at the six-digit HS level and uses the
1988/1992 HS nomenclature. These data are consistent with the trade flows for
Botswana reported in the UN Comtrade database. Since the maximum level of
disaggregation in our tariff data was at the four-digit HS level, we aggregated
exports and imports to the four-digit HS level in order to have a correspon-
dence between our tariff data and our trade flow data. The resulting bilateral
trade dataset has annual exports and imports (in both current US dollars and
Botswanan pula) at the HS four-digit level starting in 1990 and ending in 2008.
   We also gathered data on value, volume, and unit value indexes on total
exports and total imports for the 1990–2008 period to help us understand
whether Botswana’s changes in export and import values were mostly driven
by changes in volumes or prices. The data on trade flow volumes come from
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s (UNCTAD’s)
online database (UNCTADstat).

Tariff Data
As noted above, tariffs on trade with non-SACU members have been typi-
cally set by South Africa, with little or no input from Botswana. Thus, we use
South Africa’s tariff structure—representing the SACU tariff structure—to
determine the level of trade protection for Botswana. We measure trade pro-
tection using tariffs (including ad valorem equivalents), plus surcharges for
South Africa. Our data on trade protection, provided by Lawrence Edwards,
span the period 1990–2008 and are described in great detail in Edwards
(2005). This dataset comprises tariff rates (including ad valorem equivalents)
and surcharges at the eight-digit HS level. We aggregated these rates and sur-
charges to the four-digit HS level to match our trade-flow data. To construct
the four-digit HS tariffs, we used a weighted average, where the weight for
each eight-digit HS tariff is that product’s share of imports within the four-
digit HS product imported by Botswana between 1990 and 1992. We used a
similar procedure to construct industry-level tariffs according to the industry
classification used in the LFSs.
Table 3A.1  Trade flows by commodity group, 1991–2005/2006

                                           Total imports             Imports not from South Africa              Total Exports              Exports not to South Africa
                                                                                                                                                                          154 Chapter 3




                                   Value        Share      Growth     Value        Share    Growth     Value         Share      Growth     Value        Share    Growth
Commodity group       Year     (million pula)    (%)         (%)  (million pula)    (%)       (%)  (million pula)     (%)         (%)  (million pula)    (%)       (%)
Animals and animal    1991            91          2.33                    4         0.65                 129          3.36                    99        2.71
products             2005/06         375          2.14     312.1         25         1.03     5,25.0      465          1.81        260.5      269        1.13      171.7
Vegetable products    1991           184          4.71                   62        10.03                  12          0.31                    10        0.27
                     2005/06         928          5.30     404.3         37         1.52     –40.3        42          0.16        250.0       12        0.05       20.0
Foodstuffs            1991           274          7.01                   51         8.25                  35          0.91                    16        0.44
                     2005/06       1188           6.78     333.6         99         4.07       94.1      172          0.67        391.4       38        0.16      137.5
Mineral products      1991           349          8.93                   28         4.53                    1         0.03                     0        0.00
                     2005/06       3,398        19.40      873.6        121         4.97      332.1      287          1.12      28600.0      257        1.08
Chemicals and         1991           196          5.02                   15         2.43                  34          0.88                    11        0.30
allied industries    2005/06       1,539          8.79     685.2        165         6.78    1,000.0      177          0.69        420.6       95        0.40      763.6
Plastics/rubber       1991           165          4.22                   13         2.10                   5          0.13                     2        0.05
                     2005/06         688          3.93     317.0         66         2.71      407.7       76          0.30       1420.0       11        0.05      450.0
Raw hides, skins,     1991            13          0.33                    4         0.65                  24          0.62                    17        0.47
leather              2005/06          34          0.19     161.5          4         0.16        0.0       32          0.12         33.3        6        0.03      –64.7
Wood and wood         1991           213          5.45                   32         5.18                   6          0.16                     4        0.11
products             2005/06         723          4.13     239.4        102         4.19     218.8        55          0.21        816.7       17        0.07      325.0
Textiles              1991           254          6.50                   65        10.52                 127          3.31                   104        2.85
                     2005/06         688          3.93     170.9       133          5.46     104.6      1072          4.17        744.1      730        3.06      601.9
                                                  Total imports              Imports not from South Africa               Total Exports              Exports not to South Africa
                                        Value          Share      Growth     Value        Share     Growth     Value          Share      Growth     Value        Share    Growth
Commodity group            Year     (million pula)      (%)         (%)  (million pula)    (%)        (%)  (million pula)      (%)         (%)  (million pula)    (%)       (%)
Footwear                  1991               72          1.84                     8         1.29                    9           0.23                      1        0.03
                        2005/06            200           1.14     177.8          22         0.90     175.0         11           0.04       22.2           2        0.01    100.0
Stones and glass     1991                  119           3.05                    15         2.43                3,031          78.89                  3,027       82.86
(includes diamonds) 2005/06                567           3.24     376.5         258        10.60    1620.0     19,349          75.24     538.4      19,143        80.36    532.4
Metals                    1991             449          11.49                    36         5.83                  332           8.64                   323         8.84
                        2005/06          1,420           8.11     216.3         143         5.87     297.2      3,272          12.72     885.5        3,060       12.85    847.4
Machinery/                1991             690          17.66                   139        22.49                   47           1.22                     17        0.47
Electrical              2005/06          3,011          17.19     336.4         749        30.76     438.8        253           0.98     438.3         111         0.47    552.9
Transportation            1991             646          16.53                   123        19.90                   43           1.12                    20         0.55
                        2005/06          2,021          11.54     212.8         346        14.21     181.3        426           1.66      890.7         60         0.25    200.0
Miscellaneous             1991             192           4.91                    23         3.72                     7          0.18                      2        0.05
                        2005/06            732           4.18     281.3         165         6.78     617.4         28            0.11    300.0           11        0.05    450.0
Total                     1991           3,907         100.00                   618       100.00                3,842         100.00                  3,653      100.00
                        2005/06         17,512         100.00     348.2       2435        100.00     294.0     25,717         100.00     569.4      23,822       100.00    552.1
Source: Authors' calculations using UNCTAD & BIDPA data
Note: Data for 2005/06 were calculated using average levels between years.
                                                                                                                                                                                   STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  155
156 Chapter 3




Table 3A.2  Botswana’s top-10 imports and exports, 1991 and 2005

                              1991                                                  2005
                                             Value                                                 Value
                                            (million                                              (million
Rank              Commodity                  USD)      %                Commodity                  USD)       %
Panel A: Top-10 imported commodities (HS 4-digit level)
   1   Motor vehicles for the transport      125       8.0   Petroleum oils, etc, (excl. crude)    372       13.7
       of goods
  2    Petroleum oils, etc, (excl. crude)      96      6.1 Motor cars and other motor              113        4.2
                                                           vehicles principally designed for
                                                           the transport of persons (other
                                                           than those of heading 87.02),
                                                           including station wagons and
                                                           racing cars
  3    Motor cars and other motor              51      3.3   Motor vehicles for the transport      112        4.1
       vehicles                                              of goods
  4    Portland cement, aluminous              35      2.2   Medicaments consisting of               74       2.7
       cement, slag cement, super-                           mixed or unmixed products
       sulphate cement and similar                           for therapeutic or prophylactic
       hydraulic cements, whether or                         uses, put up in measured doses
       not coloured or in the form of                        (including those in the form
       clinkers.                                             of transdermal administration
                                                             systems) or in forms or packing
  5    Parts and accessories of motor          31      2.0   Parts of railway or tramway             65       2.4
       vehicles                                              locomotives or rollingstock
  6    Other aircraft (for example,            29      1.8   Nickel ores and concentrates            59       2.2
       helicopters, aeroplanes); space-
       craft (including satellites) and
       suborbital and spacecraft launch
       vehicles
   7   Structures (excluding prefab-           28      1.8   Transmission apparatus for              54      2.0
       ricated buildings of heading                          radio-telephony, radiotelegraphy,
       94.06) and parts of structures                        radio-broadcasting or television,
       (for example, bridges and                             whether or not incorporating
       bridge-sections, lock-gates,                          reception apparatus or sound
       towers, lattice masts, roofs,                         recording or reproducing appara-
       roofing frame-works, doors and                        tus; television cameras; still
       windows and their frames and                          image video cameras and other
       thresholds for doors                                  video cam
  8    Other furniture and parts thereof       27      1.7   Parts and accessories of motor          46       1.7
                                                             vehicles
  9    Insulated wire, cable, other            26      1.7   Portland cement, aluminous ce-          43      1.6
       insulated electric cables                             ment, slag cement, supersulphate
                                                             cement and similar hydraulic
                                                             cements, whether or not coloured
                                                             or in the form of clinkers
 10    New pneumatic tires, of rubber          22      1.4   Self-propelled bulldozers,              36      1.3
                                                             angledozers, graders, levellers,
                                                             scrapers, mechanical shovels, ex-
                                                             cavators, shovel loaders, tamping
                                                             machines and road rollers
                                    STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  157




                                 1991                                                 2005
                                                Value                                               Value
                                               (million                                            (million
Rank                Commodity                   USD)       %                Commodity               USD)       %
Panel B: Top-10 exported commodities (HS 4-digit level)
   1    Diamonds, whether or not                1459      79.5 Diamonds, whether or not             3322      76.6
        worked, but not mounted or set                         worked, but not mounted or set
   2    Nickel mattes, nickle oxide              154       6.9 Copper mattes; cement copper          456      10.5
        sinters, and other intermediate                        (precipitated copper)
        products
   3    Meat of bovine animals, fresh              32      5.1 Tractors (other than tractors of       78       1.8
        or chilled                                             heading 87.09)
   4    Woven fabrics of cotton, with              21      4.9 Jerseys, pullovers, cardigans,         76       1.8
        ≥ 85% cotton                                           waist-coats and similar articles,
                                                               knitted or crocheted
   5    Meat of bovine animals, frozen            20       1.4 Meat of bovine animals, fresh           41      0.9
                                                               or chilled
   6    Pile fabrics, including long pile         16       0.6 Meat of bovine animals, frozen          32      0.7
        fabrics and terry fabrics, knitted
        or crocheted
   7    Carbonates; peroxocarbonates               11      0.3 Women's or girls' blouses, shirts      30       0.7
        (percarbonates); commercial                            and shirt-blouses
        ammonium carbonate containing
        ammonium carbamate
   8    Motor cars and other motor                  7      0.3 Women's or girls' suits, ensem-        26       0.6
        vehicles principally designed for                      bles, jackets, blazers, dresses,
        the transport of persons (other                        skirts, divided skirts, trousers,
        than those of heading 87.02),                          bib and brace overalls, breeches
        including station wagons and                           and shorts (other than swim-
        racing cars                                            wear), knitted or crocheted
   9    Motor vehicles for the transport            7      0.3 Gold (including gold plated             25      0.6
        of goods                                               with platinum) unwrought or in
                                                               semi-manufactured forms, or in
                                                               powder form
 10     Yarn (other than sewing thread)             6      0.2 Men's or boys' suits, ensembles,       23       0.5
        of artificial staple fibres, not put                   jackets, blazers, trousers, bib
        up for retail sale                                     and brace overalls, breeches and
                                                               shorts (other than swimwear),
                                                               knitted or crocheted
Source: Authors' calculations using data from UNCTAD and BIDPA (various years).
158 Chapter 3




Table 3A.3  Botswana’s top-10 source countries for imports and destination countries for
exports, 1991 and 2005
                                1991                                                   2005
                                           Value                                                  Value
Rank     Country                       (million US$)     %     Country                        (million US$)      %
Panel A: Top-10 source countries (imports)
1        South Africa                      1,586        84.7   South Africa                      2,632           86.8
2        Zimbabwe                            101         5.4   Zimbabwe                              47           1.5
3        United States                        69         3.7    United Kingdom                      38            1.3
4        Turks and Caicos Islands             20         1.1    United States                        37           1.2
5        Germany                              15         0.8   China                                34            1.1
6        Switzerland                          12         0.6   Sweden                               28            0.9
7        Sweden                               11         0.6   Germany                              28            0.9
8        Italy                                  9        0.5   India                                 22           0.7
9        Japan                                  6        0.3   Japan                                20            0.7
10       France                                 5        0.3   Namibia                              15            0.5

Panel B: Top-10 destination countries (exports)
1        Switzerland                       1,458       79.5     United Kingdom                   3,350           76.1
2        Zimbabwe                            127         6.9   South Africa                        382            8.7
3        Norway                               94         5.1   Norway                              262            6.0
4        South Africa                         90         4.9   Zimbabwe                            183            4.2
5        United States                        26         1.4    United States                        97           2.2
6        Germany                              11         0.6   Germany                              28            0.6
7        Zambia                                 6        0.3   Faeroe Islands                       20            0.5
8        Malawi                                 5        0.3   Zambia                                12           0.3
9        Netherlands                            5        0.3   Namibia                               11           0.2
10       Italy                                  4        0.2   Israel                               10            0.2
Source: Authors’ calculations using United Nations Conference on Trade and Development UNCTADstat and Botswana
Institute for Development Policy Analysis data (various years).




References
Acemoglu, D., S. H. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson. 2002. An African Success Story: Botswana. CEPR
       Discussion Paper 3219. Washington, DC: Center for Economic and Policy Research.
BEAC (Business and Economic Advisory Council). 2008. Botswana Excellence: A Strategy for
       Economic Diversification and Sustainable Growth. Government Implementation. Gaborone:
       Republic of Botswana, Office of the President, Coordination Office of Botswana.
BIDPA (Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis). http://www.bidpa.bw/.
BIDPA (Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis) and World Bank. 2006. Prospects for
       Export Diversification in Botswana. Gaborone: BIDPA.
                              STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN BOTSWANA  159




CSO (Central Statistics Office). 2008. “2005/06 Labour Force Report.” Gaborone: Department of
     Printing and Publishing Services,
—. 2009. “External Trade Statistics 2004.” Gaborone: Department of Printing and Publishing
     Services.
de Vries, G. J., M. P. Timmer, and K. de Vries. 2013. Structural Transformation in Africa: Static
     Gains, Dynamic Losses. GGDC Research Memorandum 136. Groningen, Netherlands:
     Groningen Growth and Development Centre.
Edwards, L. 2005. “Has South Africa Liberalised Its Trade?” South African Journal of Economics
     73 (4): 754–775.
ERB (Embassy of the Republic of Botswana). n.d. “History of Botswana.” Washington, DC.
     http://www.botswanaembassy.org/page/history-of-botswana.
Fibaek, M. 2010. Botswana’s Modern Economic History since 1966: Has Botswana Reached the Last
     Stage of Modern Growth Regime? Copenhagen: University of Copenhagen, Department of
     Economics.
GGDC ASD (Groningen Growth and Development Centre Africa Sector Database).
     www.rug.nl/research/ggdc/data/10-sector-database.
Hausmann, R., and B. Klinger. 2010. Achieving Export Diversification in Botswana. Harvard
     University Working Paper. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University, Center for International
     Development.
Heston, A., R. Summers, and B. Aten. 2012. “Penn World Table Version 7.0.” Philadelphia:
     University of Pennsylvania, Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income
     and Prices.
Levinsohn, J., and J. McCrary. 2010. The Prevalence of HIV in Botswana. Yale University Working
     Paper. New Haven.
Lewis, W. A. 1954. “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor.” Manchester School
     of Economic and Social Studies 22 (2): 139–191.
McCaig, B., and M. McMillan. 2014. “Trade Liberalization, Employment, Productivity and
     Diversification: Evidence from an Unusual Experiment.” Mimeo.
McMillan, M., and D. Rodrik, 2011. Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity Growth.
     NBER Working Paper 17143. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
McMillan, M., D. Rodrik, and Í. Verduzco-Gallo. 2014. “Globalization, Structural Change and
     Productivity Growth with an Update on Africa.” World Development 63: 11–32.
MFDP (Ministry of Finance and Development Planning). 2002. The National Development Plan 9.
     www.sarpn.org/documents/d0001172/index.php.
—. 2009. The National Development Plan 10. www.finance.gov.bw/index.php?.
160 Chapter 3




Robinson, J. A. 2013. “Natural Resources and Industrialization: Implications for Africa.” Mimeo.
Rodrik, D. 2008. “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth.” Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity 2: 365–412.
Statistics Botswana. 2014. “Botswana International Merchandise Trade Statistics 2011.”
     www.cso.gov.bw/index.php/summary-statistics/214-botswana-international-merchandise
     -trade-statistics-2.
Timmer, M P., and G.J. de Vries, 2009. “Structural Change and Growth Accelerations in Asia and
     Latin America: A New Sectoral Data Set,” Cliometrica 3 (2): 165–190.
UN Comtrade database. http://comtrade.un.org/.
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). UNCTADstat database.
     http://unctadstat.unctad.org/wds/ReportFolders/reportFolders.aspx.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2010. Human Development Report 2010. The
     Real Wealth of Nations: Pathways to Human Development. New York.
World Bank. Various years. Doing Business database. www.doingbusiness.org/.
World Bank. 2014. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC. http://data.worldbank.org/
     news/release-of-world-development-indicators-2014.
Zizhou, F. 2009. Linkages between Trade and Industrial Policies in Botswana. Industrial Policy
     Thematic Working Group. Pretoria: Trade & Industrial Policy Strategies.
                                                                       Chapter 4


                           STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR
                        AFRICAN COUNTRY: NEW HISTORICAL
                                  EVIDENCE FROM GHANA

                                             Robert Darko Osei and Rémi Jedwab




E
      ach country has its own story of how it developed, but at the regional
      level, some stark patterns stand out. For Asia, the development path was
      rather traditional, with the decline of agriculture and the rise of manu­
facturing (that is, industrialization) and services. In fact, it is the path that
eight high-performing Asian economies followed between 1960 and 1990 to
reach rapid, sustained, and inclusive growth rates—higher than those of all
other regions—earning the title the “East Asian miracle.”
    But for Africa, the development path has been quite different. It, too, saw a
decline in agriculture, but it still lacks a vibrant manufacturing sector. There
is reason to believe that a major culprit is insufficient growth in labor produc-
tivity, which is composed of a “within” component (changes in productivity
within a sector) and a “structural change component” (changes in productivity
resulting from labor movements across sectors).
    To shed more light on the African story, a good case study is Ghana. It is
one of a handful of countries in Africa that has sufficient data on sectoral pro-
ductivity and employment over a long period. But it is also a fascinating case
of structural change in a poor African country for a variety of reasons.
 •	   Ghana’s political progression has often been a leading indicator of the rest
      of Africa’s political evolution (Figure 4.1). It was the first country in Africa
      south of the Sahara to gain independence (1957), quickly becoming a sin-
      gle-party autocracy. With the overthrow of Kwame Nkrumah in 1966,
      there were a series of military coups and fragile political regimes, followed
      by a transition to democracy in 1992. Ghana is now one of the most demo-
      cratic African countries.
 •	   Ghana’s economic progression has been a leading indicator of the rest of
      Africa’s economic evolution. It evolved from postindependence reliance on
      natural resource exports—like cocoa, mining (mostly gold), and timber—to


                                                                                   161
162 Chapter 4



FIGURE 4.1  A harbinger of political and economic changes in Africa


                                                      Evolution of political regimes and GDP, Ghana and Africa south of the Sahara, 1957–2011

                                                                  a. Political regime                           b. Per capita GDP
                                                 10                                                                                             2,000
Autocracy ← Combined polity score → Democracy




                                                                                                                                                        GDP per capita (PPP constant 2000 US$)
                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                1,500


                                                 0


                                                                                                                                                1,000
                                                –5




                                                –10                                                                                             500
                                                       1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                                                              Ghana              Africa south of the Sahara

Sources: Maddison (2008), World Bank (2010), and Polity IV (2013).
Notes: Panel (a) plots the combined polity score for Africa south of the Sahara (population-weighted average) and Ghana.
Polity IV defines three regime categories: autocracies (–10 to –6), anocracies (–5 to +5), and democracies (+6 to +10). There
were only four independent countries in the region before 1960. Panel (b) plots gross domestic product (GDP) per capita
(purchasing power parity (PPP), constant 2000 US$) for Africa south of the Sahara and Ghana.



                                                import-substitution industrialization (ISI) and a bigger role for government
                                                in the 1960s. Then income declined in the 1970s and early 1980s (Figure 4.1),
                                                as a result of macroeconomic disequilibria and austerity measures adopted to
                                                reduce the mounting public deficits. This decline was followed by renewed
                                                growth after two structural adjustment programs (1983 and 1987–89), and
                                                accelerating growth after a post-2000 improvement in the business environ-
                                                ment and a commodity price boom. Ghana is now an African transition
                                                economy, along with Senegal, Kenya, and Mozambique (McKinsey Global
                                                Institute 2011).
              •	                                Ghana is also very much a “work in progress.” Despite enormous prog-
                                                ress in the past 20 years, the economy remains highly dependent upon
                                                natural resource exports, the manufacturing sector is still uncompetitive,
                                                and the socioeconomic indicators are not good—in 2013, Ghana ranked
                                                138 out of 177 countries on the Human Development Index. With a still
                                                fast-growing population, jobs (especially for youth) are difficult to find,
                                      STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  163




      and a large part of the population is underemployed. In addition, income
      inequality is rising.
 •	   Plus, Sir Arthur Lewis, the intellectual father of structural transformation,
      not only wrote a report on Ghana’s industrialization (Lewis 1954b) but also
      was the country’s first chief economic advisor (1957–1958).
    We already know from McMillan and Rodrik (2011) that, drawing on
data for 38 countries (29 developing and 9 high-income) in 1990–2005, struc-
tural change was growth enhancing in Asia and growth reducing in Africa.
That means that economic growth in Africa was driven by the within-sector
component. We also know that in a later study of Africa, using data for
19 countries from 1990 to 2010, McMillan (2013) finds that while struc-
tural change was growth reducing in 1990–1999, it was growth enhancing in
2000–2010. As productivity also increased within sectors, the within-sector
and structural change channels combined to dramatically increase productiv-
ity, which was the basis of what is now being termed the “African growth mir-
acle” (Young 2012).
    For developed countries, structural change has been a fundamental driver
of long-term development (Duarte and Restuccia 2010; Herrendorf, Rogerson,
and Valentinyi 2011). But we know now that the lack of it can lead to poverty
traps. As Matusyama (2008) puts it: “Productivity growth can cause struc-
tural change, which in turn leads to further growth in productivity. The cir-
cular causality, however, is a double-edged sword, as the lack of productivity
growth and the lack of structural change can reinforce each other, creating
the vicious cycle of poverty.” However, if productivity increases sufficiently
within sectors, the lack of structural change may not be a major constraint to
economic development.
    This chapter begins with a conceptual framework to analyze structural
changes in poor countries. and then describes the broad patterns of economic
and structural change in Ghana from 1957 to date, before focusing in on the
agricultural, industrial, and service sectors. Next, we document the relation-
ship between structural change and economic growth in Ghana, and then dis-
cuss the role of public policies in promoting structural change in Ghana and
the future outlook.
    Our findings—which draw on new sectoral employment and value-added
data over 50 years (1960–2010)—suggest that until 1992, aggregate income
changes were mostly driven by changes in the productivity of specific sec-
tors, rather than structural change. While real GDP per capita growth ranged
from about –4 to +3 percent per year during 1960–1992, the contribution
164 Chapter 4




of structural change remained almost nil. But over time, structural change
has become a significant factor of productivity growth, as many agricultural
workers were absorbed by the (relatively more productive) industrial and ser-
vice sectors. Labor productivity has grown at 3.0 percent per year post-1992,
and about 50 percent of that growth—1.6 percent per year—came from struc-
tural change. This confirms that structural change has been growth enhanc-
ing in Ghana, too. However, our results also suggest that the “nature” of
structural change in Ghana remains different from that in other successful
developing countries, in that it has occurred without a green revolution, an
industrial revolution, or a service revolution of the types seen, for example, in
Asia. Moreover, going forward, there is still a lot of room for further structural
change to help Ghana realize its full potential.


The Many Forms of Structural Change
So how can we interpret the types of structural changes that occur in poor coun-
tries, and how these changes feed into economic growth? Let us begin with the
standard model and then explore some other possibilities.

Standard Model of Structural Change: Labor Push versus
Labor Pull
Most countries follow a standard pattern: structural change is a by-product of
either a push from agricultural productivity growth or a pull from industrial
productivity growth.
    Positive rural push (“labor push”): In poor countries, large fractions of land
and labor are devoted to producing food for subsistence needs (Schultz 1953;
Gollin, Parente, and Rogerson 2002). This “food problem” prevents the realloca-
tion of productive resources to other sectors. The “labor push” approach shows
how a rise in food productivity—a “green revolution”—reduces the food problem
and releases labor to the modern sector (Matsuyama 1992; Caselli and Coleman
II 2001; Gollin, Parente, and Rogerson 2002). Likewise, consistent with Engel’s
Law, a rise in agricultural productivity and higher rural incomes lead to a greater
demand for non-foodstuffs (that is, goods and services produced in the urban
areas) (Jedwab 2013; Voigtländer and Voth 2013). This rural push is positive for
growth when it leads to higher agricultural wages, lower food prices, and greater
employment in the modern sector.
    Positive urban pull (“labor pull”): In this case, a rise in manufacturing
productivity—an “industrial revolution”—attracts underemployed labor from
agriculture into the industrial sector (Lewis 1954a; Harris and Todaro 1970;
                                           STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  165




Hansen and Prescott 2002; Lucas 2004). In the long run, developed countries
deindustrialize and specialize in tradable services (Herrendorf, Rogerson, and
Valentinyi 2011; Buera and Kaboski 2012). However, developing countries can
also specialize in, and export, tradable services (Gollin, Jedwab, and Vollrath
2015). The “service revolution” becomes another factor of the labor pull.1

Other Labor Push and Labor Pull Factors
In the case of Africa, however, these models are not sufficient to explain the
apparent nature of structural change that it has undergone—that is, low income
growth, nonindustrialization, and the rise of services. Four theories have emerged
to account for these facts (see Jedwab and Vollrath 2015, for a recent survey of
these theories).
    Less positive urban pull: It is possible for an economy to undergo struc-
tural change without any changes in agricultural, manufacturing, and ser-
vice productivity if the country experiences a “natural resource revolution”
(Jedwab 2013; Gollin, Jedwab, and Vollrath 2015). If resource windfalls are
spent on manufactured goods and services, this creates opportunities in the
modern sector. Resource-rich countries can use their trade surplus to import
food. And if these countries also systematically import manufactured goods,
structural change does not lead to industrialization, leaving the modern sector
to consist of nontradable services.
    Negative urban pull: If there is urbanization without economic growth, the
excessive urbanization is often attributed to the urban-biased policies (agri-
cultural taxation, public employment in the manufacturing and service sec-
tors, and food price subsidies). These urban pull factors can lead to structural
change in the form of “overurbanization” (Lipton 1977; Bates 1981), which
some studies contend has occurred in Africa (Bairoch 1988; Fay and Opal
2000). This theory is consistent with the previous theory, except in this case
the resource rents are captured by the government and used to generate pub-
lic employment.
    Negative rural push: Rural poverty (whether it is the result of agricultural
taxation or not), land pressure (stemming from demographic growth), and man-
made or natural disasters (like wars or climate change) constitute rural push


 1	 It is assumed that there is no food problem and labor can be reallocated to the modern sector.
   This could occur because (1) there could be surplus labor in the food sector, (2) the industrial
   revolution could be preceded by a green revolution, (3) an industrial revolution could facilitate
   the modernization of agriculture, or (4) a country could import food. This urban pull is positive
   for growth when it leads to greater employment in the modern sector and less underemployment
   or higher wages in the agriculture sector.
166 Chapter 4




factors feeding rural exodus (Barrios, Bertinelli, and Strobl 2006; Poelhekke
2010). A relative decrease in the agricultural wage leads to structural change, as
migrants flock to the cities and seek employment in the modern sector. If they
are unskilled, they will work in the low-productivity service sectors.
    Negative urban push: Structural change out of (rural) agriculture and into
the (urban) modern sector implies that labor reallocation is associated with
migration. But another source of urban growth can be a natural increase in
population, stemming from a combination of high urban fertility and lower
urban mortality because of the epidemiological transition. Indeed, two stud-
ies find that this natural increase causes the population of African cities to
double every 15 years (Jedwab, Christiaensen, and Gindelsky 2015b; Jedwab
and Vollrath 2015a). These labor supply shocks may have been absorbed by
the low-productivity service sectors.

Type of Structural Change and Economic Growth
What is the tie-in with growth? Per capita GDP is a function of the employment-
to-population ratio and overall productivity (the average productivity of each
worker). If the employment ratio is stable, the evolution of per capita GDP is
driven by changes in labor productivity. Overall productivity increases if either
some sectors become more productive (the “within-sector” channel) or labor
moves to higher-productivity sectors (the “structural change” channel). The lat-
ter implies that labor was somewhat misallocated before. This could be the result
of institutional barriers to entry in the modern sector (for example, state own-
ership of plants in China and licensing in India, as in Hsieh and Klenow 2009).
Or it could be the result of sectoral differences in the production function—for
example, agricultural productivity could be low because of a lack of a green rev-
olution. Farmworkers may not move into the more productive modern sector if
that sector is skill intensive and cannot absorb the surplus labor.
    The six push–pull theories described above lead to various predictions
regarding the effects of structural change on growth. The standard labor push
and labor pull are always growth enhancing.
 •	   With positive rural push, as food productivity increases, the demand
      for nonfood goods also increases and the modern sector expands. If
      wages are relatively higher in the modern sector, structural change is
      growth enhancing.
 •	   With positive urban pull, the rise in manufacturing productivity and
      wages leads to an enlargement of this sector, and structural change is
      growth enhancing.
                                        STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  167




   However, the story is different for the nonstandard factors, which may
be either growth enhancing or growth reducing, and may be only briefly
growth enhancing:
 •	 Other pull factors (negative urban and less positive urban pull): In the
    resource-rich or urban-biased economies, the consumption of resource and
    nonresource rents on nonagricultural goods increases wages and employ-
    ment in the modern sector. Structural change is growth enhancing, but
    these effects may not last long. If the quality of institutions is low and
    manufactured goods are imported, structural change occurs through an
    expansion of low-productivity services (like a bloated government sector).
 •	 Other push factors (negative urban and negative rural push): Rural pov-
    erty and the natural increase in the urban population lead to labor supply
    shocks that must be absorbed by the modern sector. Structural change
    is growth enhancing if the urban wage is relatively higher for the rural
    migrants. However, it is growth enhancing simply because the rural wage
    had previously decreased. Structural change is then clearly growth reduc-
    ing if the urban natural increase is absorbed by low-productivity ser-
    vice sectors.


How Ghana’s Economy Has Evolved since
Independence
Focusing in now on Ghana, let us trace how the economy has developed and
evolved at the aggregate and sectoral levels since independence. This section
helps identify 1992 as the year when the nature of structural change was mod-
ified in Ghana.2
    1957: At independence, Ghana was one of the most developed African
countries, in part thanks to the boom in cocoa production, which made it
one of the leaders of the “cash crop revolution” (Hill 1963; Teal 2002; Jedwab
2013). Sir Arthur Lewis (1954b) believed that Ghana could not develop with-
out ISI, yet pursuing this strategy was not possible in the 1950s (Pickett and
Shaeeldin 1990; Agyeman-Duah 2008). First, wages were high because land
was relatively abundant, there was no agricultural labor surplus, and develop-
ing labor-intensive manufacturing implied that the country primarily needed
a “vigorous agricultural program.” Although Lewis is often described as

 2	 This section draws on Aryeetey, Harrigan, and Nissanke (2000); Agyeman-Duah (2008); and
   Breisinger et al. (2011).
168 Chapter 4




supporting the labor pull hypothesis and industrialist policies, at that point
he thought that labor push factors were more important. Second, there were
not enough skilled people, so developing capital-intensive manufacturing was
not a sound economic strategy. Instead, Lewis encouraged the government to
increase agricultural productivity and lay the foundations for future indus-
trialization. By providing infrastructure and investing in human capital, it
would be possible to create a larger and more productive labor force.
    1957–1966: When Kwame Nkrumah took power in 1957, his government
adopted a capital-intensive ISI strategy. This strategy was in line with Lewis’
model of development, but contradicted his recommendations to be more
patient. The rationale behind Nkrumah’s policy was that the surplus from
the cocoa sector had to be used to expand the industrial sector. But faced with
coordination failures, only an enlightened leader could implement this mas-
sive industrial policy. Another benefit of a strong state was that it promoted
nation building in a context of marked ethnic fractionalization. As it turned
out, investment rates increased but, as Figure 4.2 shows, this was driven by
public investments (in 1966 there were 53 state enterprises and 12 public
boards) (Agyeman-Duah 2008). Government consumption increased, as the
number of public employees rose from 140,000 in 1957 to 280,000 in 1965.
However, these investments had no impact on per capita GDP because of mis-
guided investment decisions, mismanagement, and the inflationary effect of
import restrictions. When cocoa prices collapsed in 1965, the government
relied on printing money and public debt. Nkrumah was overthrown in 1966.
    1966–1981: The Nkrumah presidency was followed by a succession of mili-
tary coups and fragile political regimes, which were interrupted by short dem-
ocratic episodes. The National Liberation Council (NLC) was composed of
army officers and assumed executive power until 1969, when Kofi Busia was
democratically elected. Busia was overthrown by another army coup in 1972,
and Colonel Acheampong became the new head of state. Although Nkrumah
was held responsible for the lack of economic growth before 1966, the follow-
ing NLC, Busia, and Acheampong governments all adopted the same poli-
cies, with a more limited budget. Government consumption remained high
(Figure 4.2). At the same time, the country accumulated debt, inflation was
soaring, and private investment was collapsing. Population growth was high as
mortality dropped, and urban natural increase became a major factor of urban
growth (Jedwab, Christiaensen, and Gindelsky 2015). Between 1974 and
1983, per capita income declined by 34.9 percent (Figure 4.1), hitting both the
(rural) agriculture sector and the (urban) modern sector.
                                                               STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  169



  FIGURE 4.2  Private investment starts to lead in the 2000s


                                           Investment rates and government expenditure, 1960–2010
                                      a. Investment rates                          b. Government expenditure
                   30          Total                                             Total
                               Public                                            Consumption
                               Private                                           Investment



                   20
Share of GDP (%)




                   10




                    0
                        1960   1970      1980    1990       2000   2010 1960    1970       1980      1990      2000       2010

  Source: Statistical Yearbooks of Ghana 1961–1970, CBS (1970), Ewusi (1986), Aryeetey and Fosu (2002), and World Bank
  (2010).
  Note: Panel (a) plots the investment rates for Ghana as a whole (defined as the share of gross fixed capital formation in gross
  domestic product (GDP)), and separately for the private and public sectors. Panel (b) plots the share of total government
  expenditure in GDP. Total government expenditure can be separated into government consumption (recurrent expenditure)
  and government investment (development expenditure, as already shown in Panel (a). The vertical dashed line is for 1992,
  the year when the nature of structural change was modified in Ghana.



      1981–2001: When Jerry Rawlings came to power after two coups in 1979
  and 1981, he also thought that the bleak economic picture reflected mis­
  management rather than poor policies (Agyeman-Duah 2008). Ghana was as
  poor as in 1939. Cocoa production had collapsed; the manufacturing sector
  was severely affected by cronyism, import restrictions, and price controls; and
  infrastructure was in a dire state. Moreover, Ghana had just been hit by the
  worst drought in 50 years, it was suffering from hyperinflation, and the state
  was bankrupt. The repatriation of about 1 million Ghanaians from Nigeria
  further heightened economic, political, and social pressures (Killick 2010).
  Rawlings had no choice but to implement the Economic Recovery Program
  in 1983, a structural adjustment program (SAP) under the guidance of inter-
  national organizations. The government reduced expenditure while creating
  incentives for the development of the private sector (such as abolishing price
  controls and import restrictions). From 1987 to 1989, state enterprises were
  privatized and the currency was devalued. The urban sector was particularly
170 Chapter 4




affected by the SAPs, as in most African countries (Potts 1995). The economy
slowly recovered though (Figure 4.1), and Rawlings was democratically elected
in 1992 and re-elected in 1996.
    2001–2010: Rawlings peacefully handed over power to his main opponent
John Kufuor in 2001. The macroeconomic situation was still unstable, but
the economy rapidly took off, recording annual growth rates of 5 percent
(Figure 4.1). This evolution was not coincidental, as there was an improve-
ment across all dimensions. The business environment has become more
favorable, captured by rising investment rates in the private sector (Figure 4.2),
the value of cocoa and gold exports has boomed, and the service sector has
become more competitive.
   All in all, the economic history of Ghana suggests that the country has
managed its economic development without experiencing a green revolution,
an industrial revolution, or a service revolution—that is, the positive rural
push and urban pull—as in Asia. Instead, it has relied heavily over the past
50 years on cocoa production and gold mining (the less positive urban pull),
urban-biased policies (the negative urban pull), agricultural overtaxation and
rural shocks (the negative rural push), and urban natural increase (the nega-
tive urban push).
    The issue is whether the nature of structural change was modified post-
1992, when the country became democratic.3 We know that in 1960, agri-
culture accounted for 43.3 percent of GDP and 61.8 percent of employment
(Figure 4.3). While Ghana experienced some positive structural change until
1966—as evidenced by a decline in agricultural employment—the period
from 1967 to 1984 saw a significant decline in economic activity and struc-
tural change in the wrong direction. The GDP share of agriculture increased
to 52.8 percent in 1978, while the industrial and service sectors collapsed.4
The service sector resumed its expansion in the late 1970s and early 1980s,
while industrial output returned to its pre-crisis level in 1986. Likewise, pro-
ductivity remained stable or increased across all sectors in the 1960s, dropped

 3	 Turning points are the years 1957, 1966, 1974, 1983, 1992, 2001, and 2010. We have sectoral
    GDP data for all years between 1960 and 2010, but that is not the case for sectoral employment
    data. Although employment data are only available for 1960, 1970, 1984, 1992, 2000, 2006, and
    2010, the periodicity of the dataset captures well the economic history of Ghana. The 1960–
    1970 period was characterized by ISI policies and income stagnation. The 1970–1984 period
    was marked by structural problems and economic decline. The Ghanaian economy slowly recov-
    ered in 1984–1992 and 1992–2000, after two SAPs were adopted in 1983 and 1987–1989; it later
    boomed in 2000–2006 and 2006–2010.
 4	 This result is consistent with Engel’s Law. As people became poorer, they mechanically spent
    a higher share of their budget on food items, and many workers moved back to the agriculture
    sector, thus causing a “re-agriculturalization” of the economy in the aggregate.
                                                                            STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  171



     FIGURE 4.3  Agricultural productivity remains far below that of industry and services


                                                             Sectoral labor productivity (GDP per worker), 1960–2010
                                          5,000
GDP per worker (PPP, constant 2000 US$)




                                          4,000



                                          3,000



                                          2,000



                                          1,000
                                                  1960      1970             1980             1990             2000           2010
                                                             Agriculture              Industry                     Services
                                                             Food                     Manufacturing

     Source: Economic Survey of Ghana 1961–1982, Population and Housing Censuses 1960, 1970, 1984, 2000, and 2010,
     Ghana Living Standards Survey 1991–92 and 2005–2006, Singal and Nartey (1971), Androe (1981), Ewusi (1986), Maddison
     (2008), GSS (2010), and World Bank (2010).
     Note: This figure plots sectoral labor productivity (PPP, constant 2000 US$), using three aggregate sectors “agriculture,”
     “industry,” and “services.” Sectoral labor productivity is the ratio of sectoral GDP to the number of workers in that sector.
     Data is available for the following years: 1960, 1970, 1984, 1992, 2000, 2006, and 2010. The vertical dashed line is for the
     year 1992, the year in which the nature of structural change was modified in Ghana.




      in the 1970s and early 1980s, and increased from then on (Figure 4.3). These
      patterns lead us to the following conclusions:
                        •	 Economic development and structural change are intertwined. Periods
                                          of economic growth were associated with decreasing agricultural shares of
                                          GDP and employment, whereas periods of economic stagnation or decline
                                          saw a rise in the same shares (Figure 4.4).
                        •	 Structural change manifested itself in less agriculture and more services—
                                          not more industry. The GDP and employment shares of industry are
                                          almost the same in the 2000s as in the 1960s. Ghana’s structural change
                                          occurred without industrialization, in contrast to Asia but in line with
                                          what we find for Africa as a whole in 2000.
                        •	 Ghana has undergone major positive structural changes post-1992. In the
                                          1960s and the 1980s, agriculture’s employment share was still 60 percent,
                                          but by 2010, it fell to almost 40 percent.
 172 Chapter 4



 FIGURE 4.4  Bypassing industry and into services


                                 Sectoral composition of GDP and employment, 1960–2010
                                 a. GDP                                                 b. Employment
            70


            60


            50


            40
Share (%)




            30


            20


            10


             0
                 1960   1970   1980    1990      2000      2010 1960          1970      1980      1990       2000      2010

                                       Agriculture                 Industry                 Services

 Source: Economic Surveys of Ghana (CBS 1961–1982); Population and Housing Censuses 1960, 1970, 1984, 2000, and
 2010 (GSS various years); Ghana Living Standards Surveys 1991–1992 and 2005–2006 (GSS 1995, 2008); Singal and Nartey
 (1971); Androe (1981); Ewusi (1986); GSS (2010); and World Bank (2010).
 Note: This figure plots the sectoral composition of GDP and employment, using the same three sectors. Data for both figures
 are available for the following years: 1960, 1970, 1984, 1992, 2000, 2006, and 2010. The vertical dashed line in both figures
 is for 1992, the year when the nature of structural change was modified in Ghana.



 A “Nonevolution” of Agriculture and an
 Industrial Bypass
  So what was behind a structural change pattern that saw an eventual shift out
  of agriculture and largely into services, almost bypassing industry? And what
  are the main constraints on economic growth for each of these sectors? We
  begin with agriculture.

 Structural Change Out of Agriculture
 Between 1960 and 1992, the GDP and employment shares of agriculture
 remained almost unchanged—except for 1967–1984, when the economy was
 contracting and the shares of industry and services in GDP and employment
 fell (Figure 4.5). What could account for this nonevolution? Two notable
 developments stand out: (1) the lack of a green revolution in the food subsec-
 tors (“agriculture, hunting, and livestock” and “fishing”); and (2) troubles with
 exports in the nonfood subsectors (“cocoa” and “forestry and logging”).
                                                       STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  173



 FIGURE 4.5  Agriculture’s employment share remained fairly steady for decades before
 falling sharply after 1992

                               Sectoral composition of agricultural GDP and employment, 1960–2010
                                     a. GDP                                            b. Employment
            70

            60

            50
Share (%)




            40

            30

            20

            10

             0
                 1960   1970     1980    1990     2000     2010 1960         1970      1980      1990      2000      2010

                               Agriculture (food and non-food)                  Food                Non-food

 Source: Economic Survey of Ghana (CBS 1961–1982; Population and Housing Censuses 1960, 1970, 1984, 2000, and 2010
 (GSS various years); Ghana Living Standards Surveys 1991–1992 and 2005–2006 (GSS 1995, 2008); Singal and Nartey
 (1971); Androe (1981); Ewusi (1986); GSS (2010); and World Bank (2010).
 Note: Panel (a) plots the sectoral composition of agricultural gross domestic product (GDP), when distinguishing the food
 subsectors (“agriculture, hunting, and livestock” and “fishing”) and the nonfood subsectors (“cocoa” and “forestry and
 logging”). Panel (b) plots the sectoral composition of agricultural employment, using the same subsectors. Employment data
 are available for the following years: 1960, 1970, 1984, 1992, 2000, 2006, and 2010. The vertical dashed line is for 1992,
 the year when the nature of structural change was modified in Ghana.


     Low food productivity forces farmers to remain producers in the food
 sector (Breisinger et al. 2011), which is what appears to have happened in
 Ghana. Why was it so low? The reasons range from population pressure
 and a decrease in the land-to-labor ratio to insecure property rights, a low
 adoption rate of modern inputs, and a low level of mechanization. So why
 did employment decrease and productivity increase after 1992? It is true
 that the employment share decreased faster than the GDP share in 1992–
 2005—but not because of a positive rural push, as food productivity did not
 increase (cereals and starchy roots yields remained unchanged) during the
 period. Rather, surplus labor in agriculture was attracted to other sectors
 when urban wages increased, which in turn raised productivity. After 2006,
 higher yields—up 30 percent between 2005 and 2010 for cereals and starchy
 roots—kicked in, and labor was released for the modern sector (the posi-
 tive rural push). Based on a few years of data, it is difficult to assert whether
174 Chapter 4




this evolution indicates the beginning of a green revolution (see Nweke
2004, for a study on cassava), plus productivity is the same in 2010 as in
1960 (Figure 4.3). But even if Ghana has not experienced a green revolution,
food productivity has increased in the rest of the world, and trade implies
that Ghana has also benefited from these productivity gains—its share of
imports in cereal consumption increased from around 10 percent in the
mid-1980s to 30 percent before the food price spike of 2007–2008 (FAO
2010). In the absence of high international food prices, a green revolution is
no longer necessary, as food can be imported.
    As for cocoa, Ghana is the world’s largest exporter, accounting for almost
50 percent of exports between 1960 and 2010 (Jedwab 2013). Yet the cocoa
subsector collapsed in the 1960s–1980s (Jedwab 2013) because of low
producer prices after 1958, restrictive migratory policies after 1969, and
frequent droughts in the early 1980s. Producer prices were fixed by the gov-
ernment and its Cocoa Marketing Board, to protect farmers against fluc-
tuant international prices. Given that the producer price was always below
the international price, this actually served as a taxation mechanism (Bates
1981). As the average taxation rate was 46 percent on average in 1960–2010,
cocoa really accounted for 10 percent of GDP (instead of 5 percent when
not accounting for taxation). Growth has now resumed in the subsector.
The producer price of cocoa rose in the 1990s and the subsector was liber-
alized, with production increasing from 200,000 tons to a record 1 million
tons in 2010. However, cocoa’s share of GDP remained low, as the rest of the
economy was also growing.
    As for the other nonfood subsector, forestry and logging took off after
1992 and saw a rising share of employment. But these recent improvements in
the nonfood subsector are tempered by findings that the resource rents of the
cocoa and forestry subsectors were spent either by farmers, logging companies,
and the government or on (urban) manufactured goods and services (Jedwab
2013). Thus, as manufactured goods were imported from abroad, this urban
pull produced “urbanization without industrialization”—that is, cities con-
sisting of nontradable services (Gollin, Jedwab, and Vollrath 2015).5

 5	 We classify the cocoa subsector as a “natural resource” subsector, in line with the literature
   on the Dutch disease (Bates 1981; Isham et al. 2005; Gollin, Jedwab, and Vollrath 2015). As
   explained by Isham et al. (2005), “countries can only export crops such as […] cocoa if they have
   appropriate climates.” The agronomic literature (for example, Ruf 1995a, 1995b) has also shown
   that cocoa cultivation required very specific and exhaustible soils. As a result, very few coun-
   tries are able to produce cocoa on a large scale, making cocoa supply highly inelastic, thus gener-
   ating high profits in the subsector (Bates 1981; Ruf 1995a; Jedwab 2013). In particular, Ghana,
   Indonesia, and Côte d’Ivoire account for 75 percent of the world’s cocoa exports. Other agricul-
   ture subsectors tend to be much less concentrated.
                                                        STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  175




 Structural Change without Industrialization
 For industry—which include manufacturing, public utilities, mining, and
 construction—the GDP and employment shares have not changed much
 over the past 50 years, with the exception of the 1970s and early 1980s, when
 the sector shrank (Figure 4.6). In 2010, industry still only accounted for
 21.8 percent of GDP and 15.4 percent of employment.
     The key explanation for industry being largely bypassed is the lack of an
 industrial revolution. The Nkrumah government and the following govern-
 ments all thought that industrialization was the only source of development,
 prompting massive public investments in the 1960s and 1970s. This led to a
 slight increase in the GDP and employment shares of manufacturing, and pro-
 ductivity increased. However, this rise was unsustainable, as it reflected biased
 public policies (negative urban pull), not positive structural change. When
 per capita income declined after 1976, the manufacturing sector contracted

 FIGURE 4.6  No big move into manufacturing


                               Sectoral composition of industrial GDP and employment, 1960–2010
                                    a. GDP                                                b. Employment
            25



            20



            15
Share (%)




            10



             5



             0
                 1960   1970    1980        1990   2000      2010 1960          1970      1980       1990      2000       2010

                                 Industry              Manufacturing                    Nonmanufacturing

 Source: Economic Survey of Ghana (CBS 1961–1982); Population and Housing Censuses 1960, 1970, 1984, 2000, and 2010
 (GSS various years); Ghana Living Standards Surveys 1991–1992 and 2005–2006 (GSS 1995, 2008); Singal and Nartey
 (1971); Androe (1981), Ewusi (1986); GSS (2010); and World Bank (2010).
 Note: Panel (a) plots the sectoral composition of industrial gross domestic product (GDP), when distinguishing manufacturing
 from other industrial subsectors (“mining,” “construction,” and “public utilities”). Panel (b) plots the sectoral composition of
 industrial employment, using the same subsectors. Employment data are available for the following years: 1960, 1970, 1984,
 1992, 2000, 2006, and 2010. The vertical dashed line is for the year 1992, the year in which the nature of structural change
 was modified in Ghana.
176 Chapter 4




and productivity dropped. The sector also became more informalized post-
1970, and remained so until post-1992 (Figure 4.7). It was only after the SAP
in 1983 that manufacturing production was resumed. Yet the fact that manu­
facturing productivity in 2010 was the same as in 1960 confirms the lack of
an industrial revolution (positive urban pull) (Jedwab 2013). Manufacturing
exports have also remained low as a result of high wages relative to productiv-
ity (Teal 1999) and the competition from China. The reality is that Ghana—
like many African countries—has urbanized without industrialization
(Gollin, Jedwab, and Vollrath 2015).
    As for the other subsectors, construction follows economic activity, and
two housing and infrastructure construction booms occurred in the 1960s
and the 2000s. The mining subsector collapsed post-1961, as a result of low
investments and poor maintenance, but its contribution to GDP recently
increased (8.5 percent in 2011), thanks to rising gold prices and booming oil
exports. Finally, the employment share and labor productivity in the public


FIGURE 4.7  Manufacturing’s level of formality is still quite low


                               Sectoral formal employment shares (percentage), 1960–2006

           40



           30
 Percent




           20



           10



            0
                1960             1970                 1980                 1990                 2000                 2010
                                  Agriculture                   Industry                            Services
                                                                Manufacturing

Source: Statistical Yearbook of Ghana 1961–1970; CBS 1970; Quarterly Digest of Statistics (CBS 1981–1997); Population
and Housing Census (GSS 2000); and Ghana Living Standards Survey 2005–2006 (GSS 2008).
Note: This figure displays the shares of formal employment in sectoral employment, using the three aggregate sectors
“agriculture,” “industry,” and “services” and the subsector “manufacturing.” Data are available for the following years: 1960,
1970, 1984, 1992, 2000, and 2006. Formal employment includes recorded employees of the formal establishments of the
public and private sectors. The vertical dashed line is for 1992, the year when the nature of structural change was modified
in Ghana.
                                                       STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  177




 utilities sector also followed economic activity. Productivity is now twice as
 high as at independence, thanks to the modernization of the energy sector
 that took place in the 1990s and the 2000s.

 Structural Change with a Dramatic Expansion of Services
 In services, the GDP share is at the time of this writing 49.8 percent, up from
 37.4 percent in 1960, and the employment share is at 43.3 percent, sharply up
 from 23.2 percent in 1960—providing the strongest evidence for positive struc-
 tural change in Ghana (Figure 4.8). While productivity is twice as high in ser-
 vices as in agriculture, it is still four times lower than in Asia and nearly the same
 in 2010 as it was in 1960. Moreover, the rise in service employment had only a


 FIGURE 4.8  Not really a “service revolution”


                       Sectoral composition of service GDP and employment (percentage), 1960–2010
                                  a. GDP                                                 b. Employment
          50



          40



          30
Percent




          20



          10



           0
               1960   1970    1980      1990      2000      2010 1960          1970       1980      1990       2000      2010

                             Services                                            High-productivity services
                             Average-productivity services                       Low-productivity services

 Source: Economic Survey of Ghana (CBS 1961–1982); Population and Housing Censuses 1960, 1970, 1984, 2000, and
 2010; Ghana Living Standards Surveys 1991–1992 and 2005–2006 (GSS 1995, 2008); Singal and Nartey (1971); Androe
 (1981); Ewusi (1986); GSS (2010); and World Bank (2010).
 Note: Panel (a) plots the sectoral composition of service gross domestic product (GDP), when distinguishing the low-produc-
 tivity service subsectors (wholesale and retail trade, and community, social, and personal services); the average productivity
 service subsectors (government services, transport and storage, and hotels and restaurants); and the high-productivity
 service subsectors (communications, and finance, insurance, real estate, and business services). Panel (b) plots the sectoral
 composition of service employment, using the same subsectors. GDP and employment data are available for the following
 years: 1960, 1970, 1984, 1992, 2000, 2006, and 2010.
178 Chapter 4




limited effect on per capita income. Therefore, this evolution in Ghana does not
suggest a service revolution of the type seen in Asia.
   One way to view the evolution of the service sector between 1960 and
2010 is to divide the seven subsectors into three groups, depending on whether
the subsector belongs to the top tier (communications; and finance, insurance,
real estate, and business services), middle tier (government services; transport
and storage; and hotels and restaurants), or lower tier (wholesale and retail
trade; and community, social, and personal services) of all the subsectors in
terms of labor productivity in 2010. High-productivity services are twice as
productive as average-productivity services and tenfold more productive than
low-productivity services.6 A few patterns stand out (Figure 4.8).
 •	 Service GDP. The increase in service GDP was driven by average-
    productivity services, whose share increased from 21.8 percent in 1960 to
    29.0 percent in 2010. Although employment increased in low-productivity
    services, it did not alter the GDP share of services, as productivity was
    too low. Nor did high-productivity services contribute much to structural
    change, which confirms that Ghana has not experienced a service
    revolution.
 •	 Service employment. The rise in service employment was driven by average-
    productivity and low-productivity services, with their combined shares ris-
    ing from 22.7 percent in 1960 to 40.6 percent in 2010.
 •	 Government. In the pre-1992 period, service employment first increased,
    then decreased. In the 1960s, the expansion was the result of government
    consumption and a rising number of civil servants, which together also
    boosted productivity. But after 1970, the government sector contracted,
    also bringing down productivity. Post-1992, employment increased rel-
    atively more in the private service sector. However, the employment and
    GDP shares of the government sector also rose, as economic growth led to
    a higher budget.
 •	 Tourism. Post-1992, the employment and GDP shares of hotels and restau-
    rants increased, with the number of tourists jumping from 100,000 arriv-
    als in 1985 to 1 million in 2010, and the share of service exports rising

 6	 This “economic dualism” within a same sector is not specific to the service sector. Within the
   agriculture sector, the cocoa and forestry subsectors are also much more productive than the
   more subsistence subsectors. Within the manufacturing sector, one can also note large produc-
   tivity differences across but also within manufacturing subsectors, depending on how capital
   intensive each subsector and/or group of firms is.
                                                    STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  179




         from 0.6 percent of GDP in 1985 to 10.3 percent in 2005 (mostly resulting
         from tourism).
    •	   The employment and GDP shares of low-productivity services—which are
         employers of last resort—increased with the economic crisis.
    •	   The negative rural push, urban pull, and urban push probably all contrib-
         uted to the expansion of services before 1992. After that, there is no evi-
         dence of a major positive urban pull in the case of tradable services—with
         the exception of tourism—but nontradable services managed to attract
         workers from the food sector.


Structural Change and Economic Growth in Ghana
Now that we have examined developments in the individual sectors, the big
question is how much of the growth in overall labor productivity can be
traced to within-sector versus structural change? To answer this, we use the
methodology of McMillan and Rodrik (2011) and McMillan (2013) to esti-
mate the respective contributions of the two channels (see the Overview in
this book for details on the methodology).7
    Our results (Table 4.1) show that for the overall period 1960–2010,
labor productivity rose just 0.4 percent, with structural change account-
ing for a 0.3 percentage point and within-sector productivity accounting
for the remaining 0.1 percentage point. However, the stories for before
and after 1992 differ dramatically. Before 1992, no matter the decomposi-
tion used, the changes in overall productivity were essentially driven by the
within-sector component. The structural change component was actually
growth reducing in 1970–1992, as many workers returned to agriculture or
were hired by retail trade or personal services—all unproductive sectors that
acted as employers of last resort. Within-sector productivity was positive
in 1960–1970, but then collapsed in 1970–1984, with some sectors—agri-
culture, cocoa, manufacturing (whose productivity dropped by a whopping

 7	 Algebraically, the decomposition is:
                                                   N                      N
                                          Δ Pt =   ∑θ
                                                   i–1
                                                         i,t−k Δ pi,t +   ∑p
                                                                          i–1
                                                                                i,tΔθi,t

	        where Δ Pt is the change in aggregate labor productivity between period t − k and t. The ﬁrst
         term is the “within” component, which is a weighted average of the change in labor productiv-
         ity in each of the N sectors, with the weight for sector i being the labor share of that sector in
         period t − k, measured by θi,t−k . The second term is the “structural change” component, which is
         a weighted average of the change in labor shares in the N sectors, with the weights captured by
         the labor productivity of the sector in period t.
180 Chapter 4




Table 4.1  Structural change kicks in after 1992

                             Decomposition of overall productivity growth, 1960–2010
                             Labor productivity                     Component of annual growth (percent) due to:
                  at starting year   growth          within     structural    within     structural
Period            (2000 PPP US$) (annual, percent) (9 sectors) (9 sectors) (15 sectors) (15 sectors)
1960–1970                2,622                   0.8                 0.5             0.3              0.5              0.3
1970–1984                2,850                 –3.8                 –3.6            –0.2            –3.8                 0
1984–1992                1,651                   2.5                 3.2            –0.7              4.2            –1.7
1992–2000                2,017                   1.0                -0.9             2.0            –1.8               2.9
2000–2006                2,190                   4.5                 6.0            –1.5              6.1            –1.7
2006–2010                2,851                   2.7                 0.0             2.6            –0.5               3.2
1960–2010                2,622                   0.4                 0.2             0.2              0.1              0.3
1992–2010                2,017                   3.0                 1.9             1.1              1.4              1.6
Source: Jedwab and Osei (2012).
Note: This table displays labor productivity at starting year (2000 purchasing power parity (PPP) US$) and the decomposition
of annual productivity growth (percentage) into its within-sector and structural change components using two sectoral
decompositions: 9 sectors, as in McMillan and Rodrik (2011), or 15 sectors. The advantage of using 15 sectors is that it
allows us to isolate the effect for the food sector, instead of studying the whole agriculture sector (and likewise for the other
subsectors).




65 percent), finance, and government services—more severely hit than oth-
ers. The fact that the decline was widespread suggests the importance of
national factors rather than sectoral factors. However, productivity then
turned positive in most sectors in 1984–1992, although it was stronger in
nonagriculture sectors than in agriculture, probably hampered by agricul-
tural overtaxation (the negative rural push).
    After 1992, productivity growth was driven by both within-sector productiv-
ity and structural change. For the 1992–2010 period, when labor productivity
increased by an annual average 3 percent, structural change actually contributed
slightly more than half of the total (1.6 percentage points versus 1.4 percentage
points for the within component). During 1992–2000, many workers left the
food sector and entered relatively more productive sectors (like construction,
manufacturing, mining, tourism, transport, finance and business services, and
government services). Surplus labor in agriculture was absorbed by other sectors,
probably thanks to new opportunities in these sectors. The within-sector com-
ponent was then negative because these sectors were characterized by declining
marginal returns to labor—as employment increased, sectoral productivity
decreased, even if the aggregate effect on overall productivity was positive.
    However, during 2000–2006, the within-sector effect was very high—at
around 6 percent of annual growth—with, interestingly, productivity up in
all sectors. But the structural change component was negative, because the
                                           STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  181




economy was further rationalized after the economic reforms of the 1980s
and 1990s. Each sector got rid of its less efficient workers, who had to enter a
relatively less productive sector. During 2006–2010, we find exactly the same
effects for exactly the same sectors as in 1992–2000, with urban pull factors
probably explaining why these sectors hired more workers.
    To what extent was growth driven by internal or foreign demand? This is
difficult to decipher. When adding both the within-sector and the structural
change components for each sector during the whole period 1992–2010, we
find that growth was driven by mostly seven sectors (food production, cocoa,
construction, mining, tourism, finance and business services, and govern-
ment services). Construction and government services are procyclical, so their
growth is tied to the rest of the economy. It is clear that the economy grew
because of rising international demand for Ghana’s natural resources (cocoa,
gold, timber, and oil) and tourism services, with the combined GDP share of
these sectors up from 9 percent to 18 percent in 1992–2010. In that case, the
urban pull is driven by natural resources and tourism, rather than industrial-
ization or high-productivity services, with the exception of finance and busi-
ness services. But there was also a positive rural push, as higher food yields
released labor for the modern sector, and stronger food imports post-1992 fed
even more urban workers.
    As for manufacturing, its total contribution was actually nil, which con-
firms that Ghana has experienced structural change without industrialization.
Moreover, the manufacturing sector is relatively unproductive, with informal-
ity accounting for at least 90 percent of employment in 2000, and manufac-
turing productivity being 22.7 times lower in the informal sector than in the
formal sector. In other words, Ghana has the “wrong” manufacturing sectors.
For example, the informal clothing and furniture subsectors accounted for
almost 40 percent of total manufacturing employment in 2000. Yet they serve
the domestic market and are not that different from nontradable services.

Structural Change and Informal Employment
Most African countries implemented SAPs in the 1980s, paving the way for
higher economic growth in the 1990s and 2000s. Yet these economies also
witnessed a rise in informal or small-scale employment, while it would have
been expected that a better business environment and fewer policy distortions
would have led to formalization.8 In Ghana, the proportion of employment

 8	 See Kingdon, Sandefur, and Teal (2006) for a survey of recent trends in several countries in
   Africa south of the Sahara.
182 Chapter 4




in small firms (fewer than 30 employees) increased from 33 percent in 1987
to 52 percent in 2003—a change driven by a massive new entry of small firms
(Sandefur 2010). One study finds that this could be the result of distortionary
taxes that disfavor large firms, although it also suggests that a uniform rate of
taxation would not dramatically improve overall productivity, as large firms
are not necessarily more productive than small firms (Gollin 1995).
    Two criteria are used to distinguish formal and informal employment:
the type of employment and the size of the employer. Using the first method,
Ghanaian formal employment includes the recorded employees of the for-
mal establishments of the public and private sectors, while informal employ-
ment consists of unrecorded employees, self-employed people, employers,
and unpaid family workers (Gollin (1995) favors this approach). The other
approach separates small-scale employment (in establishments with fewer
than 30 employees) and large-scale employment (in establishments with more
than 30 employees) (Sandefur (2010) favors this method). Given that it is
much more difficult to “hide” large-scale establishments from government
authorities, this threshold is likely to capture the difference between formal
and informal employment. Yet many “formal” establishments have fewer than
30 people, and their employees are mistakenly defined as belonging to the
informal sector.
    For our analysis, we use the first method, because we have no panel data
on employment in large-scale establishments at the sectoral level. Thus, for-
mal employment includes all wage and salary earners in formally registered
establishments. We also focus strictly on employment because we lack data
on informal GDP.9 We find that the level of formal employment is extremely
low—only 9.5 percent of total employment in 2006—even lower than the
13 percent in 1960, with more than half of workers in the public sector.
Second, the share of formal employment fell to 2.9 percent between 1984
and 1992 (with only 0.2 percent in the private sector), as a result of the 1983
and 1988 SAPs. This result goes against the current belief that informality
is rising in Ghana. The nonagriculture sectors were particularly affected by
the SAPs. Third, by sector today, we find a large variation in the formaliza-
tion rate, ranging from 52.6 percent in community, social, personal, and gov-
ernment services (followed by 45.6 percent in finance, insurance, real estate,
and business services, and 32.4 percent in public utilities) to 10.1 percent in

 9	 We have panel data for 18 formal and informal sectors (2 times the 9 sectors of the main analy-
   sis) for the periods 1960–1970, 1970–1984, 1984–1992, 1992–2000, and 2000–2006. Data are
   missing for the year 2010.
                                     STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  183




manufacturing; 5.9 percent in wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restau-
rants; and a mere 2.2 percent in agriculture, hunting, forestry, and fishing.
    How much of this formalization stemmed from within-sector versus struc-
tural change? Our results show that the within-sector component is far more
important than the structural component (Appendix 4B). This suggests that
national factors—not sectoral factors—account for the evolution of the over-
all formalization rate. When the formalization rate collapsed after 1984, the
contribution of the structural component was almost nil. This means that
the formalization rate did not increase because people were moving to more
informal sectors (that is, informal sectors are employers of last resort), but
because each sector was becoming more informal. The within-sector compo-
nent increased in 1992–2000 when the economy improved (the share of for-
mal employment increased to about 11 percent). The formal firms rehired
workers who ended up working for the informal firms of the same sector, or
the formal firms that had to leave the formal sector during the economic crisis
re-entered it. These results are somewhat in line with the results on structural
change (Table 4.1). In addition, the structural change component was posi-
tive in the 1960s when nonagriculture sectors formalized as a result of public
investments, and in the 1990s when the economy recovered and the more for-
mal nonagriculture sectors hired more farmworkers.

Potential Gains from Structural Change
The main results are clearly ambiguous. On the optimistic side, our data for
the post-1992 period indicate the following:
 •	   Productivity increased continuously after 1992, and Ghana transitioned
      into a more efficient and formalized economy.
 •	   The structural change component was mostly positive, which showed a
      reallocation of labor toward more productive sectors.
 •	   This reallocation was permitted by an increase in the food supply (the posi-
      tive rural push), whether it was the result of imports or rising food yields.
 •	   This reallocation benefited other sectors as well, such as construction, and
      finance and business services. As urban wages increased, they attracted
      more workers from the food sector (the positive urban pulls).
 •	   The economy diversified—while cocoa, timber, and mining accounted for
      almost all exports in 1960, Ghana now also exports tourism services and
      crude oil.
184 Chapter 4




   On the pessimistic side, these positive growth rates were not high, con-
sidering that the economy collapsed in the 1980s, which resulted in a catch-
ing-up effect in the next periods. The economy was so depressed that it could
only get better. Moreover, Ghana is still two times as poor as India. Our data
indicate the following:
 •	   Income and sectoral productivities did not increase much between 1960
      and 2010.
 •	   Changes in labor productivity are volatile, and the overall economy can
      improve or deteriorate in a matter of years, as exemplified by the 1970s.
 •	   The economy has not experienced a green revolution, which has limited its
      ability to release agricultural labor for the modern sector.
 •	   Structural change occurred without industrialization, as shown by how little
      manufacturing and tradable services have contributed to productivity growth.
 •	   Productivity growth was actually driven by the natural resource and tour-
      ism sectors, and the expansion of the construction and government sectors
      could just be the result of that economic growth.
     How do these results compare with what we know from other studies?
McMillan (2013, Figure 5) finds that structural change in Africa was growth
reducing in 1990–1999 and growth enhancing in 2000–2005, with structural
change’s contribution to growth almost nil during the whole period 1990–2005.
In Ghana, the contribution of structural change was relatively low during the
whole period. However, we also use data for the period 2006–2010, when the
contribution of structural change clearly increased (Table 4.1). The structural
change components are also stronger when using the decomposition of 15 sec-
tors, instead of 9 sectors as in McMillan (2013), as we isolate the effect for the
food sector, instead of studying the whole agriculture sector (and likewise for
the other subsectors). In Ghana, structural change was actually growth enhanc-
ing in 1992–2000 and 2006–2010. Besides, the sample of McMillan (2013)
includes many countries for which patterns could have been different. Our
results are in line with Adeyinka, Salau, and Vollrath (2013, Table 4), who find
that the contribution of structural change to growth was positive for Nigeria (at
2.3 percent per year) in 1996–2009. However, in Ghana as well as in Nigeria,
it is not obvious to what extent these changes are ultimately stemming from
resource exports or agricultural modernization and industrialization.
     Promoting structural change can clearly enhance overall productivity,
provided workers from the low-productivity sectors can be absorbed by
                                           STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  185




higher-productivity sectors. But workers are unlikely to move from the least
productive sector (such as food production) to the most productive sectors
(such as public utilities or finance). These are capital- or skill-intensive sec-
tors, which limit their ability to absorb unskilled workers from other sectors.
Besides, the demand for the goods and services produced by these sectors is
limited by the size of the domestic economy or the growth of exports.
    But workers could gradually climb the productivity ladder and move to
the next more productive sector, as the constraints to sectoral mobility would
then be less stringent. In the case of Nigeria, Adeyinka, Salau, and Vollrath
(2013) show that value-added could be 54 percent higher if there were per-
fect sectoral mobility—an assumption not credible, given sectoral differ-
ences in the production function. They find that it would be just 25 percent
higher when accounting for sectoral differences in skill intensity. In the case
of Ghana in 2000, the mean number of years of schooling was 2.8 in the
food sector, but 7.1 in the rest of the economy (6.2 in manufacturing, 10.5 in
finance, and 13.4 in government services). Within the agriculture sector, only
25 percent of the workers had at least 7 years of schooling, which shows how
limited sectoral mobility is in Ghana. These farmers could move to the least
productive urban sectors, although wages are probably not much higher once
we account for rural–urban differentials in housing and consumer prices.10


The Role of Government Policies in Structural
Change in Ghana
The fact that all sectors were affected by the economic crisis in 1967–1984 and
were then able to recover through economic growth in 1984–1992 confirms that
poor economywide policies—not just poor sectoral policies—constrained eco-
nomic development during the pre-1992 period. One major problem was the
quality of institutions, with regulatory and nonregulatory constraints on the
private sector hampering economic development. After the first phase of the
Economic Recovery Program in 1983, which was aimed at halting the economic
decline and reviving moribund sectors (like agriculture, manufacturing, and min-
ing), growth resumed (at 2.5 percent per year in 1984–1992), private investment
increased, and most sectors benefited from the better economic and institutional
climate. However, in the agriculture sector, growth resumed more slowly, as the

10	 Another possibility would be that farmers climb the productivity ladder within the agricul-
   ture sector, by specializing in riskier—but in typical years more rewarding—crops (Chapoto,
   Mabiso, and Bonsu 2013). Ghana potentially has a comparative advantage in horticulture and
   fruits (such as pineapples and fruit juices) in addition to cocoa (Wolter 2009).
186 Chapter 4




urban-biased policies of the 1960s–1980s disproportionately hurt cocoa and non-
cocoa farmers. It took some time before farmers were convinced to invest again.
    So which government policies helped or hindered structural change
between 1992 and 2010? Here we apply the growth diagnostics framework of
Hausmann, Rodrik, and Velasco (2008) to identify the binding constraints
to growth.11 Two possibilities that we can probably rule out are poor geogra-
phy and low human capital. On the former, although Ghana is in the trop-
ics, it is close to international markets, with the population concentrated in
the forested south, which has been exploited for cultivating cocoa (Hill 1963;
Jedwab 2013). As such, physical geography does not seem to be a major con-
straint, relative to countries like Mauritius or Thailand. On the latter, Ghana’s
stock of human capital is relatively high for its income level (relative to other
West Africa countries), and the returns to education are around 4 percent ver-
sus 8–12 percent on average in developing countries. Like most resource-rich
economies, Ghana does not typically rely on human capital (Gollin, Jedwab,
and Vollrath 2015), and even if the demand for labor were high and there were
a skill shortage, the country could rely on its large, well-educated, and entre-
preneurial emigrant population in the developed world.
    The biggest constraints seem to be the cost of finance, poor infrastructure,
and market failures, followed by macro and micro risks.
    Cost of finance. The low level of investment in Ghana (20 percent of GDP
versus almost 35 percent in India and 50 percent in China) could be owing to
a high cost of finance. During the pre-SAP period, savings were captured by
the government and “misallocated.” After the SAPs, the level of private invest-
ment rose, but firms still cite the inadequate availability of finance as a major
constraint. For example, one recent study finds that capital is still highly mis-
allocated in Ghana, as the marginal return to investment is higher in firms
with less access to finance (Kalemli-Ozcan and Sorensen 2012). Firms also
complain that the domestic demand for their products is too low.12 Thus, the
lack of credit is understandable, and the question becomes why firms seem
to be unable to sell their nonresource goods and services to the rest of the


11	 This section draws extensively on the analyses of Lejárraga (2010) and USG-GoG (2011).
12	 For example, according to the Doing Business database of the World Bank, Ghana was ranked
   120th in the world in terms of “Ease of Access to Credit” in 2010. Ghana is ranked lower than
   other African countries, such as South Africa (27th), Botswana (61th), Kenya (65th), Nigeria
   (90th), and Zambia (98th). Ghana is then ranked 84th in terms of “Overall Doing Business
   Score,” which suggests that the lack of access to credit is a relatively important constraint. One
   factor explaining this poor performance is the fact that less than 15 percent of individuals and
   firms are listed by a public or private credit bureau with information on their borrowing history,
   versus more than 50 percent in Botswana and South Africa.
                                  STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  187




world. Likewise, foreign firms may not be credit constrained, so why do we
not see more FDI inflows to Ghana? If the cost of finance is not an issue, the
private sector’s poor performance must be explained by a low return to eco-
nomic activity.
    Poor infrastructure. Ghana has relatively better infrastructure than most
countries with the same income level (Lejárraga 2010), but poor roads con-
tinue to be a key factor behind the lack of a green revolution. Transportation
costs are high, which increases the price of agricultural inputs and decreases
farmgate prices (Breisinger et al. 2011), and there is a lack of competition in
the transport sector, with numerous roadblocks. In addition, the energy sec-
tor is facing significant challenges, with frequent disruptions to power. Firms
are relying increasingly on their own power generation, and should this sit-
uation continue, it is unlikely that manufacturing firms can improve their
competitiveness—in 2007, power outages cost 6.5 percent of annual sales for
Ghanaian firms on average (Lejárraga 2010).
    Market failures. The lack of self-discovery and coordination externalities
(when the actions of economic agents need to be coordinated to improve
efficiency) could account for the low level of private investment. To begin
with, the economy has not diversified its exports much, although in the past
20 years, there seem to have been many “export discoveries” (products that
are exported for the first time by a country) (Lejárraga 2010). However, these
products failed to mature in larger export sectors, owing either to a lack of
international demand or to constraints in the expansion of small firms (which
predominate because of asymmetric taxes and regulations) (Gollin 1995). In
addition, smaller exporting firms tend to rely on export intermediaries to sell
their products, possibly the result of an imperfect knowledge of foreign mar-
kets or difficulties obtaining an export license (Lejárraga 2010). One example
is in the agriculture sector. Ghana has an unexploited comparative advantage
in horticulture and fruits (such as pineapples and fruit juices) (Wolter 2009).
An agriculture-based industrial policy could be initially needed to support
this nascent agribusiness industry.
    Macro risks. The macro picture improved markedly after the democrati-
zation process started in 1992. Government consumption was rationalized,
the fiscal deficit narrowed, and inflation fell. Ghana also achieved debt relief
by participating in the Highly Indebted Poor Countries initiative, which
required adopting the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility. Further, there
have been two peaceful political transitions from one party to another in
2000 and 2008, engendering more confidence in the institutions and the
economy (Osei 2012). Yet, while a stable macroeconomic environment is a
188 Chapter 4




necessary condition for long-run growth, it is not a sufficient condition for
developing a strong (nonresource) tradable sector (Lejárraga 2010). Since the
2008 oil discovery, private investment has been concentrated in the resource
sector (Barthel, Busse, and Osei 2011), and in recent years, the macro­
economic situation has deteriorated as a result of the oil boom. A big worry
is that oil revenues may not be used to further transform the economy—in
fact, the share of capital spending in government expenditure decreased from
50 percent in 2000 to 40 percent in 2011, as the choice was made to hire more
civil servants and pay them better (Osei 2012).
    Micro risks. Institutional change in the 1990s—including efforts by the gov-
ernment to rebalance the economy in favor of the private sector—has facilitated
a better business environment (Asem et al. 2013). Evidence of this policy shift is
seen in lower transaction costs associated with doing business in Ghana. Over
the period 2006–2012, Ghana was one of the top-10 reformers according to the
World Bank’s Doing Business database. It is now ranked 64th in the world (out
of 185) and 5th in Africa south of the Sahara (out of 46). It is also ranked 64th
in the world according to the Corruption Perceptions Index of Transparency
International. And it outperforms other countries in registering property
(45/185), enforcing contracts (48/185), and protecting investors (49/185).
    Even so, Ghana underperforms other countries in paying taxes (89/185),
starting a business (112/185), resolving insolvency (114/185), and dealing with
construction permits (162/185). One problem seems to be high tax rates for
firms. While taxes are necessary for funding public goods (like roads), they often
include informal payments to tax inspectors (Lejárraga 2010). Taxes are also
higher for large firms, which skews the firm distribution toward small firms
(Gollin 1995). In addition, the regulatory framework is constraining, as it is
complicated to start and shut down a business and to hire and fire workers in the
formal sector (Lejárraga 2010). The current regulations favor large, politically
connected firms, while smaller but successful firms cannot mature into larger
ones. Thus, changes in the regulatory environment have not always benefited the
majority of firms in Ghana (Asem et al. 2013). Another example of micro risks is
the insecurity of property rights in the agriculture sector (USG-GoG 2011).


Tackling the Binding Constraints
In Africa, structural change was not synonymous with industrialization, but
was defined by a dramatic expansion of services. One hypothesis is that struc-
tural change in Africa has not been as growth enhancing as in Asia. Our
results for Ghana suggest the following:
                                     STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  189




 •	   Structural change is both a factor and a consequence of development,
      as episodes of negative economic growth are associated with structural
      change in the wrong direction.
 •	   The contribution of structural change to productivity growth was nil or
      negative until the 1980s, as the political and economic environment was
      not conducive to long-run growth.
 •	   While structural change was thus growth reducing until the 1980s, it
      became growth enhancing after the country democratized in 1992.
      Therefore, structural change can also be a factor of economic development
      in Africa.
 •	   The “nature” of structural change remains different in Ghana—it has
      occurred without a green revolution, an industrial revolution, or a service
      revolution of the types seen in Asia.
    Although Ghana is hailed as one of Africa’s success stories, its economy
remains highly dependent upon natural resource exports; the manufactur-
ing sector is still uncompetitive; and there are still enormous hurdles on
the socioeconomic front, with troubling levels of poverty, unemployment,
and underemployment—especially for young people—and income inequal-
ity. The bottom line is that Ghana must cope with several binding con-
straints that contribute not only to the lack of a green, industrial, or service
revolution but also to the causes and consequences of the other mecha-
nisms of structural change (like the negative rural push, urban pull, and
urban push).
    While the contribution of structural change was positive in 1992–2010,
it could increase further. In Asia, manufacturing and tradable services have
absorbed the surplus labor from the food sector (Breisinger et al. 2011; Gollin,
Jedwab, and Vollrath 2015). But in Ghana, these sectors are 19 and 6 times
less productive than in the rest of the world, respectively. Labor costs are rel-
atively high, because so much food is still imported. Nonlabor costs are also
high because of a constraining regulatory framework, power outages, and
poor roads. Although the business environment has improved considerably
in the past 20 years, much remains to be done for Ghana to be as competitive
as Mauritius or South Africa. Ghana is unlikely to develop a strong nonre-
source tradable sector in the near future. But anything is possible in the longer
run, as exemplified by the development experience of the countries mentioned
above. The reverse scenario is also true—the recent cocoa, gold, and oil booms
could cause a new “resource curse” in Ghana.
190 Chapter 4




Appendix 4A: Data Sources
This appendix describes in detail the data we use in our analysis. We consider
the following 9 sectors for the decomposition analysis: agriculture, hunting,
forestry, and fishing (agr); mining and quarrying (min); manufacturing (man);
public utilities (pu); construction (con); wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and
restaurants (wrt); transport, storage, and communications (tsc); finance, insur-
ance, real estate, and business services (fire); and community, social, personal,
and government services (cspg). To obtain 15 sectors, we decompose the agr
sector into agriculture and hunting, cocoa, forestry and logging, and fishing;
the wrt sector into wholesale and retail trade, and hotels and restaurants; the
tsc sector into transport and storage, and communications; and the cspg sector
into community, social, and personal services, and government services.
    We use various sources to recreate total GDP (in constant 2000 US$, PPP)
for the 9 or 15 sectors annually from 1960 to 2010: Economic Surveys of
Ghana (CBS 1961–1982), Singal and Nartey (1971), Androe (1981), Ewusi
(1986), Quarterly Digest of Statistics (CBS 1981–1997), Maddison (2008),
GSS (2010), and World Bank (2010). Employment data were reconstructed
for the 9 or 15 sectors in 1960, 1970, 1984, 1992, 2000, 2006, and 2010 from
various sources: Population and Housing Censuses (PHCs) (GSS 1960, 1970,
1984, 2000, and 2010); and Ghana Living Standards Surveys (GLSS) in 1991–
1992 and 2005–2006 (GSS 1995, 2008). Sectoral labor productivity was then
calculated as the ratio of sectoral GDP to sectoral employment. For the 9 sec-
tors, formal and informal employment data were reconstructed in 1960, 1970,
1984, 1992, 2000, and 2006 from various sources: Statistical Yearbooks of
Ghana 1961–1970, Statistical Handbook of the Republic of Ghana 1970 (CBS
1970), Quarterly Digest of Statistics (CBS 1981–1997), the 2000 PHC (GSS
2000), and the 2005–2006 GLSS (GSS 2008).


Appendix 4B: Results of Informality
We decompose the aggregate evolution of the formalization rate between its
within-sector component, when sectors become more informal, and its struc-
tural component, when labor moves from more formal to less formal sectors
as follows:
       Δ Ft = Ft – Ft–1 = Σj Ej,t × ( f j,t – f j,t–1) + Σj (Ej,t – Ej,t–1) × f j,t–1
where ft and f j,t refer to economywide and sectoral formalization rates (for
sector j), respectively, and Ej,t is the share of employment in sector j. Results
are reported in Table 4B.1, below. First, the within-sector component of
                                                     STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  191




Table 4B.1  Decomposition of formal employment growth in Ghana, 1960–2006

                            Share of formal employment                           Component (percent) due to:
                      at starting year              growth                       within                  structural
Period                   (percent)              (annual, percent)              (9 sectors)               (9 sectors)
1960–1970                   15.5                        –2.2                      –4.3                        2.2
1970–1984                   12.4                       –2.8                       –1.7                      –1.1
1984–1992                     8.3                     –12.3                      –12.4                        0.1
1992–2000                     2.9                      18.0                       15.1                        2.9
2000–2006                   10.9                        –2.2                      –0.6                      –1.6

Source: Jedwab and Osei (2012).
Note: This table displays the share (percentage) of formal employment in total employment at the starting year of the period
and the decomposition of the growth of this share into its “within-sector” and “structural change” components using nine
sectors, as in McMillan and Rodrik (2011).




formalization is far more important than its structural component. This suggests
that national factors, not sectoral factors, account for the evolution of the aggre-
gate formalization rate. When the formalization rate collapsed after 1984, the
contribution of the structural component was almost nil. This means that the
formalization rate did not increase because people were moving to more infor-
mal sectors (that is, informal sectors are employers of last resort), but because each
sector was becoming more informal. The within-sector component increased
in 1992–2000 when the economy improved. The formal firms rehired workers
who ended up working for the informal firms of the same sector, and/or the for-
mal firms that had to leave the formal sector during the economic crisis re-en-
tered it. These results are in line with the results on structural change (Table 4.1).
Second, the structural change component was positive in the 1960s when non-
agriculture sectors formalized as a result of public investments, and in the 1990s
when the economy recovered and the more formal nonagriculture sectors hired
more farmworkers.


References
Adeyinka, A., S. Salau, and D. Vollrath. 2013. “Structural Change in Nigeria.” Houston: University
      of Houston, Department of Economics. Unpublished manuscript.
Agyeman-Duah, I., ed. 2008. An Economic History of Ghana: Reflections on a Half-Century of
      Challenges and Progress. Banbury, UK: Ayebia Clarke Publishing.
Androe, G. 1981. Industry in Ghana. Production Form and Spatial Structure. Stockholm:
      Scandinavian Institute of African Studies.
192 Chapter 4




Aryeetey, E., and A. Fosu. 2002. Explaining African Economic Growth Performance: The Case of
     Ghana. Nairobi: African Economic Research Consortium.
Aryeetey, E., J. Harrigan, and M. Nissanke, eds. 2000. Economic Reforms in Ghana: The Miracle
     and the Mirage. Oxford, UK: James Currey Ltd.
Asem, F., M. Busseb, R. D. Osei, and M. Silberberger. 2013. Private Sector Development and
     Governance in Ghana. IGC Working Paper. London: International Growth Centre.
Bairoch, P. 1988. Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of History to the Present.
     Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Barrios, S., L. Bertinelli, and E. Strobl. 2006. “Climatic Change and Rural-Urban Migration:
     The Case of Sub-Saharan Africa.” Journal of Urban Economics 60 (3): 357–371.
Barthel, F., M. Busse, and R. Osei. 2011. “The Characteristics and Determinants of FDI in Ghana.”
     European Journal of Development Research 23 (3): 389–408.
Bates, R. 1981. Markets and States in Tropical Africa: The Political Basis of Agricultural Policies.
     Berkeley: University of California Press.
Breisinger, C., X. Diao, S. Kolavalli, R. Al Hassan, and J. Thurlow. 2011. A New Era of
     Transformation in Ghana: Lessons from the Past and Scenarios for the Future. IFPRI Research
     Monograph. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
Buera, F. J., and J. P. Kaboski. 2012. “Scale and the Origins of Structural Change.” Journal of
     Economic Theory 147 (2): 684–712.
Caselli, F., and W. J. Coleman II. 2001. “The U.S. Structural Transformation and Regional
     Convergence: A Reinterpretation.” Journal of Political Economy 109 (3): 584–616.
CBS (Central Bureau of Statistics). 1961–1982. Ghana: Economic Surveys, 1961–1982. Accra.
—. 1970. Statistical Handbook of the Republic of Ghana. Accra.
—. 1981–1997. Quarterly Digest of Statistics. Accra.
Chapoto, A., A. Mabiso, and A. Bonsu. 2013. Agricultural Commercialization, Land Expansion,
     and Homegrown Large-Scale Farmers: Insights from Ghana. IFPRI Discussion Paper 01286.
     Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
Duarte, M., and D. Restuccia. 2010. “The Role of the Structural Transformation in Aggregate
     Productivity.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1): 129–173.
Ewusi, K. 1986. “Statistical Tables on the Economy of Ghana 1950–1985.” Accra: University of
     Ghana, Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2010. FAOSTAT database.
     http://faostat.fao.org.
Fay, M., and C. Opal. 2000. Urbanization without Growth: A Not-So-Uncommon Phenomenon.
     Policy Research Working Paper 2412. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                                          STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  193




Gollin, D. 1995. “Do Taxes on Large Firms Impede Growth? Evidence from Ghana.” University of
     Minnesota Economic Development Center Bulletins 7488: 95–99.

Gollin, D., R. Jedwab, and D. Vollrath. 2015. “Urbanization with and without Industrialization.”
     Forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Growth. http://home.gwu.edu/~jedwab/GJV2015_
     JoEG.pdf.

Gollin, D., S. L. Parente, and R. Rogerson. 2002. “The Role of Agriculture in Development.”
     American Economic Review 92 (2): 160–164.

GSS (Ghana Statistical Service). 1995. Ghana Living Standards Survey Report on the Third Round
     (GLSS3). Accra.

—. 2008. Ghana Living Standards Survey Report on the Fifth Round (GLSS5). Accra.

—. 2010. Accra.

—. Various years. Population and Housing Censuses 1960, 1970, 1984, 2000, and 2010. Accra.

Hansen, G. D., and E. C. Prescott. 2002. “Malthus to Solow.” American Economic Review 92 (4):
     1205–1217.

Harris, J. R., and M. P. Todaro. 1970. “Migration, Unemployment and Development: A Two-Sector
     Analysis.” American Economic Review 60 (1): 126–142.

Hausmann, R., D. Rodrik, and A. Velasco. 2008. “Growth Diagnostics.” In The Washington
     Consensus Reconsidered: Towards a New Global Governance, edited by J. Stiglitz and N. Serra.
     New York: Oxford University Press.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi. 2011. “Growth and Structural Transformation.”
     Draft prepared for the Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf.
     Paris: Elsevier B.V.

Hill, P. 1963. The Migrant Cocoa-Farmers of Southern Ghana: A Study in Rural Capitalism.
     Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Hsieh, C-T., and P. J. Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India.”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1403–1448.

Isham, J., M. Woolcock, L. Pritchett, and G. Busby. 2005. “The Varieties of Resource Experience:
     Natural Resource Export Structures and the Political Economy of Economic Growth.” World
     Bank Economic Review 19 (2): 141–174.

Jedwab, R. 2013. “Urbanization without Industrialization: Evidence from Consumption Cities
     in Africa.” Washington, DC: George Washington University, Department of Economics.
     Unpublished manuscript.

Jedwab, R., L. Christiaensen, and M. Gindelsky. 2015. “Demography, Urbanization and
     Development: Rural Push, Urban Pull and ... Urban Push?” Forthcoming in the Journal of
     Urban Economics.
194 Chapter 4




Jedwab, R., and R. D. Osei. 2012. Structural Change in Ghana 1960–2010. GWU IIEP Working
     Paper. Washington, DC: George Washington University, Institute for International
     Economic Policy.
Jedwab, R., and D. Vollrath. 2015a. “The Mortality Transition, Malthusian Dynamics and the
     Rise of Poor Megacities.” Washington, DC: George Washington University, Department of
     Economics. Unpublished manuscript,
—. 2015b. “Urbanization without Growth in Historical Perspective.” Forthcoming in
     Explorations in Economic History.
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., and B. E. Sorensen. 2012. Misallocation, Property Rights, and Access to Finance:
     Evidence from Within and Across Africa. NBER Working Paper 18030. Cambridge, MA:
     National Bureau of Economic Research.
Killick, T. 2010. Development Economics in Action: A Study of Economic Policies in Ghana. London:
     Heinemann Educational Books Limited.
Kingdon, G., J. Sandefur, and F. Teal. 2006. “Labour Market Flexibility, Wages and Incomes in
     Sub-Saharan Africa in the 1990s.” African Development Review 18 (3): 392–427.
Lejárraga, I. 2010. “Roaring Tiger or Purring Pussycat: A Growth Diagnostics Study of Ghana.”
     Paper prepared for the session on “Growth Diagnostics in Practice,” Annual Meeting of the
     American Economic Association, Atlanta, GA, January 4.
Lewis, W. A. 1954. “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor.” Manchester School
     of Economic and Social Studies 22 (2): 139–191.
—. 1954b. Report on The Industrialisation of the Gold Coast. Accra, Gold Coast: Government
     Printing Department.
Lipton, M. 1977. Why Poor People Stay Poor: Urban Bias in World Development. Cambridge, MA:
     Harvard University Press.
Lucas, R. E. 2004. “Life Earnings and Rural-Urban Migration.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (S1):
     S29–S59.
Maddison, A. 2008. Statistics on World Population, GDP and Per Capita GDP, 1-2008 AD.
     Groningen, Netherlands: Groningen Growth and Development Centre.
Matsuyama, K. 1992. “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and Economic Growth.”
     Journal of Economic Theory 58 (2): 317–334.
Matsuyama, K. 2010. “Structural Change.” The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics 2 (2008).
McKinsey Global Institute. 2011. Lions on the Move: The Progress and Potential of African
     Economies. London.
McMillan, M. 2013. “Structural Change in Africa.” Medford, MA: Tufts University, Department
     of Economics. Unpublished manuscript.
                                           STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN A POOR AFRICAN COUNTRY  195




McMillan, M., and D. Rodrik. 2011. Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity Growth.
     NBER Working Paper 17143. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Nweke, F. 2004. New Challenges in the Cassava Transformation in Nigeria and Ghana. IFPRI
     EPTD Discussion Paper 118. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute,
     Environment and Production Technology Division.

Osei, R. D. 2012. Aid, Growth and Private Capital Flows to Ghana. UNU–WIDER Working
     Paper 2012/22. Helsinki: United Nations University–World Institute for Development
     Economics Research.

Pickett, J., and E. Shaeeldin. 1990. “Comparative Advantage in Agriculture in Ghana.” OECD
     Development Centre Working Paper 31. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
     Development.

Poelhekke, S. 2010. “Urban Growth and Uninsured Rural Risk: Booming Towns in Bust Times.”
     Journal of Development Economics 96 (2): 461–475.

Polity IV. 2013. Political Regime Characteristics and Transitions, 1800–2013. Vienna, VA: Center
     for Systemic Peace.

Potts, D. 1995. “Shall We Go Home? Increasing Urban Poverty in African Cities and Migration
     Processes.” The Geographical Journal 161 (3): 245–264.

Ruf, F. 1995a. Booms et Crises du Cacao: Les Vertiges de l’Or Brun. Montpellier: CIRAD-SAR;
     Paris: Ministère de la Coopération and Karthala.

—. 1995b. “From ‘Forest Rent’ to ‘Tree Capital’: Basic Laws of Cocoa Supply.” In The Economics
     of Cocoa Supply, edited by F. Ruf and P. S. Siswputranto. Cambridge, UK: Woodhead Publishing
     Limited.

Sandefur, J. 2010. On the Evolution of the Firm Size Distribution in an African Economy. CSAE
     Working Paper Series 2010-05. Oxford, UK: University of Oxford, Centre for the Study of
     African Economies.

Schultz, T. W. 1953. The Economic Organization of Agriculture. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Singal, M. S., and J. D. N. Nartey. 1971. Sources and Methods of Estimation of National Income at
     Current Prices in Ghana. Accra: Central Bureau of Statistics.

Teal, F. 1999. “Why Can Mauritius Export Manufactures and Ghana Not?” World Economy 22 (7):
     981–993.

—. 2002. “Export Growth and Trade Policy in Ghana in the Twentieth Century.” World
     Economy 25 (9): 1319–1337.

Transparency International. Corruption Perceptions Index database. http://www.transparency.org/
     research/cpi/overview.
196 Chapter 4




USG-GoG (United States Government and Government of Ghana). 2011. Ghana Constraints
     Analysis (Partnership for Growth). Washington, DC, and Accra.
Voigtländer, N., and H-J. Voth. 2013. “The Three Horsemen of Riches: Plague, War, and
     Urbanization in Early Modern Europe.” Review of Economic Studies 80 (2): 774–811.
World Bank. Various years. Doing Business database. www.doingbusiness.org/.
Wolter, D. 2009. “Ghana—Seizing New Agribusiness Opportunities.” In Turning African
     Agriculture into a Business: A Reader, edited by Kiichiro Fukasaku. Paris: Organisation for
     Economic Co-operation and Development.
World Bank. 2010. World Development Indicators database . http://wdi.org.
Young, A., 2012. “The African Growth Miracle?” Journal of Political Economy 120 (4): 696-739.
                                                                                  Chapter 5


       STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND THE POSSIBILITIES
                 FOR FUTURE GROWTH IN NIGERIA

                                Adedeji Adeyinka, Sheu Salau, and Dietrich Vollrath




S
       ince the turn of the century, overall economic growth in Nigeria has been
       consistently strong—averaging around 5.4 percent per year, up substan-
       tially from about 2.0 percent during 1990–2000. Moreover, overall GDP
growth in the past decade is even higher if the oil sector—which accounts for
20–30 percent of GDP—is excluded, averaging around 8.4 percent per year, up
sharply from 2.0 percent per year (Figure 5.1). This growth pickup has occurred
alongside shifts in the composition of employment, mainly out of agriculture and
into sectors such as manufacturing and finance and business services.
    The Nigeria of today has the highest GDP in Africa south of the
Sahara—even higher than South Africa, although South Africa has a much
higher GDP per capita rate. Nigeria’s Vision 20:2020 (adopted in 2010) is
centered on positioning Nigeria to become one of the top-20 economies in
the world by 2020 (FRN/NPC 2010). Yet GDP per capita is still quite low,
along with living standards (54 percent of the population lives on less than
US$1.25 a day).1,2 The latest United Nations Development Programme
Human Development Index places Nigeria in the low human development
category, with a ranking of 152 out of 186 countries and territories. The
World Bank’s recent Doing Business database ranks Nigeria 169th out of
189 economies on “ease of doing business” and 182nd on “getting electric-
ity,” underscoring concerns about reliable power and good governance. And
unemployment and underemployment, especially for youths, pose serious
challenges. On the demographic side, Nigeria, already the continent’s
most populous country with 170 million people, is expected to see enor-
mous population growth in the decades ahead. In fact, the United Nations


 1	 In April 2014, Nigeria rebased its GDP data for 2010–2013, using 2010 as a base year for prices.
    In this chapter, we use the older GDP figures with a base year of 1990, as this provides sector-
    level breakdowns of GDP from 1990 to 2010. It is not immediately clear what effect rebasing the
    year would have on our results, as some sectors have been scaled up (telecommunications and
    information technology), while others have been scaled down (wholesale and retail trade).
 2	 All currency in this chapter is in US dollars unless otherwise specified.


                                                                                                 197
198 Chapter 5



FIGURE 5.1  Slow growth in the 1990s turns into rapid growth in the 2000s


                                 Gross domestic product growth (percentage), 1991–2010
               0.14

               0.12

               0.10                                                                             Ex-oil

               0.08
 Growth rate




               0.06
                                                                                                Total
               0.04

               0.02

               0.00

                      1990           1995                      2000                     2005                     2010
                                                               Year

Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the Nigerian National Bureau of Statistics (FRN/NBS, various years).
Note: The figure shows the growth rate of aggregate GDP in Nigeria, on a year-by-year basis. The year 2003 is excluded
because of a one-time change in reporting that falsely inflated growth.



forecasts that by 2050, Nigeria’s population will surpass that of the United
States (UN 2013).
     Fortunately, Nigeria is rich in human capital and natural resources
(especially oil and gas, but also mineral deposits). So the big question is how
best to use its enormous resources to stimulate growth and place the coun-
try on a path of sustained and rapid socioeconomic development. Clearly,
policies will need to reflect the lessons learned from past efforts on the
growth front. This chapter hopes to add to this knowledge base by dissect-
ing Nigeria’s growth between 1996 and 2009—in particular, assessing how
much of the growth in labor productivity has come from its two key com-
ponents: (1) structural change (impacts on productivity from sectoral re­­
arrangements of the labor force), and (2) within-sector change (impacts
on productivity from overall increases within sectors). We also examine
what has been occurring at the sector level, the potential gains for Nigeria
if it removes obstacles to greater structural change, and the key levers of
structural change. Mostly, we focus on the nonpetroleum portion of the
economy, which despite being only 70 percent of GDP accounts for nearly
100 percent of employment.
     Our findings show that growth in labor productivity between 1996 and
2009 was about 4.5 percent per year in the nonpetroleum economy. Of this,
             Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  199




about 1.0 percentage point of labor productivity growth was the result of
structural shifts of labor from low-productivity to high-productivity sectors,
with the remaining 3.5 percentage points coming from within-sector pro-
ductivity improvements. If we include the petroleum sector, growth in labor
productivity in the same period dips to roughly 2.9 percent per year—with
2.2 percentage points stemming from structural change and a 0.7 percentage
point from within-sector productivity.
    Despite the positive role of structural change in this period, we also find
that it could have contributed much more to growth. In fact, labor productiv-
ity could have jumped by roughly 50 percent between 1996 and 2009 under
a better economic environment and, had that occurred, growth in labor pro-
ductivity in the nonpetroleum economy would have been 3.2 percentage
points higher. The challenge now is for Nigeria to tackle a range of economic
barriers, including (1) policies that restrict agricultural productivity (like an
inadequate supply of fertilizers and the lack of appropriate infrastructure to
bring agricultural products to market); (2) a lack of infrastructure to allow
the manufacturing and business services sectors to expand and meet demands;
and (3) a lack of quality education, which limits the supply of appropriately
trained workers.


Evolution of the Nigerian Economy
When Nigeria gained independence in 1960, it was largely an agrarian econ-
omy, securing most of its export earnings and government revenues from
agriculture. But today, oil accounts for 96 percent of export earnings and
70 percent of government revenues, and the country has gone from being
self-sufficient in food to a major food importer, especially in cereals and vege-
table oils (Figure 5.2). Over much of this period, there was little net economic
growth, although the growth rate was quite volatile—reflecting an oil boom
(and soaring revenues) in the 1970s and a sharp fall in oil prices (and collaps-
ing revenues) in the 1980s. Per capita income went through similar swings,
even falling by the early 2000s to one-quarter of its mid-1970s high, below the
level at independence. Since the mid-2000s, when Nigeria secured multilateral
debt relief, the civilian government has focused on economic reforms, most
recently laid out in the 2010 Nigeria Roadmap for Power Sector Reform (PTFP
2013) and Vision 20:2020 (FRN/NPC 2010). The emphasis is on building
up and further diversifying the nonpetroleum economy to boost growth and
development. At the same time, Nigeria continues to be Africa’s largest oil
exporter (despite large cutbacks in production over the past two years, amidst
200 Chapter 5



FIGURE 5.2  From net food exporter to net importer


                                                                 Nigerian imports as percentage of total food supply, 1996–2007
                                               0.20
  Imports as percentage of total food supply




                                               0.15


                                                                  Cereals
                                               0.10

                                                                                         Vegetable oils
                                               0.05
                                                                                                               Vegetables

                                               0.00
                                                            7
                                                      6




                                                                   8


                                                                            9




                                                                                         01


                                                                                                02




                                                                                                                                       07
                                                                                                          03




                                                                                                                            05


                                                                                                                                  06
                                                                                 00




                                                                                                                 04
                                                             9


                                                                    9


                                                                           9
                                                    9

                                                          19




                                                                                       20
                                                                 19




                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                        19
                                                 19




                                                                                               20


                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                20




                                                                                              Year              20

Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the FAOSTAT database (FAO, various years).
Note: Food supply is the total amount of food available for consumption in Nigeria, roughly equal to production plus imports
minus exports, with modiﬁcations for use as feed and seed in agricultural production. Both the supply and the imports are
originally measured in metric tons.



allegations of corruption and rent seeking) and a major supplier of liquefied
natural gas to European buyers.
    The current GDP breakdown at the sectoral level—in terms of the non-
petroleum part of the economy—is typical of developing countries in Africa.
Agriculture accounts for a dominant portion of GDP, at around 50 percent of
the nonpetroleum economy (or about one-third of total GDP) (Figure 5.3). The
second major sector is wholesale and retail trade, which makes up 20 percent of
nonpetroleum GDP (or about 15 percent of total GDP). This structure is not
static, however, and over the two decades from 1990 to 2010, Nigeria experi-
enced a slow process of structural change away from agriculture—now closer to
40 percent—and into new sectors such as transport and communications.
    What has happened to labor productivity? We find that, not surprisingly,
agriculture makes up the greatest portion of employment, with nearly
60 percent, and has a relatively low level of labor productivity—at only about
two-thirds of the aggregate level (Figure 5.4). However, services, which
includes not only public employees but also many informal workers, actually
has even lower productivity, at only about 30 percent of the aggregate. Note
that the oil and gas sector is excluded from this figure because labor produc-
tivity is so large in that sector (roughly 10,000 percent higher than average),
                                  Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  201



FIGURE 5.3  Agriculture, although losing ground, still dominates


                                     Composition of gross domestic product (excluding petroleum), 1990–2010

                         1.0    General services
                                Finance and business services
                         0.9
                                Transport and communication
                         0.8
                                Wholesale and retail trade
                         0.7
  Percent of total GDP




                         0.6    Construction
                                Manufacturing
                         0.5

                         0.4

                         0.3
                                Agriculture
                         0.2

                         0.1

                         0.0
                                    2


                                              4
                           0




                                                      6




                                                                     00


                                                                             02




                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                      04




                                                                                                          08
                                                                8




                                                                                               06
                                    9
                            9




                                             9


                                                      9


                                                                9




                                                                                                                   20
                                 19
                         19




                                          19


                                                   19




                                                                    20


                                                                             20




                                                                                                        20
                                                                                    20
                                                             19




                                                                                             20


                                                                      Year

Source: Authors’ calculations from National Bureau of Statistics data on the composition of gross domestic product (GDP), in
constant 1990 prices (FRN/NBS, various years).
Note: The ﬁgure shows the fractions of GDP coming from the seven largest sectors—excluding petroleum, which typically
accounted for 20–30 percent of GDP. Other excluded sectors, because of their negligible size, are electricity, gas, and water;
mining and quarry; and undeﬁned activities. The breakdown is based on data on crop production, and electricity value-added
is adjusted for discrepancies, as described in the text.



and employment in that sector is so small (less than one-fifth of 1 percent),
that the figure would lose all meaning.
    Using household survey data for 1996–2009, we can see how the labor shares
have changed over time (Table 5.1a). Agriculture, comprising 66.5 percent
of workers in 1996, dipped to 60.8 percent by 2009. The next-largest sectors,
but still only a fraction of agriculture, are wholesale and retail trade (employ-
ing 19.4 percent of workers in 1996 before falling slightly to 17.4 percent by
2009) and general services (averaging 10.0 percent of workers, with a tempo-
rary spike in 2005 that appears to be an anomaly). Over these 13 years, as we
see in Table 5.1b, agriculture and wholesale and retail trade were the sectors los-
ing employment share, which translated into larger fractions of labor employed
in general services, transportation and communications, manufacturing, and
ﬁnance and business services. In this sense, the pattern of structural change fol-
lows the “typical” pattern one might expect from a developing country.
202 Chapter 5



FIGURE 5.4  Agriculture and services have the lowest levels of productivity


                                                                               Sector composition and productivity, 2009
                                                         400

                                                                                                                                     TCom Fire
 Sectoral productivity as % of aggregate productivity




                                                         300                                                                        Util

                                                                                                                                    Mine

                                                                                                                                 Cons
                                                         200
                                                                                                                   Manu
                                                                                                                             Trad



                                                         100
                                                                                           Agri

                                                                  Svcs
                                                           0
                                                            0.0          0.2              0.4               0.6            0.8              1.0
                                                                                        Share of employment (%)

Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the Nigerian National Bureau of Statistics (FRN/NBS, various years).
Note: The figure shows the relative labor productivity of a sector (the height of the box) against the share of employment
(the width of the box) for all sectors in Nigeria, excluding oil and gas. agri = agriculture; cons = construction; fire = finance,
insurance, real estate, and business services; manu = manufacturing; mine = mining activity, excluding oil and gas;
svcs = services; tcom = transport and communications; trad = wholesale and retail trade; util = utilities.



    Here, we should note that data from the General Household Surveys
(GHS) conducted by the National Bureau of Statistics in Nigeria for the
periods 1996–1999 and 2005–2009 (see Appendix 5B) paint a picture
of a labor force that is poorly paid and not sufficiently using both women
and youths.
  •	                                                    The fraction of the employed working for wages is extremely low, averag-
                                                        ing around 10 percent over all the surveys, and only rising to 13 percent
                                                        by 2010. The vast majority of workers are engaged in relatively informal
                                                        arrangements, working either for themselves or within the family.
  •	                                               Women make up slightly more than one-third of employment in the 1990s,
                                                   before rising slightly to average around 40 percent of employment in the
                                                   2000s. (It seems likely that women who are not employed in our calcula-
                                                   tions are concentrated in the agriculture sector, which likely understates
                                                   total agricultural employment in our calculations.)
                    Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  203




TABLE 5.1a  Agriculture still employs the most labor . . .

                        Share of employment in major sectors (percentage), 1996–2009
                                                                                Time periods
Sector                                                   1996               1999              2005               2009
Agriculture                                              66.5               62.0               58.4              60.8
Wholesale and retail trade                               19.4               20.5               17.7              17.4
General services                                           9.4              10.4               19.5              10.6
Transport and communications                               2.0                2.4               2.3                2.9
Manufacturing                                              1.9                3.1               1.1                4.1
Finance and business services                              0.2                0.5               0.4                2.4
Source: Authors’ calculations using the Nigerian General Household Surveys (FRN/NBS 2013).
Note: Sectors are deﬁned as in the ISIC revision 2 classiﬁcation to facilitate comparison across years. See Appendix 5A for
speciﬁcs on how sectors are assigned in later years.



TABLE 5.1b  . . . even though it has seen the biggest labor falls, followed by trade

              Change in share of employment in major sectors (percentage points), 1996–2009
                                                                                Time periods
Sector                                               1996–1999          1999–2005          2005–2009         1996–2009
Agriculture                                              −4.4              −3.6                 2.4              −5.6
Wholesale and retail trade                                 1.1             −2.8               −0.4               −2.1
General services                                          1.0                9.1              −9.0                 1.1
Transport and communications                              0.3                0.0                0.6               0.9
Manufacturing                                              1.2             −2.0                 3.0                2.2
Finance and business services                             0.3               −0.1                1.9                2.2
Source: Authors’ calculations using the Nigerian General Household Surveys (FRN/NBS 2013).
Note: Changes are percentage point differences between values reported in Table 5.1a.



 •	   Only 25–30 percent of the population age 15–25 is employed, with
      another 40–49 percent in school, which leaves 25–30 percent as neither in
      school nor employed—the possible result of a skills mismatch.


A Growing Role for Structural Change
How large were these movements of employment between sectors? To provide
a rough guide to the scale of the movements and their relationship to labor
productivity, Figure 5.5 shows the changes in employment shares between
1996 and 2009 against the log of relative productivity in each sector. The sizes
of the circles denoting each sector reflect their employment share in 1996.
204 Chapter 5



FIGURE 5.5  A picture of positive structural change


                                                                        Employment changes and relative productivity, 1996–2009
                                                        400

                                                                                                                                                 Fire
                                                                                                                                TCom
 Sectoral productivity as % of aggregate productivity




                                                        300
                                                                                                                         Util
                                                                                                                            Mine

                                                        200
                                                                                                                                   Cons
                                                                                                 Trad
                                                                                                                                                 Manu

                                                        100
                                                                 Agri

                                                                                                                                          Svcs
                                                          0
                                                              −0.06          −0.04              −0.02                0.00                    0.02
                                                                                 Change in employment share, 1996–2009

Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the Nigerian National Bureau of Statistics (FRN/NBS, various years).
Note: The ﬁgure shows the productivity of a sector in 2009 relative to aggregate productivity against the change in the
share (percentage) of employment in that sector from 1996 to 2009. agri = agriculture; cons = construction; fire = finance,
insurance, real estate, and business services; manu = manufacturing; mine = mining activity, excluding oil and gas;
svcs = services; tcom = transport and communications; trad = wholesale and retail trade; util = utilities.




Agriculture—the largest sector, but with low productivity—saw the largest
drop in employment share during this period. Wholesale and resale trade also
witnessed a decline in employment share, despite being slightly above average
in labor productivity. Services actually grew but remained a low-productivity
sector. The remaining sectors—including manufacturing—witnessed growth
in their share of employment and had relatively high productivity.
    Looking across sectors, the general relationship is positive, indicating that
growth in employment was occurring in sectors that were highly productive—
thus raising overall productivity between 1996 and 2009. Here, again, the oil
and gas sector is excluded, because its relative labor productivity is so large
that it would make the ﬁgure unreadable. In addition, its share of labor grew
from only 0.03 percent in 1996 to 0.2 percent in 2009. That said, our analy-
sis of the role of structural change covers the differences that arise whether the
oil and gas sector is included or excluded.
                Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  205




    What is of special interest is that this positive correlation between relative
productivity and shifts in labor is consistent with the findings of a study by
McMillan and Harttgen (2014), which looks at Africa south of the Sahara. In
the case of Nigeria, it also found a positive correlation using the period 1999–
2009. However, our finding contradicts the negative correlation found by
McMillan and Rodrik (2011), who looked at 38 countries (29 developing and
9 high-income), including Nigeria, for the period 1990–2005. We believe that
the likely reason for the discrepancy is the specific time frame that McMillan
and Rodrik (2011) use. The years prior to both 1996 and 2005 appear to have
several anomalous features when compared with the rest of the 2000s. Using
a consistent set of data (as we do here and McMillan and Harttgen (2014) do)
results in a positive correlation.
    Did the movement of employment between sectors actually contribute
meaningfully to growth in labor productivity in Nigeria? To address this, we
follow McMillan and Rodrik (2011) and decompose the overall percentage
change in labor productivity in Nigeria from 1996 to 2009 into a “within-
sector” component representing only increases in sector-level productivity
and a “structural change” component representing the reallocation of employ-
ment between sectors (see the Overview in this book for details on the meth-
odology).3 The data on value-added are available from 1990 to 2010 and are
reported in constant 1990 US dollars, calculated using sector-speciﬁc deﬂators
applied to sector-speciﬁc nominal value-added (Appendix 5C).
    Let us start by dividing the 1996–2009 period into three subperiods
(excluding oil and gas). As panel A in Table 5.2 shows, labor productivity
undergoes major swings, beginning with overall growth of only 0.8 percent
per year in the first subperiod (1996–1999), then jumping to 4.8 percent in
the second subperiod (1999–2005), and rising again to 7 percent in the final
subperiod (2005–2009). For the period as a whole, labor productivity grew at
4.5 percent per year.
    At the same time, structural change experienced major swings. In the
first subperiod (1996–1999), it was the only factor contributing positively

 3	 Algebraically, the decomposition is:
                                              N                      N
                                     Δ Pt =   ∑θ
                                              i–1
                                                    i,t−k Δ pi,t +   ∑p
                                                                     i–1
                                                                           i,tΔθi,t

	   where Δ Pt is the change in aggregate labor productivity between period t − k and t. The ﬁrst
    term is the “within-sector” component, which is a weighted average of the change in labor pro-
    ductivity in each of the N sectors, with the weight for sector i being the labor share of that sector
    in period t − k, measured by θi,t−k . The second term is the “structural change” component, which
    is a weighted average of the change in labor shares in the N sectors, with the weights captured by
    the labor productivity of the sector in period t.
206 Chapter 5




TABLE 5.2  Structural change starts to take on a bigger role in the mid-2000s

                        Structural components of labor productivity change, 1996–2009
                                                                             Time periods
Structural components                            1996–1999          1999–2005           2005–2009           1996–2009
Panel A: Excluding oil and gas
  % annual growth productivity                        0.8                 4.8                 7.0                4.5
of which:
  % “within-sector” productivity                    −2.0                  9.4                 2.6                3.5
  % “structural change”                               2.8               –4.6                  4.4                1.0
Panel B: Including oil and gas
  % annual growth productivity                      −0.8                  4.4                 4.1                2.9
of which:
  % “within-sector” productivity                     −7.1                 6.2               −1.6                 0.7
  % “structural change”                               6.3               −1.8                  5.7                2.2
Source: Authors’ calculations. Data on output by industry are from Nigerian National Bureau of Statistics (FRN/NBS, various
years), and workers engaged in each industry are calculated from the Nigerian General Household Surveys (FRN/NBS
1996–2009).
Note: See Appendix 5A for a translation of industries reported by NBS into standard International Standard Industrial
Classification revision 2 codes. See Appendix 5B for a description of labor force data.



(2.8 percent per year) to overall productivity growth, as within-sector produc-
tivity actually fell by 2 percent per year, although the transfer of labor from
low-productivity sectors to high-productivity sectors was able to turn overall
labor productivity positive.
    In the next two subperiods, we can see the effect of the spike in services’
share of employment in 2005. Between 1999 and 2005, the implied contri-
bution of structural change was negative, reﬂecting the anomalous increase
in services. Then from 2005 to 2009, the reversion to the typical level of ser-
vices employment shows up as a very large contribution of structural change to
labor productivity growth.
    Given the service spike anomaly, a look at the decomposition of the full
time span (1996–2009) is likely the most informative of all. We find that
during the robust growth in labor productivity (4.5 percent per year), the big
driver was within-sector growth (with 3.5 percentage points), while structural
change accounted for the remaining 1.0 percentage point (about 21 percent
of the total). On net, labor moved away from agriculture and wholesale and
retail trade, with relatively low productivity, and into ﬁnance and business
services, manufacturing, services, and transport, which as a group had rela-
tively high productivity—although this effect was small relative to the overall
increase in labor productivity within sectors.
                   Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  207




     What happens if we include the oil and gas sector? As panel B in Table 5.2
 shows, several of the patterns remain intact, but the role of structural change
 becomes exaggerated. In particular, if we take the whole period (1996–2009),
 growth is lower—just 2.9 percent per year, as opposed to 4.5 percent when the
 oil and gas sector is excluded. Of this gain, the main factor is structural shifts,
 at 2.2 percentage points, unlike when the oil and gas sector is excluded (then
“within” is the main factor). This exaggeration arises because there is a minute
 change in the fraction of workers in the mining industry (which includes oil
 and gas), rising from 0.03 percent of the workforce in 1996 to 0.2 percent of
 the workforce by 2009. In addition, labor productivity in the oil and gas sec-
 tor is so high that this small shift in labor implies an enormous gain in overall
 labor productivity.
     Which non-oil sectors pulled in the most labor from agriculture and
 wholesale and retail trade, and what were their relative labor productivities?
 Table 5.3 shows the labor productivity in 2009 of each major sector relative
 to agriculture, as well as the change in employment share in each sector. We
 can see that while wholesale and retail trade is relatively productive, it lost
 2.1 percentage points of employment in this period. Moreover, employment
 shifting out of agriculture and trade into general services was actually bad for
 productivity, as general services had a productivity of only one-third of agri-
 culture’s level.
     The biggest sources of the positive structural change were the movements
 of employment into transportation and communications and the ﬁnance
 industries. Each of these sectors has labor productivity more than four times

TABLE 5.3  Transportation and communications sector outperforms other sectors

           Sector productivity levels relative to agriculture and employment changes, 1996–2009
                                                  Change in                                          Change in labor
                                                employment,                 Relative labor             productivity
                                                 1995–2009                   productivity,             1996–2009
Sector                                       (percentage points)                2009                  (percentage)
Agriculture                                          −5.6                        1.00                        58.6
Wholesale and retail trade                           −2.1                        2.29                      164.0
General services                                       1.1                       0.34                        58.4
Transportation and communications                      0.9                       4.60                      236.1
Manufacturing                                          2.2                       2.17                      −30.9
Finance and business services                          2.2                       4.95                      −86.7
Source: Authors’ calculations using output data from the Nigerian National Bureau of Statistics (FRN/NBS, various years) and
labor force in each industry from the Nigerian General Household Surveys (FRN/NBS 1996–2009). Changes in employment
are taken from Table 5.1.
Note: Labor productivity is reported relative to agriculture for each sector.
208 Chapter 5




higher than agriculture. By together adding about 3 percentage points to their
share of employment, these two sectors contributed signiﬁcantly to growth
between 1996 and 2009.
    It is interesting to examine the distinction between levels of productivity
and growth in productivity. Structural change was positive for growth
because the levels of productivity in transportation, ﬁnance, and manufactur-
ing were generally higher than in agriculture and trade. However, growth in
productivity in those three sectors was not necessarily positive. As can be seen
in Table 5.3, in manufacturing and ﬁnance and business services, productiv-
ity growth was actually negative during 1996–2009, consistent with declining
marginal returns to labor in those sectors.
    Contrast this performance to that of the transportation and communica-
tions industry, which had both productivity growth and levels of productiv-
ity that were higher than those of any other major sector. The combination of
high productivity growth and an inﬂow of employment provides prima facie
evidence of either technological improvements or signiﬁcant capital accumula-
tion in transportation and communications. In the declining sectors, agricul-
ture and trade, the level of productivity was relatively low, but grew over this
period. These sectors thus contributed in two ways to overall labor productiv-
ity growth: first, by passing employment off to more productive uses; and sec-
ond, through their own labor productivity growth.


Gradual Move into New Economic Areas
Drilling down into the subsectors, we gain more insights into Nigeria’s eco-
nomic evolution, especially a gradual broadening of economic activities. One
caveat here is that the data are fragile, given that we are using the GHS and
the absolute numbers of people reporting activity in any given subsector can
be quite small.
    Manufacturing. In 1996, nearly two-thirds of the manufacturing employ-
ees in Nigeria were reported to be in the textile, apparel, and leather goods
subsector. However, by 2009, the distribution of manufacturing work had
shifted substantially, with this subsector employing less than 30 percent of
manufacturing labor. The main beneﬁciary of this drop was the manufacture
of food, beverages, and tobacco, which employed 36 percent of manufactur-
ing labor, as opposed to only 4 percent in 1996. Given the absolute growth in
manufacturing workers from 1996 to 2009, the food and beverage subsector
grew by a factor of nearly 27 in absolute terms, absorbing most of the addi-
tional manufacturing labor.
             Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  209




    Finance and business services. This sector grew by roughly the same
number of workers as manufacturing between 1996 and 2009. By using the
more detailed ISIC revision 4 classiﬁcations available in 2009, we can see that
much of the labor engaged in this industry appears to have come from the
expansion of office administration and security services activities.
    Transportation and communications. This sector is dominated by trans-
portation activities. In 2009, 84 percent of the sector worked in the transpor-
tation subsector, while in 1996 the comparable number was 94 percent. The
three largest nontransportation subsectors in 2009 were information ser-
vices, telecommunications, and computer programming. Together these three
accounted for about 14.5 percent of the entire sector employment. The rela-
tively high-tech subsectors of information services, telecommunications, and
computer programming contributed significantly to overall labor productiv-
ity growth.
    General services. Unlike the others, this sector has a relatively small labor
productivity level, and so the shift of employment into this industry was actu-
ally a net drag on aggregate labor productivity. This shift into the services
industry was almost exclusively the result of the addition of employment in
education and personal and household services (mostly “other personal ser-
vices,” which likely is a catch-all for domestic service and similar work, and
may reﬂect part of the reason why the general services sector had such low lev-
els of measured labor productivity).
    Thus, between 1996 and 2009, Nigeria saw a broad shift of employment
out of agriculture and trade into a few particular subsectors: the manufac-
ture of food products; office administration and support; security and inves-
tigation; high technology (telecommunications, computer programming, and
information services); education; and other personal services. This movement
appears to reflect a general broadening of the types of economic activities
Nigerians engage in as they move out of the agricultural and trade activities
that still dominate employment (Table 5.4).


Using Human Capital to Measure Labor Effort
But before we move on, it is important to ask whether this decomposition of
growth may misstate the role of structural change, given that we have used
productivity per worker, rather than a more refined measure that accounts
for human capital and time spent working by those workers. Here we ask
whether accounting for human capital levels and/or hours worked changes our
prior decomposition significantly. We do this by decomposing value-added
210 Chapter 5




TABLE 5.4  Agriculture and trade still dominate employment

                                 ISIC revision 4 subsector employment shares, 2009
ISIC-4 subsector                                                                         Percentage of employment
Crop and animal production                                                                            59.43
Retail trade, excluding motor vehicles                                                                13.44
Education                                                                                              3.27
Other personal services                                                                                3.17
Public administration and defense                                                                      2.32
Land transport and transport via pipeline                                                              2.28
Food and beverage service activities                                                                   1.51
Wholesale, retail, and repair of motor vehicles                                                        1.50
Manufacture of food products                                                                           1.38
Construction of buildings                                                                              1.03
Human health activities                                                                                0.92
Fishing and aquaculture                                                                                0.90
Manufacture of wearing apparel                                                                         0.89
Office administration, support                                                                         0.84
Wholesale trade, excluding motor vehicles                                                              0.82
Security and investigation                                                                             0.48
Manufacture of furniture                                                                               0.36
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2009 Nigerian General Household Survey (FRN/NBS 2010).
Note: The subsectors are International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) revision 4 categories, as reported in the GHS.


per unit of human capital, value-added per hour worked, and value-added
per hour worked by each unit of human capital (see Appendix 5D for details).
We report the results excluding the oil and gas sector, but the adjustment to
the results of including that sector are similar to what was seen in Table 5.2,
where overall growth in labor productivity is slower, but structural change
accounts for a larger fraction of that growth.
    Our results show that from 1996 to 2009, human capital productivity
grew by 2.3 percent per year—roughly half of what we saw for growth in labor
productivity (Table 5.5, panel A). This implies that human capital per worker
roughly doubled, accounting for a large portion of the raw labor productivity
increase. Of this, the share attributable to the structural shift of human capi-
tal between sectors was about a 0.5 percentage point—which is a share propor-
tionally similar to, if slightly higher than, that seen for labor productivity. The
similar breakdown of growth into within-sector and structural change growth
                   Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  211




TABLE 5.5  Structural change was broad based in terms of human capital

                     Components of productivity change using human capital, 1996–2009
                                                                            Time periods
Components                                  1996–1999            1999–2005           2005–2009            1996–2009
Panel A: Productivity per unit of
human capital
  % change productivity                        −1.9                   1.2                  7.4                 2.3
of which:
  % “within-sector” productivity               −2.0                   4.2                  3.1                 1.8
  % “structural change”                          0.1                −3.0                   4.3                 0.5
Panel B: Productivity per hour
  % change productivity                          6.1                  3.5                  7.4                 5.3
of which:
  % “within-sector” productivity                 4.8                  7.2                  3.7                 4.3
  % “structural change”                          1.3                −3.7                   3.6                 0.9
Panel C: Productivity per hour of
human capital
  % change productivity                          0.8                  1.2                  8.0                 3.1
of which:
  % “within-sector” productivity                 2.2                  3.7                  4.3                 2.7
  % “structural change”                        −1.3                 −2.5                   3.7                 0.5
Source: Authors’ calculations using data described in Appendix 5D.
Note: The panels show the decomposition of productivity growth in the noted periods. For a comparison, see Table 5.2,
which measures productivity in terms of output per worker.


implies that the shifts of human capital were broad based. That is, there is not
any indication that only high-education or low-education workers were mov-
ing from and into sectors.
    What about productivity per hour of work? Here, too, our results are quite
similar to those for labor productivity (Table 5.5, panel B). In other words,
variation in hours across industries is not very signiﬁcant, and there has not
been a signiﬁcant change in the average hours worked in the whole economy
in this period. There is an overall growth in hourly productivity of 5.3 percent
per year from 1996 to 2009; of this, a 0.9 percentage point is the result of
structural shifts from industries with low hourly productivity to high-produc-
tivity industries.
    Finally, we can adjust for both hours and human capital, and measure
hourly human capital productivity changes. Once again, the overall story
remains similar to that of labor productivity (Table 5.5, panel C). From 1996
to 2009, structural shifts into industries with relatively high productivity per
212 Chapter 5




human capital hour accounted for about 0.5 percentage points of the overall
3.1 percent growth rate in productivity. Thus, the structural change in Nigeria
over this period was broad based in the sense that individual workers, hours
worked, and human capital all shifted similarly out of agriculture and the
trade sectors into the rest of the economy.


Potential Gains from Further Structural Change
The big question, though, is whether structural change could have been an
even greater force for growth. Here, we ask the following question: If labor
(or human capital) had been able to ﬂow into the sectors where it was the
most productive, how much higher would value-added per worker (or per unit
of human capital) have been? Or taking a forward perspective, how much
growth could we possibly still expect from structural change?
    To answer these questions we employ a very simple theoretical setting that
describes how value-added per worker is related to the number of workers in
a sector. It is quite similar to the setting used by other studies on the role of
misallocations between sectors (such as Chanda and Dalgaard 2008; Vollrath
2009; and Cordoba and Ripoll 2009). Essentially, we ask how much higher
value-added per worker would be if we shifted workers among sectors until
we reached the optimal allocation. Notably, we assume that each sector exhib-
its diminishing returns to labor. This means that moving workers from agri-
culture to transportation and communications will raise aggregate output per
worker, but eventually per-worker productivity in transportation and commu-
nications will fall (and that in agriculture will rise), and there will no longer
be any gain from moving workers. The optimal allocation is where all workers
have the same value-added per worker, and there is no longer any gain from
shifting a worker into another sector (see Appendix 5E for more details on the
methodology).4
    Using this method, we ﬁnd a possible gain in value-added per worker of
54 percent. This gain comes primarily from moving workers out of agriculture.
The fraction of workers who remain in agriculture in our counterfactual cal-
culation is only 4.24 percent—a very low number that reflects the extremely
low productivity in Nigerian agriculture. Maximizing output per worker
would involve shifting a massive number of workers out of low-productivity

 4	 The implication is that the current allocation of labor across sectors in Nigeria is inefficient,
   in the sense that income is not maximized. This does not necessarily mean that the allocation
   is suboptimal from a welfare perspective. There may be costs to shifting labor between sectors
   that make the current allocations welfare maximizing from an individual perspective.
             Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  213




agriculture into other sectors. In comparison, the proportion in transpor-
tation and communications would be 33 percent, and that in ﬁnance and
business services would be 34 percent. Unsurprisingly, the allocation that
maximizes value-added per worker is heavily skewed toward those sectors with
the highest actual value-added per worker. If these shifts had occurred over
the period under study, 1996–2009, this would have raised labor productivity
growth by approximately 3.2 percent per year.
    What if we use the units of human capital instead of the number of work-
ers? Now we ﬁnd value-added could be 25 percent higher if human capital
were rearranged among sectors to equalize the value-added per unit of human
capital. If this shift had occurred between 1996 and 2009, it would have
raised growth in labor productivity by about 1.7 percent per year.
    An important caveat to these results is that they ignore the oil and gas
industry. A collapse of oil prices or a slowdown of production would lead
to a signiﬁcant loss of GDP, but likely would have an impact on the struc-
ture of employment within Nigeria as well. While we cannot calculate a
precise number, some of the structural change that has actually taken place
to this point is likely driven by oil revenues, leading to greater demand for
services—often urban services. If oil revenues were to collapse, then this
demand would shrink, causing a shift of labor out of service sectors. Where
precisely this labor would go is unclear, but a likely outcome is a ﬂow of
labor back into rural areas and possibly agricultural work. Moreover, if oil
revenues were to disappear rapidly, the structural change that has occurred
so far might come undone.


Levers of Structural Change
Clearly there appears to be great scope for growth through further structural
change, but so far, little progress is being made. What are the key barriers that
hinder further development? Let us start with the biggest non-oil sector, agri-
culture, where productivity is still very low.

Agricultural Production Needs to Be Stimulated
A number of constraints on agriculture prevent it from being a larger con-
tributor to the process of structural change. One of the most important is
the sector’s limited use of fertilizer and improved varieties of crops. Nigeria
uses about 10–15 kilograms per hectare (kg/ha) of fertilizer—far below
the 100–200 kg/ha used in most developed nations. In the early 2000s, the
National Fertilizer Company of Nigeria (NAFCON) was shuttered, and ever
214 Chapter 5




since all the fertilizer used in Nigeria has been imported.5 Increases in inter­
national fertilizer prices have kept imports low, despite the presence of subsi-
dies of 25 percent since 2001 (Phillip et al. 2009).
    An additional issue is that the fertilizer that is imported often fails to
make it to the smallholders who dominate the agriculture sector. Several bar-
riers prevent an efficient distribution to those who might beneﬁt most, such
as poor transportation links from ports to inland destinations and a lack of
any meaningful distribution network (Phillip et al. 2009). The World Bank
(2007) notes that the density of roads in the rural areas is extremely low, with
only 0.06 kilometers (km) of road per 10 hectares of cultivable land, com-
pared with rates of 0.18 km in Tanzania and 0.19 km in India. This leaves
30 million rural inhabitants more than 2 km from the nearest road.
    Several studies corroborate that it is actually constraints on the supply of
necessary inputs that limit the reach of improved farming techniques, rather
than an unwillingness of farmers to try them. In cases where extension ser-
vices have introduced improved varieties of crops, adoption rates are often
above 75 percent, and normally well above 50 percent of treated farmers.
However, packages of improvements (which include improved techniques and
use of larger quantities of fertilizer) have a much lower adoption rate (World
Bank 2008, Annex 6; Taiwo 2007). Moreover, the limited infrastructure to
deliver needed inputs to agriculture is mirrored in a lack of infrastructure to
get agricultural products to market, with transportation costs between one-
third and one-half of the cost of bringing agricultural crops to market (Fade-
Aluko 2007).
    Another major hurdle, especially for smallholders, is securing financing
for improving productivity. One study reports that none of the farmers in its
sample in Oyo and Ogun states was able to access conventional bank loans to
ﬁnance projects, relying instead on cooperatives or friends and family (Phillip
and Adetimir 2001). At a national level, the loan picture is getting even worse.
The Central Bank of Nigeria reports that in 1993, 16.4 percent of all loans
were made to the agriculture sector, while by 2009 that percentage was down
to 1.5 percent (CBN 2010). In terms of total value-added from agriculture,
loans were equal to 12 percent of the total in 1993 and only 3 percent by 2009.
    Three parastatal entities are supposed to deliver credit services to the
agriculture sector. The Nigerian Agricultural, Cooperative, and Rural
Development Bank was created in 2000 to provide credit directly as well as

 5	 A company named Notore acquired many of the assets of NAFCON in 2009, and is now begin-
   ning to produce again for the domestic market.
             Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  215




loan guarantees. The Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme Fund has existed
for more than 30 years, guaranteeing credit on behalf of farmers. And the
Agricultural Credit Support Scheme was established in 2006 to subsidize
commercial bank loans to the agriculture sector. But the extent to which these
institutions have penetrated the rural market is quite limited.
    Over the past decade, there have been several major policy initiatives to
improve the situation, although all of them have fallen short. The Presidential
Initiative on Cassava—launched in 2002 to increase the production of starch,
chips, and ﬂour, and raise exports of cassava products by $5 billion by 2007—
has received only a fraction of the 65.6 billion naira budgeted (FAO). Major
constraints to exporting cassava include a lack of adequate storage facilities, a
lack of railway systems for moving large volumes of cassava from inland pro-
duction areas to processing plants, and a lack of port facilities for agricul-
tural exports.
    Similar issues plague the Presidential Initiative on Rice and the
Presidential Initiative on Vegetable Oil Development. Promised funds have
not been released, and output and the ability to process the output have not
grown appreciably. In fact, neither rice nor cassava production has grown any
faster than maize, a crop that was not subject to a speciﬁc initiative (Phillip et
al. 2009).
    The bottom line is that the shifts of labor out of agriculture are a positive
contributor to aggregate labor productivity growth. But if better practices—
such as increased fertilizer use and better infrastructure for bringing crops to
market—were adopted, the gains to agricultural labor productivity could be
quite large, accelerating the structural changes that are now proceeding only
very slowly.

Trade Policies Need to Be Further Liberalized
The speciﬁc patterns of tariff protection within certain sectors are closely cor-
related with the patterns of employment within those sectors, although the
tariff protection itself does not appear to have a signiﬁcant effect on the scale
of structural change itself. This shows up most clearly within manufacturing.
    Overall, manufacturing raised its share of employment from 1.9 percent in
1996 to 4.1 percent in 2009. Within that sector, tariffs on intermediate and
ﬁnal goods vary by subsector.
    For four key subsectors (food and beverages, textiles, wood products, and
paper and printing), there is a distinct degree of tariff escalation across stages
of production (WTO 2005)—meaning low tariffs on imports involved in the
initial stage of production (that is, raw materials) combined with high tariffs
216 Chapter 5




on imports of the ﬁnal goods. As a result, raw materials and necessary inputs
can be purchased relatively cheaply, while their output is competitive because
of the high end-product tariffs. The differences in tariff rates between the
ﬁnal and initial stages are quite large (20 percentage points for food and bever-
age, 25 for textiles, 30 for wood products, and 15 for paper and printing).
    The protection accorded these subsectors shows up in sectoral alloca-
tions. In manufacturing, the subsectors with the largest shares of workers are
food products (1.38 percent), wearing apparel (0.89 percent), and furniture
(0.36 percent) (Table 5.4). While none of these shares is particularly large rel-
ative to the economy as a whole, these subsectors form the dominant propor-
tion of all manufacturing work.
    Textiles are a particularly interesting case, as they face not only a favor-
able tariff structure but also outright import bans on 70 percent of tariff
lines—which continue to exist despite Nigeria’s adoption of the Economic
Community of West African States common external tariff in October 2005.
Yet despite this degree of protection, the share of labor working in textiles has
been falling, and a vibrant textile industry has yet to materialize. Moreover,
these measures appear to have diverted resources into smuggling (Raballand
and Mjekiqi 2010). One issue may be that after the Multi-Fibre Arrangement
expired in 2005, a ﬂood of low-cost producers from Southeast Asia and else-
where entered the market. While Nigeria may have low-cost labor capable of
supporting a larger textile sector, it becomes uncompetitive once nonlabor
costs to trade are factored in.
    Tariff structures for the remaining areas of manufacturing do not have a
similar escalation across stages of production. For nonmetallic mineral prod-
ucts, tariffs on initial-stage products are nearly 10 percentage points higher
than ﬁnal-stage tariffs, meaning that producers face high input costs and lim-
ited output protection. Within the manufacturing sector as a whole, then, tar-
iff patterns appear to be closely correlated with the type of work done. This
pattern favors food, textiles, and furniture production relative to the remain-
ing subsectors. But while the protection ensures that these sectors do not face
intense international competition, it has not engendered any sustained expan-
sion of these sectors.
    In general, agricultural end products face very high tariffs. From the late
1990s until 2002, the average tariff rate on the output of the agriculture sector
was 27 percent, rising to 42 percent after that. This compares with an average
tariff on the output of the manufacturing sector of 24 percent prior to 2002
and 28 percent afterward. Within agriculture, fruits and vegetables carry
import tariffs of 98 percent; tobacco, 90 percent; and nonwater beverages,
             Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  217




75 percent. Additionally, several agricultural products are simply prohib-
ited from being imported (like wheat ﬂour, sorghum, cassava, and frozen
poultry). Although numerous products were removed from the banned list in
October 2008, the remaining bans cover many goods with signiﬁcant trade
possibilities. Similarly, imports of major construction goods (like cement, steel,
and wood) are restricted. In each case, this leads to shortages and higher prices
for construction projects. In the case of timber, builders are forced to use local
hardwood, which is more expensive and could otherwise be exported.
    On the export side, several programs were set up to explicitly foster growth.
The Export Expansion Grant (EEG) program makes grants of 15–30 percent
of export value. A similar Manufacture-in-Bond (MIB) program involves
the duty-free importation of raw materials for use in producing exportable
products. Also, the Pioneer Tax program provides tax holidays for those who
export at least half of their total production. And there are 17 free trade zones
(FTZs), some of which target speciﬁc industries (particularly oil and gas).
    How have these programs fared? One recent study ﬁnds a very limited
impact, citing a low uptake of the programs (Mousley 2010). It says that
only 94 ﬁrms accessed the Pioneer Tax program from 2006 to 2010, while
almost all FTZs are related to oil and gas. Further, the EEG and MIB pro-
grams generated very few jobs, with ﬁrms stymied by daunting documenta-
tion requirements.
    More broadly, policy and practice act to limit trade. Nigeria ranked 144th
out of 181 countries in the World Bank’s Doing Business 2009 rankings
(World Bank). Hurdles include a large number of export documents required
(10 for Nigeria, compared with 6 in Ghana and 4 in Singapore); high export
container costs ($1,179, which is roughly twice that of the most efficient oper-
ators in the world); hefty import container costs ($1,306, which is between
two and three times higher than the most efficient countries); and lengthy
import clearance times (nearly 42 days, compared with 26 in Kenya, 29 in
Ghana, and only 3 in Singapore).
    Complicating matters is the naira’s exchange rate. Although the naira has
maintained a stable exchange rate with the US dollar over the past 12 years,
following a major depreciation in 1999 (Box 5.1), the dollar itself has been
slowly depreciating over most of this time period versus other major curren-
cies (especially the euro and pound sterling). Given that the United Kingdom
and Europe are major trading partners with Nigeria, this means that imports
from those countries have been getting more expensive over time, limiting fur-
ther the ability to import necessary inputs. While the depreciated exchange
rate should also make exports more competitive, restrictive tariff policies and
218 Chapter 5




   Box 5.1  The                            naira’s role in foreign trade
   The sharp depreciation of the naira after 1999 (Figure B5.1)—part of the
   package of financial reforms that took place with the return to democracy—
   should have made exporting more lucrative and raised the prices of imports.
   Also, the more transparent foreign exchange management system has led to
   a much less volatile exchange rate, which has helped boost oil revenues.
       However, the sectors that may have been expected to beneﬁt through
   exports (like textiles) have not expanded appreciably because of the high
   costs of exporting. On the other hand, the depreciated naira—not only in
   nominal but also in real terms—has increased the cost of imports, which has
   had direct effects on consumer prices of food and vegetable oils, as well as
   on imports that may be useful in raising productivity. An example is fertilizer,
   whose limited use stands as a major barrier to higher agricultural productiv-
   ity. Still, an open question is whether a further depreciation will be needed in
   the absence of trade liberalization.

   Figure B5.1  Stability after depreciation


                                                         US dollar/naira exchange rate, 1990–2010
                                    0.14

                                    0.12
       Dollar/naira exchange rate




                                    0.12

                                    0.08

                                    0.06

                                    0.04

                                    0.02

                                    0.00
                                       90

                                              92

                                                    94

                                                            96

                                                                   98

                                                                          00

                                                                                 02

                                                                                        04

                                                                                               06

                                                                                                    08

                                                                                                         10
                                      19

                                             19

                                                   19

                                                          19

                                                                 19

                                                                        20

                                                                                 20

                                                                                      20

                                                                                              20

                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                         20




                                                                          Year


   Source: Authors’ calculations from the World Development Indicators database (World Bank, various years).
   Note: A lower dollar/naira exchange rate value means a depreciation of the naira.
              Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  219




the lack of infrastructure have likely prevented Nigerian exporters from tak-
ing full advantage.
    In the end, the restrictive tariff policies and import bans have acted to
freeze Nigeria’s economic structure. Insulated from competition, there is little
incentive for firms to improve their productivity, which would allow for either
an expansion of output or a shift of resources away from the protected sectors.
The tariff structure has managed to focus manufacturing on several speciﬁc
subsectors, but it has not been able to signiﬁcantly boost manufacturing
employment overall. Import bans have not provided any incentive for domes-
tic industries to expand, instead simply shifting trade into unofficial channels.
The costs of necessary inputs that would contribute to productivity growth
(like fertilizer and cement) are made more expensive by an exchange rate pol-
icy that favors a stable but devalued naira.
    Moreover, regardless of the precise tariff policies in Nigeria, competi-
tion from numerous other developing countries producing similar entry-level
manufactured goods (like textiles)—but operating with lower transportation
costs—certainly hinders the ability of manufacturing to grow signiﬁcantly.
To the extent that there are economies of scale involved in manufacturing,
then the developing industries in Southeast Asia will continue to be lower-cost
producers than those in Nigeria. Overcoming that advantage and making
manufacturing exports a driver of structural change will require a signiﬁcant
reduction in costs in Nigeria, either directly through lowering the logistical
barriers to trade or indirectly by a signiﬁcant devaluation of the naira.

Infrastructure Needs to Be More Widespread and Reliable
A commonly cited reason for low productivity in Nigerian industry is the
lack of reliable power. As a result, firms are forced to rely on self-generation
to ensure electricity supplies, which requires substantial resources that could
other­wise be used to invest in the ﬁrms’ productivity or for expansion and the
creation of new wage positions. Take the following examples.
 •	   Nigeria produces only around 4,000 megawatts (MW) of power—far
      below the 39,000 MW of South Africa, with only one-third of Nigeria’s
      population (World Bank 2007).
 •	   In the 2002 World Bank Regional Program on Enterprise Development
      survey, about 94 percent of ﬁrms reported power as being their number
      one problem—more than twice the percentage of any other individual con-
      straint on growth—and more than 90 percent of them had some facility to
      generate their own power (World Bank 2002).
220 Chapter 5




 •	   A 2003 survey of firms in Abia and Anambra states found that 90 percent
      of ﬁrms named infrastructure as a constraint on their business, and
      85 percent cited the high cost of utilities (World Bank 2007).
 •	   Up to 15 percent of total payrolls for industrial firms in Nigeria goes
      toward maintaining self-generation facilities; 20 percent of the costs of new
      investment projects is for infrastructure investments (like power, water,
      and telecoms); and 22 percent of the value of equipment and machinery in
      business is for electricity generation (World Bank 2007).
    Thus, it seems safe to assert that disruptions and limitations caused by the
sporadic power supply are a signiﬁcant constraint on Nigerian manufacturing
and industry, leading to a constriction of the nonagriculture sectors. At this
point, fewer ﬁrms are entering the manufacturing sector because of the high
costs of start-up associated with providing one’s own power, and ﬁrms are
operating below capacity because of the lack of reliable power supplies.
    Similarly, infrastructure related to transportation is a major problem for
industry. While some roads are relatively well maintained (for example, Lagos-
Kano), almost half (46 percent) of Nigeria’s roads are classiﬁed as being in
poor condition. More than half of the local roads, in particular, which con-
stitute two-thirds of the total kilometers in the system, are in poor condition
(World Bank 2007). The railway system also has major problems that make
reliability low and limit its usefulness to industry. Locomotive availability at
the Nigerian Railway Corporation is only 6 percent, compared with an aver-
age of 75 percent in the rest of Africa. Wagons and passenger coaches both
have an availability of less than 30 percent (World Bank 2007). As a result,
nearly all cargo is transported by road.
    One notable contrast to these infrastructure problems is telecommunica-
tions. Following liberalization in 1999, this subsector has grown demonstrably,
with four mobile operators and more than 20 ﬁxed-line operators. The density
of telephone subscriptions reached 16 percent by 2005 from a rate of less than
1 percent in 2000. We noted before the rapid growth of the telecommunica-
tions subsector as a part of the overall growth in the transportation and com-
munications sector. It is worth recalling that this subsector also showed the
most notable growth in labor productivity between 1996 and 2010. It is regu-
lated by the Nigeria Communications Commission, which is independent of
the national telecommunications company NITEL, in which the government
is pursuing the sale of a large stake.
    In other areas of infrastructure, the Infrastructure Concession Regulatory
Act of 2005 allows for public–private partnerships in delivering electricity,
            Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  221




water, and other basic utilities. The act allows the government to contract
with private companies to either build, operate, and transfer new infrastruc-
ture projects, or take on the repair, maintenance, and operation of existing
facilities. An Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission was estab-
lished to regulate and monitor the contracts. To the extent that these new
regulations will generate an expansion in infrastructure services similar to
telecommunications, they can foster positive structural change, although at
this point the verdict is still out.

Human Capital Needs to Be Further Developed
A final major barrier to structural change appears to be the lack of suitable
human capital for formal sector, technical jobs. As a recent World Bank report
notes, “...there are mismatches between skills being developed by present pub-
lic policies and those required to support structural change and employment
in the labor market” (Billetoft 2010). This is a problem for a nation with only
28 percent of young people (age 15–25) in the labor force, and only 63 percent
of them age 25–35.
    The ﬁrst source of this mismatch can be traced to general education.
Even in 2009, a large portion of the workforce (including most agricul-
tural workers) consisted of individuals with only a primary education. The
actual breakdown was: about 37.0 percent of all individuals over the age
of 20 had completed only primary school or less; 6.0 percent had com-
pleted junior secondary school; 34.0 percent had completed senior second-
ary school; 8.0 percent had the equivalent of a baccalaureate degree (which
includes the Higher National Diploma); 2.1 percent had a post­baccalaureate
degree; another 10.0 percent obtained the National Diploma, the Nigerian
Certiﬁcate in Education, or nursing degrees (all technical or vocational
tertiary degrees); and less than 0.1 percent had completed a degree at a
vocational or technical college that serves as an alternative to senior second-
ary school.
    The lack of graduates from this last group seems particularly relevant to
the process of structural change. These programs involve teaching skills, such
as electrical installation, welding and fabrication, bookkeeping, plumbing,
and carpentry. While higher education is generally valuable, the supply of
graduates with baccalaureate degrees appears to be out of proportion to the
supply of graduates with the skills appropriate for the developing manufactur-
ing and construction sectors.
    A reason for the limited supply of workers who may be likely to move
into growing sectors—such as manufacturing and construction—is that the
222 Chapter 5




National Board of Technical Education (NBTE) has not been able to provide
sufficient resources to train these students. The African Development Fund
(2005) found that technical colleges are unable to respond to labor market
needs because their capital and methods are outdated.
    In an effort to improve the education picture, two types of new insti-
tutions were introduced by the Federal Ministry of Education in 2007—
the Vocational Enterprise Institutions (VEIs) and Innovation Enterprise
Institutions (IEIs). These privately run institutions serve secondary school
leavers (VEIs) and those with some postsecondary education (IEIs). They
were designed to equip the students with the technical skills demanded by
industry, enabling them to take on formal-sector jobs that otherwise they
would not be qualiﬁed for, even if they held baccalaureate degrees. The NBTE
reports that in 2008 a total of 138 program areas were being offered in 2 VEIs
and 22 IEIs (Billetoft 2010). It is too early to evaluate whether these institu-
tions will have a material impact on structural change within Nigeria, as their
ﬁrst graduates only entered the job market in 2010.6
    Several tertiary institutions (including the polytechnics and monotech-
nics) ostensibly already provide some of this kind of training, although their
poor funding and low status serve as roadblocks to increasing their enrollment
(Billetoft 2010). In 2000, the Ministry of Education formulated a Master Plan
for Technical and Vocational Development, with proposed actions to take in
the following decade (Billetoft 2010). One of the main tools called for was the
creation of a National Vocational Qualiﬁcations Framework, which would
standardize the certiﬁcation of programs, thereby allowing the private sector
to step in and take on a more active role in providing skills training. However,
to date, this idea, too, has yet to be fully realized.


Focusing on Barriers to Growth
As policy makers debate the road ahead for Nigeria, it is encouraging to
know that growth-enhancing structural change is occurring in Nigeria, with
employment tending to shift from agriculture and trade activities into manu-
facturing, transportation, and services. We find that between 1996 and 2009,
structural change accounted for about one-quarter of the overall growth in
labor productivity (4.5 percent), excluding the oil and gas sector, with the
remainder accounted for by within-sector productivity growth. Moreover, if

 6	 There are not enough observations of individuals in the GHS with vocational schooling to make
   any concrete statements about their unemployment rates versus those with higher degrees.
             Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  223




we include oil and gas, the structural change share rises to three-quarters of
overall labor productivity growth (2.2 percent). This transition ﬁts within a
typical model of structural transition, with labor leaving agriculture and basic
trade activities and moving to higher-productivity activities. Looking more
closely, the main beneﬁciaries of this shift were the food products, textile, and
wood products subsectors of manufacturing, as well as education, office ser-
vices, security services, and telecommunications.
    This push-out of agriculture has occurred despite the lack of appreciable
gains in total agricultural output in this period—likely constrained by a lack
of fertilizer and poor infrastructure. Without those constraints, the transition
out of agriculture to higher-productivity sectors may well have been higher.
Moreover, we hypothesize that removing those constraints could induce a
larger structural shift in the future.
    For the manufacturing sector, the lack of sufficient infrastructure to sup-
port high-productivity activities has likely led to its relatively slow growth.
This includes not only utility provision but also the availability of efficient
transport and port facilities, which lower the cost of trade. Sectors that have
grown quickly, such as telecommunications, have done so in an environment
explicitly free of many of the regulatory barriers in other sectors.
    Complicating matters has been an apparent mismatch of the skill develop­
ment of the Nigerian workforce and the needs of high-productivity sectors.
The trade and vocational skills that are demanded by many sectors are not
being adequately supplied by the technical education system—as manifested
in the relatively low labor force participation rate for the younger generations
of Nigerian workers.
    We estimate that removing those barriers and allowing the economy to
efficiently allocate human capital among sectors would raise value-added in
Nigeria by about 25 percent. In other words, these barriers are holding back a
potentially significant source of growth in labor productivity in Nigeria.


Appendix 5A: Translation of ISIC Revision 4 to
ISIC Revision 2
Data from later years of the Nigerian GHS (2006 through 2009) use ISIC
revision 4, while the earlier data use revision 2. To make data comparable, we
translated the revision 4 codes into revision 2 categories, following the stan-
dard concordance provided by the United Nations Statistical Division. The
following shows the two-digit ISIC revision 4 codes that were included under
each one-digit ISIC revision 2 category:
224 Chapter 5




 •	   1 (Agriculture, Forestry, and Farming): 01, 02, 03
 •	   2 (Mining and Quarrying): 05, 06, 07, 08, 09
 •	   3 (Manufacturing): 10 through 33, inclusive
 •	   4 (Electricity, Gas, and Water): 35, 36
 •	   5 (Construction): 41, 42, 43
 •	   6 (Wholesale and Retail Trade and Restaurants and Hotels): 45, 46, 47,
      55, 56
 •	   7 (Transport, Storage, and Communications): 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 58–63
      inclusive
 •	   8 (Finance, Insurance, Real Estate, and Business Services): 64, 65, 66, 68,
      69–82 inclusive
 •	   9 (Community, Social, and Personal Services): 84–96 inclusive, 99
 •	   10 (Activities not adequately deﬁned): 97, 98, 99

Assigning National Accounts Data to Industries
The breakdown of Nigerian GDP into economic activities does not conform
directly to the ISIC revision 2 categories of activities. The following lists the
one-digit ISIC codes and the economic activities from the national accounts
that were aggregated into them:
 •	   1 (Agriculture, Forestry, and Farming): crop production, livestock, forestry,
      ﬁshing
 •	   2 (Mining and Quarrying): coal mining, metal ores, and other quarrying
 •	   3 (Manufacturing): oil reﬁning, cement, and other manufacturing
 •	   4 (Electricity, Gas, and Water): water
 •	   5 (Construction): construction
 •	   6 (Wholesale and Retail Trade and Restaurants and Hotels): whole sale
      and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants
 •	   7 (Transport, Storage, and Communications): road transportation, rail
      transportation, pipelines, water transportation, air transportation, post
      office, telecommunications, and broadcasting
                 Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  225




 •	   8 (Finance, Insurance, Real Estate, and Business Services): ﬁnancial insti-
      tutions, insurance, real estate, and business services
 •	   9 (Community, Social, and Personal Services): public administration, edu-
      cation, health, private nonproﬁts, and other services
   Two economic activities listed in the Nigerian national accounts data are
not included in our calculations. The ﬁrst is the oil and gas sector, which is
excluded because of its large size and relatively small local labor force. The sec-
ond is the electricity sector, which in the national accounts data experienced
an unexplained increase in GDP of approximately 1,000 percent in 2003.


Appendix 5B: Employment Data
To deﬁne who is included in our measures of employment, we use a common
question across all the GHS: “What was your main job in the last week?” The
possible answering options are: (1) worked for pay, (2) got job but did not
work, (3) worked for proﬁt, (4) attached but did not work, (5) got an appren-
ticeship, (6) stayed home, (7) went to school, and (8) did nothing.
    We count anyone under the ﬁrst ﬁve categories as being employed.
Haywood and Teal (2010) use a similar deﬁnition, but also include those who
did nothing but reported themselves as either looking for work or recently laid
off. We have excluded those individuals, as our interest is ultimately in the
sector affiliation of employed workers, and these job seekers have none listed.
Table 5B.1 shows that employed workers were approximately one-third of the
entire sample over all years.
    We can describe several features of employment that conform to com-
mon ﬁndings regarding the Nigerian labor market. First we identify individ-
uals involved in wage work as those who responded “worked for pay” to the
question regarding their main job. We also count as wage workers those who
reported “got job but did not work,” “attached but did not work,” or “appren-
ticeship”—along with reporting their employment status on a separate ques-
tion as “employee.”7
    While we have 10 different surveys available, several irregularities in the
data conﬁne our analysis to a limited number of years. By focusing speciﬁ-
cally on 1996, 1999, 2005, and 2009, we can track changes over the longest
possible time period, while still providing some information on intermediate

 7	 The other alternatives for this separate questionnaire are “Employer,” “Own account worker,”
      “Member of cooperative,” “Unpaid family worker,” and “Other.”
226 Chapter 5




Table 5B.1  Summary data from Nigerian General Household Surveys, 1996–2009

Category                    1996      1997      1998      1999       2005      2006      2007     2008   2009
Observations (number)      28,168 32,164 34,249 35,567 97,699 83,880 83,700 85,183 107,425
 Percentage                33.6      34.0       34.7      36.3      35.1      32.3       32.4    33.4   36.0
  employed
Of employed:
 Percentage with            9.6       9.1       10.7      10.6      10.9      11.1       11.1    13.6   11.4
  wage work
 Percentage women          35.4      33.3       36.4      37.6      40.1      37.0       37.0    41.7   40.9
 Percentage with            6.3       5.5        7.8       7.6      38.7      12.8       12.7    17.3   17.6
  second job
Age 15–25 (number)          5,308     6,202     6,542     6,587     20,429 16,549 16,557 16,321 21,207
 Percentage                26.2      27.4       28.6      29.2      28.7      24.0       24.0    25.7   29.7
  employed
 Percentage in school      40.2      39.8       41.7      43.6      49.2      44.3       44.3    43.1   46.3
Source: Authors’ calculations using the Nigerian General Household Surveys (FRN/NBS 1996–2009).
Note: Deﬁnitions of the different percentage breakdowns are described throughout the chapter.


years. The problems relate to the nature of the data on industry of employ-
ment, notably in 2006 and 2007, when there is an aberration—17 percent of
the labor force is coded as working in coal mining (compared with essentially
0 percent in the prior and following years). We believe that these individu-
als may have been miscoded as “service sector workers,” but we have no way of
identifying the right sector more precisely.
    For 2008, the reported industry codes do not correspond directly to the
ISIC deﬁnitions. In 2010, there is a distinct shift of employment into manu­
facturing (roughly an additional 6 percent of the labor force) that appears
anomalous compared with the movements into manufacturing over the rest of
the years. Again, as we have a relatively long time frame by summarizing data
from 1996 to 2009, dropping the years with suspicious outcomes does not
severely limit our ability to measure the role of structural change.
    To stay consistent, these industries are all coded to match the top levels of
ISIC revision 2. This gives us nine major sectors, as well as a tenth for “activi-
ties not adequately deﬁned.” The most important sectors, both in size and in
terms of changes over this period, are agriculture, manufacturing, wholesale
and retail trade, transportation and communications, ﬁnance and business
services, and general services.8

 8	 The other sectors are mining and quarrying; electricity, gas and water; and construction. These
    three account for very small fractions of the labor force and do not reveal large changes in those
    fractions over time.
                                  Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  227




Appendix 5C: Value-added Data
Data on value-added are available from 1990 to 2010. These data are reported
in constant 1990 US dollars, calculated using sector-speciﬁc deﬂators applied
to sector-speciﬁc nominal value-added. The speciﬁc sectors do not conform
directly to the two-digit ISIC revision 2 categories on which our labor force
data are organized. We aggregate the reported sectors from the Nigerian
national accounts into the two-digit ISIC categories ourselves.
    Two anomalies in the reported value-added data require modiﬁcation.
In particular, crop production (a large component of total agricultural value-
added) experiences an unexplained spike in output in 2002. This will inﬂate
the measure of aggregate labor productivity, as well as labor productivity in
agriculture. Figure 5C.1 shows a plot of the reported crop production value-
added from the national accounts data, as well as two measures of real crop
production from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO). All are scaled to 100 in 1996 to facilitate comparison. The
one-time spike in production in the national accounts data can be seen clearly
in 2002. Additionally, after 2002, the growth rate of the value-added in crop

Figure 5C.1  Measures of crop production, 1996–2009



                       300


                       250                               Reported crop value−added
  Index (1996 = 100)




                       200

                                                                                     FAO crop production index
                       150


                       100                                                 Cereals production (tonnes)
                             96

                                  97

                                        98

                                             99

                                                   00

                                                        01

                                                              02

                                                                    03

                                                                            04

                                                                                    05

                                                                                           06

                                                                                                   07

                                                                                                           08

                                                                                                                   09
                        19

                                  19

                                       19

                                             19

                                                  20

                                                        20

                                                             20

                                                                   20

                                                                          20

                                                                                 20

                                                                                         20

                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                 20




                                                                  Year

Source: “Reported crop value-added” is from the Nigerian national accounts, in constant 1990 dollars. “FAO Crop Production
Index” and “Cereals production (tonnes)” are both from the FAOSTAT database (FAO various years).
Note: Each series in the ﬁgure has been scaled to equal 100 in 1996. The crop production index is a measure created by
FAO to capture production of ﬁeld crops valued at reference world prices, constant at 2005 international dollars. Cereals
production is the metric tons of rice-milled equivalents of major cereal crops produced. Rice-milled equivalents scale crops
by nutritional value to be comparable.
228 Chapter 5




production is much higher than the apparent growth in real output, as evi-
denced by the other indexes.
    A similar issue appears with respect to value-added in the electricity sec-
tor. Here there is a disjoint in the series in 2001, with value-added rising
by roughly 1,300 percent in one year. Figure 5C.2 shows how the reported
value-added in electricity evolves compared with kilowatt-hours (kWh)
reported in the World Development Indicators (WDI) database (World
Bank, various years). As can be seen, the jump in 2001 is remarkable, and
there continues to be a distinct upward trend after 2001 that is not matched
in the WDI data.
    We adjust the electricity value-added data in a manner similar to that used
for the process of crop production. For 2001, we assume that the growth rate
of electricity value-added is equal to the average growth rate after 2001. This
eliminates the one-time spike in value-added in 2001, but retains the pattern
of growth in the value-added data subsequently. Given the relatively small size
of the electricity sector, this change does not have a material impact on the
role of structural change in aggregate growth.

Figure 5C.2  Measures of electricity production, 1990–2010


                                    3,000

                                    2,500
 Index of production (1990 = 100)




                                    2,000                                                  Reported value−added


                                    1,500

                                    1,000

                                     500
                                                                                  Electricity production (kWh)
                                     100
                                            90


                                                 92


                                                      94


                                                           96


                                                                96


                                                                     00


                                                                             02


                                                                                        04


                                                                                                 06


                                                                                                          08


                                                                                                                   10
                                       19


                                                 19


                                                      19


                                                           19


                                                                19


                                                                     20


                                                                             20


                                                                                      20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                 20




                                                                      Year

Source: “Reported value-added” is from the Nigerian national accounts, in constant 1990 dollars. Authors’ calculations using
the Nigerian General Household Surveys (FRN/NBS various years). “Electricity production (kWh)” is taken from the World
Development Indicators (World Bank, various years).
Note: Each series in the ﬁgure has been scaled to equal 100 in 1990.
                   Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  229




Appendix 5D: Human Capital and Hours Worked
There are distinct differences across industries in the human capital levels
of workers. As can be seen in Table 5D.1, in agriculture, most workers have
completed only primary education, and just about one-third have completed
secondary or postsecondary schooling. In the trade, transport, and manu-
facturing industries, roughly half of the workers have only a primary educa-
tion, with the remainder possessing secondary or postsecondary education.
It is only in the general services and ﬁnance and business services indus-
tries that a signiﬁcant majority of workers have completed at least secondary
schooling. In services, roughly half have completed postsecondary educa-
tion, which includes not only typical bachelor’s degrees, but also vocational
degrees (such as nursing certiﬁcates, the Higher National Diploma, or the
National Diploma).
    What these differences imply is that while output per worker may be
much higher in ﬁnance and business services than in agriculture, output per
unit of human capital may not be. To address the role of the reallocation of
human capital across sectors, we generate for each individual in our dataset
an imputed level of human capital based on a standard Mincerian technique.
This method has two components. First, it assumes that workers’ human capi-
tal is a function of their stock of schooling. Speciﬁcally, human capital is equal
to exp(S), where S is the stock of schooling. Second, the stock of schooling is
equal to a rate of return applied to each year, S = φ × years, where φ is a coef-
ficient that is derived from studies of labor markets, and captures the average

Table 5D.1  Human capital and hours worked by industry, 2009

                                          Percentage with highest level of schooling                     Average weekly
Sector                            Below primary         Primary      Secondary Postsecondary              hours worked
Agriculture                              2.9              64.1          28.0                5.1                40.8
Wholesale and retail trade               1.1              50.8          40.4                7.7                43.7
General services                         0.4              20.7          28.5              50.5                 41.2
Transport and communi-                   0.6              45.6          45.6                8.3                48.5
cations
Manufacturing                            0.9              53.9          36.3                8.9                41.5
Finance and business                     0.1             17.9           33.7              48.3                 44.5
services
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2009 Nigerian General Household Survey (FRN/NBS 2010).
Note: The industry deﬁnitions are translated from the reported ISIC revision 4 data in the 2009 GHS to International Standard
Industrial Classification revision 2 to be consistent with the data across all years. See Appendix 5A for details on the
translation.
230 Chapter 5




gain in wage for an additional year of schooling. In our case, we adopt a typi-
cal assumption that φ = 0.10 (a 10 percent increase in wage per year of school).
With that value, each individual is assigned human capital equal to exp(0.1 ×
years). Using an alternative return rate does not produce results that are quali-
tatively different.9 Using the exponential function in this formulation implies
that human capital rises with years of schooling, but at a decreasing rate.
    One thing to note is that we are assuming that human capital itself is per-
fectly fungible among sectors. That is, if a female worker has 10 years of edu-
cation, then her human capital is exp(0.1 × 10) = 2.72, regardless of the sector
that she works in. This is a crude measurement of her human capital, and it
ignores sector-speciﬁc skills that she may possess. Measuring human capital
as we do here means that all workers can carry their human capital with them
between sectors, so it makes sense to think of productivity per unit of human
capital. In the prior section, we considered only productivity per worker. In
that formulation, we were implicitly assuming that every worker within a sec-
tor was identical in productivity—meaning that when our worker left agri-
culture she left behind her agricultural human capital and instantly gained a
new set of manufacturing human capital. Comparing the two measures allows
us to discover if the labor shifts we observe are broad based in the sense that
workers of all levels of education are moving, or if it is only a smaller group of
workers with speciﬁc levels of education who are moving.
   With human capital measured for each individual, we can calculate the
share of total human capital engaged in each sector. The results present dis-
tinct differences compared with the per-worker measures. For example, while
61 percent of workers in 2009 worked in agriculture, only 40 percent of
human capital was employed in that sector in the same year. On the other
hand, while only 11 percent of workers were employed in the general ser-
vices sector, nearly 23 percent of total human capital was employed there.
Therefore, the gap in human capital productivity between sectors is smaller
than the gap in labor productivity between sectors.




 9	 Practically, for years of schooling, workers with less than primary education are assigned
   0 years; those with primary education, 6 years; those with secondary education, 12 years; and
   those with postsecondary education, 16 years. While some surveys report speciﬁcally the years
   of education completed, the surveys are not consistent in how they report this information
   across years. Alternative means of allocating years of schooling do not produce meaningfully
   diﬀerent results.
                Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  231




Appendix 5E: Calculating the Potential Gains
from Reallocation
To begin, each sector i ’s value-added is described by the following production
function:

    	                                     VAi = XiL1–α
                                                   i 	(1)

where Xi is a ﬁxed-productivity term speciﬁc to sector i. In terms of more tra-
ditional Cobb-Douglas production functions, the Xi combines the role of
physical capital and total factor productivity. For our purposes, those quanti-
ties are held constant, and so are combined into a single term.10
    Li is the labor employed in a sector, and (1 – α) is the elasticity of value-
added with respect to labor. This value will be important, in that it deter-
mines how much labor productivity will fall (rise) as labor is added to
(subtracted from) a sector. Value-added per worker, our measure of labor pro-
ductivity, is

                                             VAi X i
    	                                           = 	(2)
                                             Li Liα

   As seen earlier in Table 5.5, there are large differences in value-added per
worker across sectors in Nigeria. To assess the potential gains from struc-
tural change, we will ask how large aggregate value-added would be if value-
added per worker were equalized across all the sectors. This will entail
moving labor out of low-productivity sectors (such as agriculture) into
high-productivity sectors (such as manufacturing). Labor is moved until
the value-added per worker in agriculture has risen, and that in manufac-
turing has fallen, to the same level. At that point, there are no more gains to
be exploited.
   With n sectors, it can be shown that the allocation of labor that equalizes
value-added per worker is equal to

                                            Li   Xα
    	                                          = ni α	(3)
                                            L ∑j X j


10	 If we explicitly modeled the role of capital and capital accumulation, then the potential gains
   would be even larger, as the increased productivity from structural change would induce more
   investment and a higher capital stock overall.
232 Chapter 5




in sector i. Essentially, the higher Xi is for a given sector, the more labor it
should be allocated. Given these allocations, this potential aggregate value-
added can be expressed as
                                              n      α
    	                               VAPot = (∑j X jα) L1–α	                                  (4)

where L is the total of all labor available.11 We are interested in the ratio of
potential value-added to actual value-added. This ratio M, which represents
the maximum possible gains available from structural change, is written as

                                           n α α 1–α               n αα
                             Pot (∑j X j ) L    (∑j Xj )
    	                 M = VA
                           n    = n 1–α = n                  	(5)
                          ∑j VAj ∑j Xj Lj    ∑j Xj (Lj/L)1–α

To calculate M, we require information on Xi as well as on the fraction of
labor currently employed in each sector. We can back out Xi from equa-
tion (2) for each sector, given our data on value-added per worker and labor
allocations, as well as an assumption regarding α. For our purposes here, we
will assume that α = 0.3, matching the typical assumptions made in the lit-
erature. If the value of α were sector specific, that would complicate the cal-
culations, but would not change the general concept behind our exercise. As
it stands, there is little evidence that labor shares differ across sectors sub-
stantially (Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh 2011). Additionally, assuming that
α = 0.3 matches estimates of the own price elasticity of labor demand found in
Hamermesh (1993).

11	 We have not explicitly accounted for the change in relative prices that would occur following
   shifts of labor among sectors. In practice, allowing for such changes does not prove to be signiﬁ-
   cant in such calculations (Vollrath 2009).
                Structural Change and the Possibilities for Future Growth in Nigeria  233




References
African Development Fund. 2005. Appraisal Report. Nigeria Skills Training and Vocational
     Education Project. Abuja.
Billetoft, J. 2010. “Labor Market Trends and Skills Development.” In Putting Nigeria to Work,
     edited by V. Treichel. Washington DC: World Bank.
CBN (Central Bank of Nigeria). 2010. Statistical Bulletin, 2010. Abuja.
Chanda, A., and C-J. Dalgaard. 2008. “Dual Economies and International Total Factor
     Productivity Differences: Channelling the Impact from Institutions, Trade, and Geography.”
     Economica 75: 629–661.
Cordoba, J-C., and M. Ripoll. 2009. “Agriculture and Aggregation.” Economics Letters 105 (1):
     110–112.
Fade-Aluko, T. O. 2007. Marketing of Ofada Rice in Abeokuta Metropolis of Ogun State. Abeokuta,
     Nigeria: University of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Economics and Farm
     Management.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). Various years. FAOSTAT
     database. http://faostat.fao.org/default.aspx.
FRN/NBS (Federal Republic of Nigeria/National Bureau of Statistics). 1996–2009. Nigeria—
     General Household Survey. Abuja.
—. 2010. Nigeria—General Household Survey 2009, Fifth Round. Abuja. http://nigerianstat
     .gov.ng/nada/index.php/catalog/36.
—. 2013. Nigeria—General Household Survey–Panel 2010–2011 (PostHarvest), First Round
     (Wave one). Abuja. http://nigerianstat.gov.ng/nada/index.php/catalog/31.
—. Various years. http://nigerianstat.gov.ng/.
FRN/NPC (Federal Republic of Nigeria/National Planning Commission). 2010. Nigeria Vision
     20:2020—Economic Transformation Blueprint. Abuja.
Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. Waugh. 2011. The Agricultural Productivity Gap in Developing
     Countries. Working Paper. London: International Growth Centre.
Hamermesh, D. 1993. Labor Demand. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Haywood, L., and F. Teal. 2010. “Employment, Unemployment, Joblessness, and Incomes in
     Nigeria, 1999–2006.” In Putting Nigeria to Work: A Strategy for Employment and Growth,
     edited by V. Treichel, 167–202. Directions in Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
McMillan, M., and K. Harttgen. 2014. What Is Driving the ‘African Growth Miracle’? NBER
     Working Paper 20077. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
McMillan, M., and D. Rodrik. 2011. Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity Growth.
     NBER Working Paper 17143. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
234 Chapter 5




Mousley, P. 2010. “Building the Enterprise Sector for Employment and Growth: Some Policy
     Options.” In Putting Nigeria to Work, edited by V. Treichel. Washington DC: World Bank.
Phillip, D., and V. O. Adetimir. 2001. Enhancing the Transfer and Commercialization of
     Agricultural Technologies in Nigeria. PRA Survey Report on the South West Zone of Nigeria.
     Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso: Organization of African Unity/Semi-Arid Food Grain
     Research and Development-Scientific Technical and Research Commission.
Phillip, D., E. Nkonya, J. Pender, and O. A. Oni. 2009. Constraints to Increasing Agricultural
     Productivity in Nigeria: A Review. Nigeria Strategy Support Program Background Paper
     NSSP 006. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
PTFP (Presidential Task Force on Power). 2013. Nigeria Roadmap for Power Sector Reform:
     Revision I. Abuja: Federal Republic of Nigeria, Office of the President.
Raballand, G., and E. Mjekiqi. 2010. “Nigeria’s Trade Policy Facilitates Unofficial Trade but Not
     Manufacturing.” In Putting Nigeria to Work, edited by V. Treichel. Washington, DC: World
     Bank.
Schultz, T. 1953. The Economic Organization of Agriculture. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Taiwo, O. I. 2007. “A Literature Review on the Impact of Agricultural Public Investment in
     Nigeria.” Background paper for Nigeria—Agriculture Expenditure Review. Washington, DC:
     World Bank.
UN (United Nations). 2013. World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision, Key Findings and
     Advance Tables. ESA/P/WP.227. New York: UN Department of Economic and Social
     Affairs, Population Division.
Vollrath, D. 2009. “How Important Are Dual Economy Effects for Aggregate Productivity?”
     Journal of Development Economics 11 (3): 187–228.
World Bank. Various years. Doing Business database. www.doingbusiness.org/rankings.
World Bank. 2002. An Assessment of the Private Sector in Nigeria. Washington, DC: World Bank
     Regional Programme on Enterprise Development.
—. 2007. Nigeria: Competitiveness and Growth: Country Economic Memorandum. Report
     36483-NG. Washington, DC.
—. 2008. Nigeria: Agriculture Public Expenditure Review. Report 44000-NG. Washington, DC.
—. Various years. World Development Indicators database. http://data.worldbank.org/
     data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
WTO (World Trade Organization). 2005. Trade Policy Review, Nigeria. WT/TPR/S/147. Geneva.
                                                                     Chapter 6


                          THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF
                     ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY: STRUCTURAL
                   CHANGE WITHOUT TRANSFORMATION?

                                           Danielle Resnick and James Thurlow




L
       ong considered the archetype of economic decline in Africa, Zambia
       more recently has been heralded as an example of Africa’s economic resur-
       gence. Thanks to rapid growth during the 2000s, the country reclaimed
its “middle-income” status that had been lost after independence in 1964. This
coincided with macroeconomic stability and a burgeoning consumer class, sym-
bolized by the rising number of shopping malls in the capital city Lusaka.
     Such a rosy picture, however, contrasts sharply with the message presented
by multiple scholars, civil society organizations, and political figures during the
2000s. They noted the sharp rise in the cost of living and service delivery for those
in low-income neighborhoods (Simatele and Simatele 2009) and observed pop-
ular resentment toward signs of growing income disparities (Larmer and Fraser
2007). In addition, the veteran politician Michael Sata, who led the opposition
Patriotic Front (PF) until he was elected president in 2011, repeatedly argued that
the country had experienced rising unemployment and inequality under the ten-
ure of Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD). Over the course of three
elections between 2006 and 2011, Sata targeted his campaigns in Zambia’s major
cities, where rapid urbanization contributed to large numbers of voters. His mas-
sive and sustained electoral support among those living in shanty compounds and
working in informal markets suggested that his message regarding uneven trans-
formation strongly resonated with a large share of the populace (Cheeseman and
Hinfelaar 2010; Gould 2007; Larmer and Fraser 2007; Resnick 2013).
    Why did Zambia’s growth trajectory change so radically over the 1991–
2010 period? Why did Zambians vote out the party that oversaw unprec-
edented economic growth? And was there any empirical validity to Sata’s
message? This chapter examines these questions, with a special focus on the
sources of economic growth and whether these were associated with positive
structural change—defined as a shift in the share of employment toward more
productive sectors. We begin with a look at how Zambia’s five key economic
sectors (mining, manufacturing, agriculture, informal trade, and high-value

                                                                                  235
236 Chapter 6




services) contributed to social outcomes. Next, we trace how the PF capital-
ized on perceptions of widening social disparities in urban areas during suc-
cessive presidential campaigns, even as the MMD attempted to mobilize rural
voters and higher-income urbanites who benefited from the MMD’s tenure.
And we conclude by discussing lessons from the Zambian experience and the
long-term potential for social transformation, given recent policy decisions.
    Overall, we find that Zambia recovered remarkably from its poor perfor-
mance in the 1990s, and national welfare was much higher in 2010 than it was
in 1991. The 1990s saw de-urbanization and pronounced negative structural
change, which was only somewhat offset by slightly higher productivity within
sectors, leaving overall productivity growth also negative. However, the 2000s
saw a reversal of these trends, with labor productivity growth up 3.56 percent
per year, roughly split between the structural change (1.77 percent per year) and
within-sector (1.79 percent per year) components. Even so, for the whole period
(1991–2010), the positive structural change of the 2000s did not outweigh the
negative structural change of the 1990s. As a result, labor productivity growth
for 1991–2010 was only 0.31 percent per year, with the major driver being the
within-sector component (0.87 percent per year) and the structural change com-
ponent still negative (–0.65 percent per year). Had within-sector labor produc-
tivity not increased over the past two decades, overall productivity would have
declined, because a greater proportion of workers in 2010 found themselves
employed in traditionally low-productivity sectors. Moreover, we find that, at
least over the short term, the characteristics of the more recent economic growth
and positive structural change did not translate into significant social transfor-
mation, which was reflected in the country’s shifting political landscape.


Dramatic Change in the Role of Structural Change
Zambia’s transition to lower-middle-income status in the 2000s reflected the
country’s rapidly rising level of per capita GDP. This new designation represented
a major shift from the 1990s, when Zambia experienced a period of economic
decline. At that time, President Frederick Chiluba and his MMD-led government
implemented major structural reforms in response to a severe macroeconomic cri-
sis (Rakner 2003). But while total GDP managed to grow at 1.1 percent per year
during 1991–2002, this was well below population growth of 2.9 percent per year,
causing GDP per capita to fall from US$1,065 in 1991 to US$875 in 2002.1

  1	 All GDP values reported in this paper are in constant 2002 prices and account for differences
   in purchasing power across countries. Also, all currency is in US dollars, unless specified other-
   wise. GDP and employment data are discussed in Appendix 6A.
                                                       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  237




    The economic decline occurred in all sectors, except trade services
and finance and business services (Table 6.1). The most dramatic slippage
occurred in the mining sector, which accounted for almost three-quarters of
the drop in GDP. In 1991, mining contributed one-fifth of total GDP, gener-
ating most of Zambia’s foreign exchange earnings via copper exports. But by
2002, its contribution to total GDP had more than halved, with agriculture
and trade replacing mining as Zambia’s largest sectors.
    In contrast, the 2000s was a period of rapid economic recovery, overseen
largely by Chiluba’s two successors, Levy Mwanawasa (who entered office in
2001) and Rupiah Banda (who was elected president in 2008 in the wake of
Mwanawasa’s death). During their tenure, and especially during 2002–2010,
total GDP grew at 6.4 percent per year and population growth slowed to
2.3 percent per year. As a result, GDP per capita increased by a third to $1,204
in 2010, marking a return to pre-crisis levels and paving the way for middle-
income status.
    All sectors contributed to the economic recovery, which saw a major
change in Zambia’s economic structure. Although much attention has been
given to the recovery of copper exports, mining accounted for only a sixth
of the increase in total GDP. Instead, construction, communications, and
finance dominated economic growth, together accounting for more than half
of the increase in GDP. Manufacturing continued its relative decline, with
modest gains in GDP driven almost entirely by food processing.

Table 6.1  Mining is no longer in the top spot

                            Shares of gross domestic product, 1991, 2002, and 2010
Sectors                                                        1991                   2002                   2010
GDP per capita (2002 US$ PPP)                                 1,065                     875                 1,204
Sectoral share of total GDP (%)                                  100                   100                    100
 Agriculture                                                    15.2                   16.9                   13.4
 Mining                                                         20.1                    8.7                   10.7
 Manufacturing                                                  10.7                   11.9                    9.9
 Construction and utilities                                     11.7                    9.8                   15.2
  Trade services                                                18.5                   23.3                   19.0
  Transport and communication                                     6.1                   6.8                   10.6
  Finance and business                                           9.8                   14.0                   12.1
 Community services                                              7.9                    8.5                    9.2
GDP per worker (2002 US$ PPP)                                 3,339                  2,680                  3,544
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the Central Statistical Office (RoZ/CSO 1993, 2004, 2011, 2012) and the
International Monetary Fund (1999).
Note: GDP = gross domestic product or total value-added; PPP = purchasing power parity.
238 Chapter 6




Structural Change Is Finally Helping Growth
Did economic growth go hand in hand with positive structural change? To
answer this question we look at what types of changes occurred in national
labor productivity (that is, value-added or GDP per worker). We use the meth-
odology in McMillan, Rodrik, and Verduzco-Gallo (2014), which decom-
poses economywide labor productivity into two components: (1) within-sector
change: the sum of sectoral productivity changes weighted by initial employ-
ment shares, assuming that changes in national employment are distributed
proportionally across sectors; and (2) structural change: the additional effect
of reallocating labor across sectors after accounting for changes in sectoral
productivity (see the Overview in this book for details on the methodology).2
When workers move, in aggregate, from low- to high-productivity sectors
or when job creation is faster in higher-productivity sectors, then structural
change is said to have contributed positively to national labor productivity.
    Our results show that the roles of these two components varied dra-
matically during the 1990s and 2000s (Table 6.2). During the structural
adjustment period of 1991–2002, value-added per worker fell by $659 (or
–1.98 percent per year) from $3,339 in 1991. This decline was almost entirely
the result of negative structural change, with workers moving out of industry
and services into low-productivity agriculture. It was exacerbated by falling
productivity within agriculture and industry and was only partly offset by ris-
ing productivity in services.
    In contrast, the economic recovery in 2002–2010 was associated with
a large increase in labor productivity, with value-added per worker rising
by $864 (or 3.6 percent per year) from $2,680 in 2002. About half of this
increase was attributable to positive structural change, driven by faster
employment growth in services and a relative decline in farm employment,
where value-added per worker was very low. Productivity improvements
within sectors, particularly industry, accounted for the remaining half of
economywide productivity growth.


 2	 Algebraically, the decomposition is:
                                             N                      N
                                    Δ Pt =   ∑θ
                                             i–1
                                                   i,t−k Δ pi,t +   ∑p
                                                                    i–1
                                                                          i,tΔθi,t

	whereΔ Pt is the change in aggregate labor productivity between period t−k and t. The first term
 is the “within” component, which is a weighted average of the change in labor productivity in
 each of the N sectors, with the weight for sector i being the labor share of that sector in period
 t−k, measured by θ i,t−k . The second term is the “structural change” component, which is a
 weighted average of the change in labor shares in the N sectors, with the weights captured by the
 labor productivity of the sector in period t.
                                                       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  239




Table 6.2  Positive structural change is the new story

                                  Labor productivity decomposition, 1991–2010
                                                    Change in value-added per worker (2002 US$ PPP)
                                                1991–2002                  2002–2010                   1991–2010
Change components                            US$            %            US$            %           US$            %
Total productivity change                   –659          100.0          864          100.0          205          100.0
Within-sector component                       12           –1.8          435           50.3          595          289.8
 Agriculture                                 –96           14.5           52            6.0          –49          –23.7
 Industry                                   –189           28.7          364           42.1          286          139.1
 Services                                    297          –45.0           19            2.2          358          174.5
Structural change component                 –671          101.8          430           49.7        –390          –189.8
 Agriculture                                  40           –6.1          –28           –3.3          16             7.9
 Industry                                   –414           62.8           86           10.0        –439          –213.7
 Services                                   –297           45.1          372           43.0          33            15.9
Annual productivity growth rate               —           –1.98          —             3.56          —             0.31
  Within-sector component                     —            0.03          —             1.79          —             0.91
  Structural change component                 —           –2.02          —             1.77          —            -0.60
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the Central Statistical Office (RoZ/CSO 1993, 2004, 2011, 2012).
Note: PPP = purchasing power parity.


    One way to visualize the pendulum effect that agriculture has had on the
economy is shown in Figure 6.1. The vertical axis shows sectoral productiv-
ity relative to economywide productivity. A positive value means that a sector
generated above-average value-added per worker. The horizontal axis shows
the percentage point change in employment shares. A negative value means
that a sector’s share of total employment has fallen, even if it has grown in
absolute terms. The size of the circles represents the sectors’ initial contribu-
tions to total employment. Given that at least two-thirds of Zambians are
farmers, agriculture has the largest circle.
    We can see quite clearly that farm employment, especially in low-value sub-
sistence agriculture, dominates structural change (see “agr” in the three charts
in Figure 6.1). During the 1990s, there was a shift into agricultural employ-
ment as the nonfarm economy contracted. This reduced national labor pro-
ductivity because all nonfarm sectors generated more value-added per worker
than agriculture. Nonfarm employment fell in less productive sectors, such as
community services and trade, as well as in high-productivity sectors, such as
mining and financial services. Only government services and hotels and cater-
ing recorded small increases in employment shares.
    The pendulum swung back during the 2000s, with a decline in agricul-
tural employment following the recovery of the nonfarm economy. The largest
240 Chapter 6



Figure 6.1  The seesaw role of agriculture


                                                                             Structural change, 1991–2010
                                       1.5        1991–2002
                                                                                     min
       (log deviation from average)




                                       1.0        Slope: –0.112
          Value-added per worker




                                                                                    fbs
                                                  t-stat: –1.50               con
                                       0.5                                   man          utl hot
                                                                       trd          trc
                                       0.0
                                                                                                gov
                                      –0.5                                    osv                                                    agr
                                      –1.0

                                      –1.5
                                             –6         –4              –2                  0                2               4   6         8
                                                                       Change in employment share (%-point)

                                       1.5        2002–2010
                                                                                                utl    fbs
       (log deviation from average)




                                       1.0        Slope: 0.208
          Value-added per worker




                                                                                    min
                                                  t-stat: 2.02                                      con
                                       0.5                                    man                  trc
                                                                                                hot              trd
                                       0.0                                                      gov

                                      –0.5                       agr                             osv

                                      –1.0

                                      –1.5
                                             –6         –4              –2         0         2          4                        6         8
                                                                       Change in employment share (%-point)
                                       1.5        1991–2010
                                                                                     min
       (log deviation from average)




                                       1.0        Slope: –0.136                                  fbs
          Value-added per worker




                                                                                  con
                                                  t-stat: –0.79                 utl
                                       0.5                              man
                                                                                                 hot
                                                                                                       trd
                                                                                trc
                                       0.0                                                      gov

                                      –0.5                                     osv                                     agr
                                      –1.0

                                      –1.5
                                             –6         –4              –2         0         2          4                        6         8
                                                                       Change in employment share (%-point)

Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the Central Statistical Office (RoZ/CSO 1993, 2004, 2011, 2012) and Inter­
national Monetary Fund (1999).
Note: The size of a circle equals the sector’s original employment share. agr = agriculture; con = construction; fbs = finance,
business, and real estate; gov = government (administration, health, and education); hot = hotels and catering; man =
manufacturing; min = mining; osv = other services (such as domestic work and community services); trc = transport and
communications; trd = trade services; utl = utilities (electricity, gas, and water). The estimated slope and its t-statistic are from
linear regressions.
                                    THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  241




increase in employment share was in trade services. Since trade’s productiv-
ity level is higher than agriculture’s, the move from farming to trading repre-
sented positive structural change. Nevertheless, productivity is lower in the
trade sector than in the rest of the nonfarm economy, so the increase in trade
employment only accounted for about a quarter of the total gain from struc-
tural change. Most of the gain came from small increases in employment
shares in higher-value construction, finance, and communications. Finally,
mining’s and manufacturing’s contributions to national employment stag-
nated during the 2000s, even though GDP was rising in these sectors. This
explains why, unlike services, industrial growth during the 2000s was driven
almost entirely by improvements in within-sector productivity, rather than
structural change.
    The bottom line is that half of the increase in GDP per worker during the
2000s resulted from positive structural change, whereas the decline in worker
productivity during the 1990s was almost entirely the result of negative struc-
tural change. As Table 6.2 shows, for the full 1991–2010 period there was a
small net gain in GDP per worker of $205 (or 0.31 percent per year), which
was the result of strong within-sector productivity gains in industry and ser-
vices, with agricultural productivity declining. However, key negative struc-
tural changes of the 1990s were not reversed by the end of the 2000s. This
was mainly because of the large decline in the importance of employment in
mining and manufacturing—once the sectors with the highest value-added
per worker. In other words, while the Zambian recovery in worker productiv-
ity was underpinned by positive structural change, it was not driven by a repli-
cation of the precrisis era economic structure.

Rising Urbanization and Marginalized Youth
How do these changes in labor productivity relate to overall economic growth
and employment in Zambia? And how do they fit into the country’s broader
demographic and labor market dynamics? The equation below helps explain
the relationship between GDP per worker (GDPpw), which was decomposed
above, and GDP per capita (GDPpc).
                    Total GDP    Total GDP                1
         GDPpw =              =                = GDPpc ·
                    Employment Population · ER           ER
GDP per worker is total GDP divided by the number of employed people in
the economy.
   Total employment in turn is equal to the total population multiplied by the
share of the population who participate in the labor market and are able to find
242 Chapter 6




jobs (that is, the employment rate ER).3 If the share of the employed population
remains constant, then GDP per capita and GDP per worker move in unison. If
employment rates change, then national labor productivity and GDP per capita
diverge. This was the case in Zambia, where GDP per capita grew at 4.1 percent
per year during 2002–2010, whereas GDP per worker grew at only 3.6 percent
per year. This means that employment grew faster than the population during
this period (that is, ER increased). The higher employment rate was caused by
an increase in labor force participation that outweighed rising unemployment
rates (Table 6.3). Conversely, GDP per capita declined more slowly than GDP
per worker during 1991–2002 as a result of falling employment rates. This was
caused by a substantial drop in the rate of participation in the labor market and
a more modest decline in unemployment rates. Demographic and labor force
dynamics were therefore important in determining how labor productivity
resulting from structural change translated into changing GDP per capita.
    Perhaps the most important demographic change was the level of urban-
ization. From 1991 to 2002, the urban population share fell from 46 to
35 percent when the nonfarm economy contracted—a trend that was most
pronounced in the Copperbelt, where most of Zambia’s copper is mined
(Potts 2005). Although some migrants from urban areas became agricultural
workers, adding to the declining share of nonfarm employment, there was also
a sharp drop in rural participation rates, suggesting that many migrants opted
out of the rural labor market. In addition, the decline in the urban unemploy-
ment rate suggests that migrants were often those who were already unem-
ployed in urban areas prior to the reforms. This would also explain why the
drop in the urban employment share was smaller than the drop in the urban
population share. Migrants appear to have treated family farms in rural areas
as a safety net, rather than as an employment opportunity during the reform
period. Therefore, the large shift into agricultural employment reported ear-
lier hides an even larger de-urbanization process that was characterized by the
inability of both the rural economy to absorb new migrants and the urban sec-
ondary and tertiary sectors to provide new employment.
    But with the 2002–2010 economic recovery, Zambia began urbanizing
again. Although the urban population in 2010 was still well below that of
1991, the urban employment share and the share of nonfarm jobs had both
recouped about two-thirds of their previous losses. This was partly the result
of a large increase in urban labor market participation, which unfortunately

 3	 As defined here, the employment rate is the participation rate multiplied by one minus the
   unemployment rate.
                                                      THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  243




Table 6.3  Rising urbanization and high youth unemployment

                                   Employment profiles, 1991, 2002, and 2010
Demographics                                                  1991                  2002                   2010
Population (1,000s)                                          7,896                 10,785                12,913
 Urban areas (%)                                              46.0                  34.9                   36.2
 Adolescents, 12–17 years (%)                                 13.6                  17.5                   18.1
  Youths, 18–34 years (%)                                     28.4                  32.0                   32.8
Participation rates (%)                                       60.5                  48.4                   53.4
  Rural areas                                                 71.6                  50.8                   55.8
 Urban areas                                                  47.9                  44.2                   49.4
 Adolescents, 12–17 years                                     29.0                   9.5                   10.9
  Youths, 18–34 years                                         62.2                  56.8                   63.9
 Adults, 35+ years                                            78.4                   65.1                  71.2
Inactive adolescents in school (%)                            57.4                  81.9                   94.7
Inactive youths in school (%)                                 16.4                  36.3                   61.1
Employed (1,000s)                                            2,362                  3,520                 4,385
 Urban areas (%)                                              31.2                  27.0                   29.2
 Nonfarm sectors (%)                                          31.6                  28.3                   32.3
  Paid formal sector workers (%)                              21.6                  12.2                   15.6
 Adolescents, 12–17 years (%)                                  7.1                   3.8                    4.0
  Youths, 18–34 years (%)                                     43.9                  47.9                   48.7
  Finished primary school (%)                                 33.8                   36.4                  42.7
  Finished secondary school (%)                               10.2                  12.4                   17.4
Unemployment rates (%)                                        21.8                   9.4                   15.0
  Rural areas                                                 14.5                   2.0                    7.1
 Urban areas                                                  34.1                  24.9                   29.5
 Adolescents, 12–17 years                                     45.9                  24.9                   30.6
  Youths, 18–34 years                                         25.7                  13.9                   21.1
 Adults, 35+ years                                            11.9                   2.9                    5.6
  Finished primary school                                     23.4                  10.7                   14.1
  Finished secondary school                                   20.8                  21.4                   25.9
Share of total private consumption (%)                        100                    100                   100
  Poorest 50% of the population                                6.9                  15.4                    9.1
 Middle 40% of the population                                 41.3                  36.9                   38.3
  Richest 10% of the population                               51.7                  47.7                   52.6
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the Central Statistical Office (RoZ/CSO 1993, 2004, 2011, 2012).
Note: “Inactive” excludes those who are working (employed) or looking for work (unemployed). Private consumption is based
on the official basket of goods used to measure national poverty.
244 Chapter 6




led to not only more urban job seekers but also higher urban unemployment
rates. While the economic growth of the 2000s returned GDP per capita to
precrisis levels, it did not imply a return to previous demographic structures.
Many of the migrants who left urban areas during the reform period still
remained in rural areas in 2010, where unemployment rates had started to rise.
    One population group that benefited the least during the reform and
recovery periods was Zambia’s youths—defined here as those ages 12 to 35.4
Youth participation rates fell during the reform period when adult participa-
tion rates were rising, and they did not increase by as much during the recov-
ery. Part of this was a result of Zambia’s free primary school program, which
began in 2002 and greatly increased the share of youths who opted out of the
labor market in favor of attending school. Nevertheless, youth unemploy-
ment rates remained very high and rose faster than those for adults during
the 2000s. Unemployment rates also increased for better-educated job seekers,
suggesting that the economy failed to create enough jobs to accommodate new
school leavers, especially those with higher education. Clearly, not all of the
labor force participated in the economic recovery.


Sectoral Drivers of Social Change
In the 1990s and 2000s, the growing social disparities were felt more strongly
among some groups than others—a pattern that could be traced back to how
Zambia’s economy was evolving. To better understand what occurred, it is
helpful to focus on the following five sectors for a number of reasons. Mining,
which is predominantly in the Copperbelt, continues to represent the main
driver of Zambia’s export revenues, while agriculture remains the sector in
which a majority of the population derives its livelihood. Manufacturing,
which has been concentrated in Lusaka, collapsed during the reform period
and contributed to large-scale unemployment. The sector’s inability to fully
recover during the 2000s is deserving of special attention. Finally, trade, along
with construction and high-value services, represented the main sources of
positive structural change during the 2000s, and their expansion highlights a
fundamental shift in the foundations of Zambia’s economy.

Mining Remained an Enclave Sector
Zambia lost about a third of its mining jobs in the 1990s, prompting large-
scale migration back to rural areas in the Copperbelt (Potts 2005). Despite

 4	 Zambia’s own youth policy identifies 35 as the upper cut-off for this group.
                                                      THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  245




Table 6.4  Agriculture is driving job growth but not GDP

                          Drivers of GDP and formal employment growth, 1991–2010
                                         GDP (millions of 2002 US$)                Employment (”000s people)
                                      Initial      Change over period           Initial       Change over period
Sectors                               1991      1991–2002 2002–2010              1991      1991–2002 2002–2010
Value (US$ millions or ‘000s)         8,410         1,023          6,108        2,519         1,001           865
Contribution (%)                      100.0         100.0         100.0         100.0         100.0          100.0
Agriculture                            15.2          30.5             8.1         65.4         87.6           51.4
Mining                                  20.1        -84.4           13.6           1.9           0.2            1.0
Manufacturing                           10.7         21.3            6.8           4.3           1.4            1.3
Utilities                                3.3           2.6           1.6           0.9         –1.2             0.7
Construction                             8.4         –8.0           21.9           1.9         –0.3             4.2
Trade                                  17.3          49.3            9.8          10.3           4.8          19.6
Hotels, catering                         1.2         14.0            2.5           0.5           1.9            1.3
Transport, communications                6.1         12.1           16.5           2.9         –1.5             3.7
Finance, business services               9.8         48.8            9.0           1.8           0.6            6.1
Government                               7.1         11.4            8.9           5.6           6.7            6.7
Other services                           0.7           2.3           1.4           4.5         –0.2             4.1
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the R02/CSO (1993, 2004, 2011, 2012) and International Monetary Fund
(1999).


the sector’s impressive recovery in the 2000s, it failed to increase its share of
total employment. While mining generated 14 percent of the increase in total
GDP during 2002–-2010, it only accounted for 1 percent of employment
growth (Table 6.4).5 Mining therefore remained an “enclave” sector, with
weakening links to the broader economy. It was also one of the main sources
of paid employment in 1991, but its declining labor intensity constrained job
creation in the formal sector.
    Zambia’s state-owned mines were very inefficient at the start of the 1990s
and were a large drain on the government budget (Thurlow and Wobst 2006).
Although privatizing the mines was a cornerstone of the structural adjustment
program, this reform did not start in earnest until after 2000. By this time,
world copper prices were low, and Zambian copper production had fallen
from 430,000 tons in 1991 to 320,000 tons in 2002. This made it difficult


 5	 Zambia’s formal enterprise survey (that is, the Quarterly Employment and Earnings Inquiry)
    reports that 21,000 paid mining jobs were created in 2002–2009, while the household surveys
    report only 9,000 new jobs in 2002–2010. Both surveys suggest that mining accounted for a
    total of almost 60,000 jobs in 2010.
246 Chapter 6




to attract and retain foreign buyers until after 2003, when copper prices rose
again. Privatization led to large inflows of FDI that recapitalized the mines
and allowed copper production to reach 690,000 tons in 2010—a level that
surpassed the previous peak in the 1960s.
    One reason why mining growth did not create many new jobs in the
2000s—a period that was driven by rising value-added per worker rather than
employment—is that government subsidies in the 1980s created a form of pro-
tected overemployment. This artificially high labor intensity ended when the
mines were privatized (Thurlow and Wobst 2006). Another reason is that
Zambia’s mining unions prevented job creation in the 2000s by bargaining
for higher wages for “insiders” rather than new jobs for “outsiders” (World
Bank 2011). Indeed, high labor costs partly explain why, despite privatization,
Zambia has some of the world’s least efficient copper mines.
    Moreover, mining growth failed to generate much tax revenue. To attract
foreign investors when copper prices were low, Zambia had offered low tax
rates and royalties as well as generous allowances for writing off investment
costs (Otto et al. 2006). In 2010, when copper accounted for most of the value
of exported goods—85.9 percent—royalties accounted for only 2.6 percent of
government revenues. Moreover, mining taxes accounted for only 3–5 percent
of Zambia’s export revenues, well below the 25–40 percent level in the rest
of the world (World Bank 2011). Thus, the government lacked the revenues
that might have been used to spread the benefits of mining growth to the
broader economy.
    In addition, the main link between mining and the rest of the economy
was not job creation or tax revenues, but rather the exchange rate. An increase
in world copper prices and mining exports during the 2000s caused the real
exchange rate to appreciate—making imported goods cheaper (especially for
urban consumers) and constraining exports and job creation in agriculture
and manufacturing.

Manufacturing Continued Its Decline
Zambia’s manufacturing sector was one of the hardest hit during the reform
period, and it struggled to recover afterward. Manufacturing accounted
for 6.8 percent of the increase in national GDP during 2002–2010, but
only 1.3 percent of employment growth (Table 6.4). This was still a major
improvement over the 1990s, when most manufacturing contracted (partic-
ularly metals beneficiation). Although manufacturing GDP grew during the
2000s, it lagged far behind the rest of the economy and its composition nar-
rowed dramatically. By 2010, 70 percent of the sector’s GDP was from food
                                              THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  247




processing, up from 50 percent in 1991, while textiles and clothing virtu-
ally collapsed.
    Why did manufacturing perform so poorly? First, many SOEs could not
compete after being privatized in the 1990s—the total number of manufac-
turing jobs in SOEs fell to 2 percent in 2010 from almost 33 percent in 1991.
Second, trade liberalization exposed domestic firms to foreign competition.
Zambia’s import tariff rates halved from 19.7 to 9.7 percent during 1991–
2002 and again to 4.4 percent in 2010.6 Third, the large influx of FDI and
foreign-owned firms into manufacturing generated productivity gains not
through horizontal spillovers (that is, technology transfers between firms), but
rather through vertical linkages to sectors outside of manufacturing (that is,
demand for raw inputs) (Bwalya 2006). Even though foreign firms out-com-
peted local firms, they often strengthened manufacturing’s linkages to other
sectors. Fourth, Zambia’s real exchange rate appreciated in the mid-2000s
because of rising copper prices, which lowered the cost of imports, particularly
for manufactured goods.
    A good example of how Zambian manufacturing suffered setbacks over
two decades is the textiles and clothing subsector. In 1991, this subsector
was the largest employer within manufacturing, producing a range of prod-
ucts (including cotton, fabrics, and garments). Privatization and deregula-
tion led to large inflows of FDI and, by 2010, multinational companies had
come to dominate the country’s cotton growing and ginning (Tschirley and
Kabwe 2009). Although foreign companies displaced less efficient local com-
panies, their vertically linked outgrower schemes raised the productivity of
smallholder cotton farmers and made Zambia one of Africa’s larger and more
competitive cotton producers. However, unlike in the 1980s, when cotton
was supplied to local textile companies, most of Zambia’s cotton was now
exported. In fact, by 2010, the local textiles industry virtually ceased to exist,
despite government efforts to establish export-processing zones (Eliassen
2012), largely the result of increased foreign competition. In 1991, some of
Zambia’s highest tariffs were on textiles and clothing, but by 2010, these had
fallen by two-thirds, leading to a wave of cheap imports from Asia that local
firms could not compete against. This was compounded by imported second-
hand clothes donated to foreign charities and sold at low prices in Zambia
(Hansen 2000). In the end, employment in the textiles sector fell from 25,000


 6	 Collection rates are import duties collected as a share of the value of imported goods. These are
   typically lower than statutory tariff rates because of collection inefficiencies and exemptions.
   Our trade and tariff estimates are calculated using UN Comtrade data for Zambia.
248 Chapter 6




in the 1980s to less than 2,500 in 2002 (Eliassen 2012). And by 2010, tex-
tiles and clothing had dropped to less than 0.3 percent of Zambia’s GDP from
1.8 percent in 1991.
    In contrast, food processing was a success story. One example is the coun-
try’s largest meat processer, which established a successful partnership with
a foreign-owned supermarket chain and is now itself expanding to other
African countries (The Economist 2013). In this case, manufacturing was a
beneficiary of the vertical linkages from upstream FDI. Another example is
wheat milling, with millers greatly increasing their production of flour and
bread, primarily for urban consumers (Mason et al. 2011). Behind wheat
milling’s initial success was trade liberalization, which lowered the price of
imported wheat and reduced millers’ production costs. However, this created
tensions with local farmers, and the Zambia National Farming Union even-
tually convinced the MMD government to ban the import of wheat flour.
These restrictions were subsequently removed and reintroduced, reflecting the
government’s difficulty in balancing the interests of urban consumers, who
represent a large share of votes, and commercial farmers. Nonetheless, by 2009,
Zambia was self-sufficient throughout the wheat and bread supply chain.
Unfortunately, however, these emergent food-processing firms were less labor
intensive than either existing food processing or textiles and clothing firms.
Consequently, manufacturing as a whole contributed less to national job cre-
ation during the 2000s than it did to economic growth.

Agriculture Remained Stagnant
Agriculture is one of Zambia’s most important sectors, with at least two-thirds
of Zambians living or working on farms. However, agriculture is character-
ized by a dualistic structure. On the one hand, there exists a well-organized
and technically efficient large-scale commercial farming sector that encom-
passes approximately 8 percent of farmers with landholdings of 20 hectares or
more. On the other hand, a majority of the sector, approximately 75 percent of
farmers, consists of smallholders with less than 5 hectares of land who use tra-
ditional technologies to grow food crops and raise livestock for predominantly
subsistence purposes (Thurlow et al. 2012a).7 Agriculture’s productivity was
low in the 1990s and remained so even during the economic recovery, and
rural poverty rates remained high and virtually unchanged during the
1990s and 2000s. Moreover, while the sector accounted for 51.4 percent of

 7	 Approximately 17 percent of farmers are known as “emergent farmers,” with landholdings of
   5–20 hectares (Sitko and Jane 2014).
                                      THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  249




employment growth during 2002–2010, it accounted for only 8.1 percent of
the rise in national GDP (Table 6.4).
    In the 1990s, numerous structural adjustment policies were created to
improve the sector’s performance (Resnick and Thurlow 2009). The main
reform was the abolition of pan-territorial maize prices and urban food sub-
sidies. Although this reform raised urban consumer prices, it also led to more
appropriate cropland allocations (such as a switch from maize to cassava in the
North). This outcome enhanced food security, even though it did not raise
agricultural productivity. Cotton farming was another success story, which, as
mentioned earlier, benefited from contract arrangements with foreign-owned
cotton ginning firms. By the end of the 1990s, a quarter of a million small-
holder farmers were growing cotton, which reduced rural poverty, mainly in
Eastern Province (Thurlow and Wobst 2006). Nevertheless, these pockets of
success were unable to absorb the large influx of migrants as Zambia’s popula-
tion de-urbanized.
    Several factors explain agriculture’s poor performance. First, most farming
in Zambia is rainfed rather than irrigated. The sector was exposed to a series
of severe droughts in the 2000s that undermined growth and investment and
increased rural poverty (Thurlow et al. 2012b). Second, the prevalence of HIV/
AIDS is extremely high in Zambia. Studies indicate that adult deaths reduced
farm productivity and exacerbated the effects of droughts (Chapoto and Jayne
2008; Mason et al. 2010). Third, public fertilizer subsidies under the Farmer
Input Support Program (FISP) generated modest returns and even then only
under fairly ideal agroecological conditions (Zhiying et al. 2009). Evidence
also suggests that subsidies may have at times been allocated for political rather
than economic reasons (Mason, Jayne, and van de Walle 2013). Fourth, the
government established the Food Reserve Agency (FRA) in 1996, which even-
tually became the dominant buyer of maize in Zambia. Evidence suggests that,
even though the FRA raised and stabilized prices, it generated few benefits for
small-scale farmers and may have hurt urban consumers (Mason and Myers
2013). And fifth, even though public spending on agriculture rose during the
2000s, approximately 70 percent of the agricultural budget has been directed
toward the FRA and FISP (Mason and Myers 2013; World Bank 2012). Less
funding was available for other investments that are considered to provide
higher returns, such as research and extension (Thurlow et al. 2012a).
    Thus, agriculture’s stagnation was in spite of large, albeit inefficient, invest-
ments in market price stabilization and improved farm inputs. Slow agricul-
tural growth meant that poverty remained high in Zambia and became more
concentrated among smallholder farmers (Diao, Hazell, and Thurlow 2010).
250 Chapter 6




Informal Trade Became the Dominant Nonfarm Employer
Trade was by far responsible for the largest increases in nonfarm employ-
ment during 2002–2010, accounting for 19.6 percent of total employment
growth and 9.8 percent of the increase in GDP (Table 6.4). However, the bulk
(more than four-fifths) of the new trade sector jobs created was in the infor-
mal sector.
    In urban areas, informal trade is predominantly retail based and engaged
in by street hawkers and market vendors, with more than half of them below
the age of 35. Significantly, between 2002 and 2010, one-third of these
informal jobs was filled by people who had completed secondary school.
Employment in this sector is viewed more as a coping strategy than a source
of decent jobs, given that the work is low paid and insecure, and often takes
place in substandard conditions. But such trade fills a vital niche in that many
of the informal retail markets are located within urban shanty compounds,
providing easy access to a wide variety of goods at customizable sizes for the
urban poor.
    Economic liberalization in the 1990s contributed to the growth of infor-
mal trade in cities, particularly Lusaka, by both diminishing the number of
jobs available in the formal sector and removing controls on foreign exchange,
imports, and prices—which reduced the barriers to entry into the sector
(Hansen 2007). Increasingly, street vendors began establishing tuntembas, or
makeshift plastic, wood, and cardboard stalls, along Lusaka’s main streets.
According to Hansen (2004), street vending reached “anarchic proportions”
by the end of 1998. At the same time, the number of designated informal
trade markets recognized by the Lusaka City Council grew from 36 to 57
between 1980 and 2000 (Nchito 2006). While a large variety of goods is
found in the markets, saluala, or second-hand clothing, represents a major
share of the merchandise sold by informal traders because, unlike some other
African countries, Zambia did not place quotas on these imports or limit their
distribution to solely charitable organizations (Hansen 2000).
    Informal trade has demonstrated both negative and positive externalities
on employment growth. On the one hand, during the 1990s, the country’s
dwindling textile sector could not compete with the lower prices offered on
second-hand goods and prompted a number of manufacturing firms to leave
Zambia or to restructure entirely. In response to demands from the Zambian
Association of Manufacturing union, Chiluba’s government attempted
in 1998 to increase tariffs on imports of saluala; however, this was met by
large-scale resistance from street vendors and marketers and was ultimately
rescinded (Hansen 2000). On the other hand, informal trade creates links
                                      THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  251




throughout the sector, as vendors often need to purchase food, stall materials,
and other goods from each other.
    Since the early 2000s, Zambian informal traders have faced a more chal-
lenging environment in at least two regards. First, some of the markets were
upgraded to provide safer and cleaner stalls, sanitation facilities, and legalized
access to electricity. Yet, such upgrades required demolishing old structures and
forcing many traders either to return to the streets or to swell already danger-
ously overpopulated markets. Upon the completion of some of these new mar-
kets, traders found that the rents for stalls had increased beyond their means
and had allowed Chinese, Indian, and Lebanese traders to gain a foothold in the
sector (Hansen 2007). Second, the MMD adopted a more stringent approach
toward informal trade during Mwanawasa’s tenure. For example, in mid-2002,
there was a major effort by the Zambian police and paramilitary and the Lusaka
City Council to clear vendors off the streets (Hansen 2004). Moreover, under
Mwanawasa’s “Keep Zambia Clean and Healthy” initiative, street vendors were
targeted for litter, cholera, traffic congestion, and deterring business investment.
This initiative involved adding more restricted provisions to the Street Vending
and Nuisances Act to fine anyone engaged in street vending or purchasing from
vendors (Times of Zambia 2007).
   Although not as large a source of employment as its informal counterpart,
formal trade also provided a number of new jobs over the 2000s. In fact, the
number of formal paid employees in the trade services sector doubled between
2002 and 2010, from 51,000 to 101,000. By 2010, trade was Zambia’s largest
formal-sector employer outside of the government. Driven by foreign invest-
ment, tourists, and rising purchasing power among high-income locals, these
formal jobs are primarily in retail trade, with some additional employment
creation in hotels and restaurants.
   Much of the retail trade boom has been concentrated in Lusaka’s 11 shop-
ping malls, including the 72-store Levy Junction Mall, which opened in late
2011. A characteristic feature of these malls is that they are located in Lusaka’s
low-density, more affluent neighborhoods (Nchito 2006), and they primarily
house foreign retail chains. Although these foreign chains may have displaced
indigenous traders or narrowed their profit margins, they have also in some
cases created strong links to local agricultural and food suppliers. For example,
the South African-owned retailer, Shoprite, sources much of its stores’ meat
from the locally owned Zambeef (The Economist 2013). Yet, formal-sector
trade employment is not always synonymous with decent jobs, as evidenced by
multiple strikes since 1999 at Shoprite chains across the country over low pay,
lack of pensions, and the casualization of labor.
252 Chapter 6




High-value Services Benefited Mainly the Middle Class
Over the 2000s, the largest contributors to growth were construction, trans-
port and communications, and finance and business services, which collec-
tively accounted for 47.4 percent of the increase in GDP. However, these
sectors generated only 14 percent of employment growth (Table 6.4)—mean-
ing that, unlike trade, their growth was driven mainly by rising value-added
per worker, rather than by an increase in the number of workers. Moreover,
the demand for these services is largely linked to the growth in consumption
by those at the higher end of the income distribution, which rose by 5 percent
for the richest decile in the 2000s (Table 6.3). In contrast, poorer Zambians
failed to significantly benefit either from the services generated by these sec-
tors or from the jobs that they created.
    In the construction sector, most of the new jobs were not for casual
workers. Instead, they were for paid, formal employees, whose share of con-
struction jobs rose from only 5 percent in 2002 to about 33 percent by 2010.
Most of Zambia’s construction activities have involved rehabilitating major
roads, developing new office blocks, and building shopping malls in Lusaka;
mining developments in the Copperbelt; and undertaking suburban residen-
tial housing initiatives, such as Lusaka Heights, a 3,700-unit, high-end hous-
ing development (Phillips 2007). Notably, the construction of housing for
low-income groups in rapidly growing urban areas has been much less expan-
sive. For example, in Lusaka, about 70 percent of the population continues
to live in unplanned, shanty settlements (Nchito 2007). Most of these settle-
ments lack proper infrastructure and key services, such as internal plumbing,
which in turn often forces communities to share the same latrines and com-
munal water taps (Taylor 2006).
    The capital-intensive nature of and need for highly skilled workers in the
communications and financial sectors largely explain why they did not rep-
resent a major source of employment creation. Much of the growth in the
communications sector was the result of the expanding availability of mobile
phones, which are serviced by three main companies (UNCTAD 2011).
Between 2000 and 2010, the number of mobile phone subscribers increased
from 98,000 to more than 5 million (World Bank 2013), benefiting a large
number of Zambians. While fixed broadband Internet subscribers also
increased, from 21 to more than 10,000 people (World Bank 2013), the fees
lie far beyond the reach of much of the population.
    In the financial services sector, bank lending increased by almost three-
fold between 2004 and 2007, and the establishment of a credit bureau in
2008 has enabled banks to assess borrowers’ creditworthiness and reduce the
                                             THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  253




costs of borrowing that were previously inflated by the perceived high risk of
default (Baker 2008). There are at least two growing areas in this sector. One
is the provision of housing mortgages for the small number of Zambians who
are able to afford home ownership (Phillips 2007). The second is the gradual
rise in mobile banking, which allows payments to be made to an individual’s
mobile phone, even if the owner does not possess a bank account (Adongo
2007). Overall, by 2009, 37.3 percent of all Zambians used some type of
financial service, with Lusaka and the Copperbelt provinces accounting for
60 percent of the country’s total banking customers (FinScope 2010).


Political Ramifications of Uneven Transformation
Not surprisingly, the changing economic and social dynamics in the 1990s
and 2000s ultimately filtered into the political sphere. During successive
elections in 2006, 2008, and 2011, Sata effectively tapped into public dis-
gruntlement with the lack of broad-based development and other aspects of
Zambia’s transformation over the 2000s.8 He overwhelmingly focused on
urban areas—including Lusaka and cities in the Copperbelt, such as Ndola
and Kitwe—which, given the resurgence of urbanization, contained a large,
concentrated source of potential votes. And that meant reaching out to the
unemployed and participants in the urban informal trade sector. It is true that
the latter, thanks to structural change, were gaining marginally higher wages
than Zambians concentrated in rural areas. But the MMD government had
not necessarily been actively responsible for promoting this positive structural
change; in fact, at times it actively harassed those involved in informal trade
and attempted to impose legal restrictions on their activities.
    Instead, informal trade essentially became a coping strategy for both those
who exited agriculture and those who lost jobs in the formal sector because
of the collapse of manufacturing. In other words, while migrants to urban
areas were better off than they might have been if they had stayed in agri-
culture, those born in urban areas were worse off than they might have been
because of the failure of mining, manufacturing, and high-value services to
generate much employment. The urban milieu undoubtedly reinforced these
disparities, as informal workers’ living and working conditions were starkly
contrasted against those of the increasingly visible symbols of Zambia’s small
but burgeoning middle and upper classes (Larmer and Fraser 2007). As an

 8	 Although Sata also competed in the 2001 elections, he established the PF only 59 days before
   election day, and therefore engaged in very little campaigning.
254 Chapter 6




indicator of such inequalities, Lusaka’s Gini coefficient was estimated at 0.66
in 2006 (UN-Habitat 2010).9 A 2008 government survey underscored a
feeling of discontent, with urban, informal workers less sanguine than their
formal counterparts about economic conditions—emphasizing the disjunc-
ture between macroeconomic developments and individual perceptions of
improvements (Table 6.5).10
    Within urban areas, Sata explicitly targeted the poor by opening and
closing his campaigns in Lusaka’s informal markets and shanty compounds
(Larmer and Fraser 2007; Kalaluka and Noyoo 2008). A survey in the shanty
compounds revealed that foremost among workers’ concerns were insuffi-
cient job opportunities, low wages, and the high price of basic goods (World
Bank 2007). Specifically, the PF’s slogan was “lower taxes, more jobs, more
money in your pockets.” Even outside election years, Sata criticized the elec-
tricity outages and lack of clean water faced by the poor (The Post 2005), and
in 2007 he led a mass procession in Lusaka to denounce a proposal from
the IMF to increase value-added taxes on food and agricultural products
(Larmer and Fraser 2007), which comprise a large share of the urban poor’s
daily consumption.
    Furthermore, Sata condemned the MMD’s harassment of those in the
informal sector by emphasizing that the former ruling party had failed to
provide adequate jobs for this constituency: “You can’t force them [vendors]
out of the streets…. If you crack down on them, where are you going to take
them? What I’m saying is, if you fail to provide for them, don’t bring puni-
tive measures against them” (Michael Sata, cited in Resnick 2013). Similarly,
he denounced the MMD’s allocation of upgraded market stalls to foreign
traders—an issue of considerable contention among marketers (Larmer and
Fraser 2007).
    Given that the informal sector has been populated by a large share of
young people, many youths were in turn attracted to Sata’s promises of more
jobs. However, he made this appeal even more explicit in 2011 by using a rap
song called Donchi Kubeba (“Don’t Tell”) by a popular local artist named
Dandy Krazy. The song’s message urged Zambians to accept campaign

 9	 The Gini coefficient is measured on an index from 0 to 1, with values closer to 1 indicating
   greater inequality.
10	 The 2008 Zambian Governance Survey (RoZ/CSO 2009) was commissioned under the aegis
   of the country’s Fifth National Development Plan for 2006–2010 (RoZ/MoFNP 2006). The
   survey aimed to assess how well Zambians understand governance processes and institutions,
   as well as to create a benchmark dataset for future analyses of governance progress within the
   country. The survey covered approximately 4,000 households in rural and urban areas in all
   nine provinces.
                                                       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  255




Table 6.5  Informal workers are less satisfied than formal workers

                           Assessments of the economy by employment status, 2008

In the past 12 months, how would you describe                        Share agreeing with assessment (%)
the economic conditions in this country?                      Urban formal workers           Urban informal workers
Good or fairly good                                                     59.8                            49.2
Bad or very bad                                                         37.7                            44.7
Don’t know                                                               2.5                             6.1
Number of observations                                                   888                             934
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2008 Zambian Governance Survey (RoZ/CSO 2009).
Note: “Formal” refers to Zambians who are working for the central or local government, parastatal entity, private sector,
nongovernmental organization, international organization, or embassy, or who are themselves employers. “Informal” refers to
Zambians who are self-employed, subsistence farmers, piece workers, or household employees.


handouts from the MMD but to refuse to say which party they would actu-
ally support in the elections. Significantly, there were 1.2 million new regis-
tered voters in 2011, 54 percent of whom were between the ages of 18 and 35.
The largest share of these new young voters was in the Copperbelt and Lusaka,
highlighting that it was especially urban youths who were mobilized in the
last elections (Nyimbili 2012).
    Another important component of Sata’s message was a focus on the way
the mining sector had been managed. He denounced the low levels of tax
paid by multinationals operating in the mining sector: “Zambians are paying
high taxes while the mines pay little tax. This will change when we [the PF]
come to power because the mines must also pay tax” (cited in Seccombe 2006).
Specifically, he vowed to implement a 25 percent windfall tax on mining rev-
enues if elected into office and promised to invest the additional revenues in
the social services sector.
    Given Sata’s urban focus, the PF did not focus significantly on the agri-
culture sector. The PF’s former spokesperson noted: “We talk about lower
taxes, we talk about jobs for people. Now, that appeals to the people in the
urban areas because they’re the ones who are looking for jobs, they’re the ones
whose incomes are overtaxed. So, we appeal to them more than to rural dwell-
ers. We haven’t articulated issues of agriculture that strongly” (Given Lubinda,
cited in Resnick 2013). In fact, some of Sata’s promises in urban areas, such
as reducing the price of food, were contrary to the interests of rural producers
(Cheeseman and Hinfelaar 2010). Instead, Sata often focused on ethno­
linguistic appeals in rural areas, especially in Northern and Luapula provinces,
where many of his Bemba co-ethnics reside (Resnick 2013).
    The MMD adopted a different strategy by focusing heavily on rural
areas and courting higher-income urban Zambians—a group that had
256 Chapter 6




benefited the most from the country’s structural change. Its manifestos
ranked agriculture as the number one priority for the country’s development
agenda (Resnick 2013). Despite the sector’s relatively weak role in generat-
ing structural change, the MMD’s rural campaigns emphasized the fertilizer
subsidy program and the role played by the FRA, aimed at reminding rural
voters of the individual, material benefits they accrued during the party’s
tenure.11 In 2008, for example, the MMD’s Rupiah Banda promised on the
campaign trail to expand the share of fertilizer that it subsidizes from 60 to
75 percent (Miti 2008). The 2011 election campaign in particular coincided
with a bumper harvest for maize, which the MMD attributed to the subsidy
program (Redvers 2011).
    Moreover, in urban areas, Banda launched his 2008 and 2011 campaigns
from Lusaka’s plush InterContinental Hotel, presenting a sharp contrast to
Sata’s focus on shanty compounds. With the slogan of “security, stability, and
prosperity,” Banda tried to convince the new middle class that their stan-
dard of living could be threatened if Sata became president (The Economist
2011; Redvers 2011). In addition, he highlighted the MMD’s investments
in roads, schools, and hospitals, while also opposing a windfall tax on min-
ing, claiming it would deter foreign investment and undermine job growth
(Commonwealth Secretariat 2011).
    Collectively, the impact of these different strategies was evident in each
successive election. Sata’s highest share of votes continuously came from the
two most urbanized regions, increasing from 58 to 63 percent in Lusaka’s
urban constituencies between 2006 and 2011 and from 51 to 68 percent in
Copperbelt Province during the same period.12 The PF retained an espe-
cially strong foothold in high-density, shanty settlements. While the MMD
gained support from the affluent and new middle classes in urban centers
(Cheeseman and Hinfelaar 2010), the size of this constituency meant that its
overall voting power vis-à-vis the urban poor was much smaller.
    In rural areas, the MMD continued to obtain the highest share of votes
in much of the rest of the country’s provinces. Two exceptions were the
Bembaphone heartlands of Northern and Luapula provinces, where Sata won
in 2011 with 64 and 73 percent of the vote, respectively. During those elec-
tions, Sata finally defeated Banda by obtaining 42 percent of the national


11	 These programs, in various guises, had been running in Zambia under the MMD since 1996
   (Mason, Jayne, and van de Walle 2013).
12	 Lusaka Province contains 12 constituencies, but only 7 of these are considered “urban”:
   Chawama, Kabwata, Kanyama, Lusaka Central, Mandevu, Matero, and Munali.
                                            THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  257




vote.13 His victory was significant, not only for ending two decades of MMD
rule, but also because eight other opposition parties competed, increasing the
likelihood that they would split the vote to the MMD’s benefit. The PF’s suc-
cessful outcome, therefore, revealed how much the party’s message resonated
with those who—despite Zambia’s economic resurgence during the 2000s—
perceived little tangible improvement in their own living conditions.


Structural Change without Transformation
Overall, we found that Zambia’s unprecedented levels of GDP growth over
the past decade have indeed been accompanied by positive structural change,
which accounted for about half of the increase in the GDP per worker during
2002–2010 of 3.56 percent per year. This was a substantial improvement over
1991–2002, when negative structural change (a substantial decline in worker
productivity) was somewhat greater than the slight increase in within-sector
productivity growth. Yet despite the recent improvement in the country’s per-
formance, the negative structural change of the 1990s dominated the past
two decades. As a result, labor productivity growth for 1991–2010 was only
0.31 percent per year, with the major driver being the within-sector compo-
nent (0.87 percent per year), and the structural change component still nega-
tive (–0.65 percent per year).
    Which sectors were driving growth? Between 2002 and 2010, agricul-
ture and manufacturing remained stagnant, and mining’s capital-intensive
nature prevented it from generating much employment. Instead, a large share
of employment growth occurred in trade, with much of it occurring in the
informal sector and a smaller share in the formal sector, thanks to the coun-
try’s retail boom. A larger proportion of economic growth, but smaller share
of job growth generation, emerged from construction and high-value ser-
vices, where value-added per worker is much higher. Notably, the nature of
this structural change did not translate into large-scale social transforma-
tion, given that many newly created jobs in trade are low paid and often inse-
cure. Furthermore, both the drivers and the beneficiaries of construction and
services tend to be higher-income groups in urban areas, whose consumption
share has increased since the 1990s. By the end of the 2000s, this trajectory
contributed to a Zambia characterized by three main groups: the rural poor,
the urban poor, and a rising middle class that had reaped most of the benefits

13	 Election results are available from the Electoral Commission of Zambia: http://www.elections
   .org.zm.
258 Chapter 6




from macroeconomic growth. As shown by Sata’s 2011 election, these eco-
nomic and social dynamics ultimately filtered into the political sphere.
    These dynamics have important policy implications for Zambia’s govern-
ment, especially in agriculture and trade, which are the two sectors that are
largely responsible for the country’s structural change without transforma-
tion. In the agriculture sector, the government’s continued focus on FISP,
despite much research questioning the program’s impact on productivity
gains (Mason, Jayne, and Mofya-Mukuka 2013), needs to be reconsidered,
and expenditures need to be redirected into areas that may generate more
long-term, broad-based benefits for smallholders. Although the political will
to eliminate subsidies is difficult to mobilize, the planned incorporation of
an e-voucher into FISP (starting in the 2015/2016 agricultural season) will
reduce the program’s costs by eliminating transport and administrative over-
heads and also give smallholders the chance to access inputs that are more
appropriate for their farms’ agroecological conditions.
    However, to attract youths to agriculture, particularly, much more effort is
needed to increase agriculture’s appeal as a business opportunity, rather than
simply as a subsistence sector. The country’s Farm Block Program represents
one effort to this end, as it aims to link smallholder farmers to commercial
opportunities by providing specific tracts of land with feeder roads, electricity,
irrigation, and communications facilities. Yet, preliminary research suggests
that the government needs to be cautious that the farm blocks do not exacer­
bate the already pronounced dualism in the agriculture sector by creating
opportunities for urban-based elites, rather than existing rural smallholders
(Sitko and Jayne 2014).
    In the trade sector, which is where most of Zambia’s structural change
has been concentrated, at least two priorities are apparent. First, in the for-
mal trade sector, especially in retail trade, hotels, and restaurants, there
must be caution about overextending beyond the demands of the country’s
still-nascent middle class. Second, in the informal sector, greater attention is
needed to ensure opportunities for “decent jobs”—those that involve provid-
ing at least secure and hygienic market and trading areas and that limit erratic
harassment of informal traders by local authorities. This will entail strength-
ening legal mechanisms that provide recourse to traders, as well as effective
oversight by the Ministry of Local Government to ensure the balanced imple-
mentation of such laws across the country’s district councils.
    The broader challenge for Zambia’s transformation is both a lack of mac-
roeconomic stability and persistent policy volatility. At the time of this
book’s writing, the country is once again confronting the disadvantages of its
                                            THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  259




lack of diversification away from copper. In the wake of plummeting copper
prices, the currency has depreciated significantly, and high levels of debt have
increased speculation about the need for an IMF agreement. A lack of com-
mitment to policy decisions is equally problematic, as it deters further invest-
ment in agriculture and other sectors. Problems include periodic trade bans
on maize exports and wheat imports, ad hoc decisions related to allocating
grain levies on smallholders to raise revenues for local councils, and executive
decrees related to the price at which the FRA will purchase maize.14 These
episodes of volatility are attributed to changing presidential prerogatives and
the ability of the executive to override long-term policy planning by techno-
crats. The frequent changeover in presidents over the last decade—ranging
from Levy Mwanawasa to Rupiah Banda of the MMD and then Michael Sata
and Edgar Lungu of the PF—has exacerbated this trend, since each new presi-
dent aims to create his own legacy and pursues multiple cabinet reshuffles.
   These policy issues and the broader findings from this chapter suggest that
Zambia’s experience is not an anomaly, but is rather an instructive case study
for many other African countries. Even in countries without large-scale min-
eral resources, much of the region is characterized by modest improvements in
agricultural production, insignificant levels of indigenous manufacturing, the
predominance of informal-sector employment, and a small but burgeoning
services sector. These factors are complicated by rapid urbanization, a youth
bulge, a rising middle class, and political parties eager to capitalize on citizens’
grievances in the region’s growing number of democracies. Undoubtedly then,
reconciling positive structural change with large-scale transformation will
remain a major economic, social, and political concern not only for Zambia
but also for much of Africa over the foreseeable future.


Appendix 6A: Data Sources
Total GDP for 28 sectors for 1994–2010 was taken from the Central Statistical
Office (RoZ/CSO 2011). These data were measured in constant 1994 prices—
the last year when national accounts were rebased. Total GDP for 11 sectors for
1990–1993 was taken from IMF (1999), which reconciled these estimates with
the 1994 base year estimates. GDP for six manufacturing subsectors was esti-
mated for 1990–1993 using the index of industrial production (IMF 1999). All


14	 In 2012, the government suddenly introduced Statutory Instrument 33, which banned the use
   of foreign currency for domestic transactions. Two years later, the policy was rescinded with-
   out warning, creating further confusion among foreign investors.
260 Chapter 6




values were converted to 2002 US dollars using GDP deflators, exchange rates,
and purchasing power parity conversion factors from World Bank (2013).
   The main concern about Zambian GDP estimates is the long delay
between rebasing national accounts. By 2010, it was possible that national
accounts did not accurately reflect the level and structure of GDP. Of par-
ticular concern is the nonfarm informal sector, which employment data sug-
gest has grown, but whose growth is difficult to capture without an economic
census or large-sample firm surveys. Trade services GDP, for example, might
be underestimated, implying that value-added per worker was higher in 2010
than the GDP time series suggests. Less concerning are agriculture and the
formal sector, which were tracked using annual surveys and business registers.
    Employment estimates were taken from censuses and surveys conducted
by the CSO. We compiled an employment time series for 16 sectors using the
Population and Housing Censuses (1990, 2000, and 2010); Priority Surveys
(PS 1991 and 1993); Living Conditions Monitoring Surveys (LCMSs 1996,
1998, 2002, 2004, 2006, and 2010); and Labor Force Surveys (LFSs 1986,
2005, and 2008). Table 6A.1 reports total employment by sector from these

Table 6A.1  Total employment by sector, 1986–2010


Year and         Employed                            Share of total employment by sector (%)
source            (’000s)        AGR       MIN       MAN        UTL       CON       TRH       TRC        FBS       CGS
1990 C             1,858         68.4       3.3       5.1       0.6       1.9        3.8       2.9       2.0      12.0
2000 C             2,686         75.7      1.4        2.9       0.4       1.4        7.2       2.0       1.1        8.0
2010 C             3,704         66.5      1.9        3.6       0.4       3.0        9.9       4.2       0.5      10.0
1991 PS            2,519         65.4      1.9        4.3       0.9       1.9       10.8       2.9       1.8      10.1
1993 PS            2,813         73.6       2.5       3.7       0.4       1.0        8.5       2.2       1.4        6.7
1996 LCMS           3,371        67.1      1.8        5.1       0.4       1.1       12.1       1.7       1.4        9.3
1998 LCMS          3,526         70.4      1.6        3.8       0.2       0.9       11.1       2.0       1.3        8.6
2002 LCMS          3,520         71.7      1.4        3.5       0.3       1.3        9.6       1.6       1.5        9.1
2004 LCMS          3,910         69.5      1.6        3.7       0.5       1.5       10.9       2.1       1.3        9.1
2006 LCMS          4,224         71.0      1.6        3.8       0.4       1.3       10.0       2.0       2.0        7.9
2010 LCMS          4,385         67.7      1.3        3.0       0.4       1.8       11.9       2.1       2.4        9.4
1986 LFS           2,506         69.7      1.9        4.3       0.4       1.9        6.9       2.9       1.8      10.2
2005 LFS           4,130         72.2      1.4        4.0       0.4       1.4       10.5       2.1       1.0        7.0
2008 LFS           4,607         71.3       2.0       3.5       0.3       1.7       10.1       2.1       0.6        8.4
Source: Authors’ estimates using survey and census data collected by the Central Statistical Office (RoZ/CSO 2011).
Note: AGR = agriculture; CGS = community and government services (government + other services from Figure 6.1);
CON = construction; FBS = finance, business, and real estate; MIN = mining; MAN = manufacturing; TRC = transport and
communications; TRH = trade, hotels, and catering (trade services + hotels and catering from Figure 6.1); UTL = utilities
(electricity, gas, and water). C = Population and Housing Census; LCMS = Living Conditions Monitoring Survey; LFS = Labor
Force Survey; PS = Priority Survey.
                                                         THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  261




data sources. Additional formal employment estimates are from the CSO
Quarterly Employment and Earnings Inquiry.
   The population censuses underestimated total employment compared
with the surveys, and the 1990 census underreported informal trade, possibly
because a large number of workers did not report their sector of employment
and because labor market questions are less detailed in censuses. Therefore,
we used the 1991 PS and the 2002 and 2010 LCMSs. Total and sectoral
employment trends from these surveys are consistent with the LFSs, which
are designed to capture employment data, but whose timing was not ideal for
studying the 1990s and 2000s. Table 6A.2 reports value-added per worker
based on the GDP and survey data.

Table 6A.2  Total value-added per worker by sector, 1990–2010

Year and                       Average annual gross domestic product per worker (2002 US$ PPP)
source              TOT      AGR        MIN        MAN         UTL       CON         TRH        TRC         FBS       CGS
1990 C            4,609      960      30,117      9,559      22,777 20,445         22,459      10,105      21,783 2,933
1991 PS           3,339      778      35,273      8,329     12,126 14,805            5,707      7,050      18,190 2,602
1996 LCMS          2,357     686      18,112       5,222 18,258         10,221       4,151      8,938      18,074 2,245
1998 LCMS         2,294      600      14,604       7,124     32,703 13,958           4,666      7,841      23,073 2,276
2000 LCMS         3,210      819      16,911 13,016          25,339 12,874         10,174      11,227      42,294 3,476
2002 LCMS         2,680      631      16,440       9,174     28,618 13,962           6,483     11,012      25,946 2,511
2004 LCMS          2,717     643      15,573       8,725     16,471 16,143           5,782      8,645      29,258 2,308
2005 LFS          2,722      582      18,721       7,822 18,443 19,864               5,872      8,992      36,284 3,149
2006 LCMS         2,849      592      16,322       8,476     22,027 24,005           6,223     11,631      18,225 2,969
2008 LFS          2,946      556      12,878       9,041 24,945 20,676               6,012 14,059          61,394 3,234
2010 LCMS         3,544      704      28,010 11,522          23,950 24,270           5,672 18,223          18,042 3,468
2010 C            4,196      848      23,533 11,498          26,768 17,680           8,041 10,591 101,244 3,861
Source: Authors’ estimates using survey and census data collected by the Central Statistical Office (RoZ/CSO 2011).
Note: AGR = agriculture; CGS = community and government services (government + other services from Figure 6.1);
CON = construction; FBS = finance, business, and real estate; MIN = mining; MAN = manufacturing; PPP = purchasing
power parity; TOT = total; TRC = transport and communications; TRH = trade, hotels, and catering (trade services + hotels
and catering from Figure 6.1); UTL = utilities (electricity, gas, and water). C = Population and Housing Census; LCMS = Living
Conditions Monitoring Survey; LFS = Labor Force Survey; PS = Priority Survey.
262 Chapter 6




References
Adongo, J. 2007. The Potential for Mobile Banking in Zambia. Lusaka: FinScope.
Baker, G. 2008. “Zambia—Opportunity Knocks—A Stable Economy and Growing Middle Class
     Is Attracting International Banks to Zambia.” The Banker, April 7. Accessed via ProQuest on
     March 15, 2013.
Bwalya, S. M. 2006. “Foreign Direct Investment and Technology Spillovers: Evidence from Panel
     Data Analysis of Manufacturing Firms in Zambia.” Journal of Development Economics 81:
     514–526.
Chapoto, A., and T. S. Jayne. 2008. “Impact of AIDS-Related Mortality on Farm Household
     Welfare in Zambia.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 56 (2): 327–374.
Cheeseman, N., and M. Hinfelaar. 2010. “Parties, Platforms, and Political Mobilization: The
     Zambian Presidential Election of 2008.” African Affairs 109 (434): 1–26.
Commonwealth Secretariat. 2011. Zambia General Elections: Report of the Commonwealth
     Observer Group. London.
Diao, X., P. Hazell, and J. Thurlow. 2010. “The Role of Agriculture in African Development.”
     World Development 38 (10): 1375–1383.
The Economist . 2011. “Cobra vs. Codger: Zambia’s Election.” September 17: 48.
— . 2013. “Zambeef: A Rare Meat Success in Africa.” June 8: 59.
Eliassen, I. E. 2012. Chinese Investors: Saving the Zambian Textile and Clothing Industry?
     Stellenbosch, South Africa: Center for Chinese Studies.
FinScope. 2010. FinScope Zambia 2009: Topline Findings. Lusaka.
Gould, J. 2007. “Zambia’s 2006 Elections: The Ethnicization of Politics?” News from the Nordic
     Africa Institute 1 (January): 5–9.
Hansen, K. T. 2000. Salaula: The World of Secondhand Clothing in Zambia. Chicago: University
     of Chicago Press.
—. 2004. “Who Rules the Streets? The Politics of Vending Space in Lusaka.” In Reconsidering
     Urban Informality: Perspectives from Urban Africa, edited by K. T. Hansen and M. Vaa.
     Uppsala, Sweden: Nordiska Afrikainstitutet.
—. 2007. “The Informalization of Lusaka’s Economy: Regime Change, Ultra Modern
     Markets, and Street Vending, 1972–2004.” In One Zambia, Many Histories: Towards
     a Post-Colonial History of Zambia, edited by J. B. Gewalt, M. Hinfelaar, and G. Macola.
     Leiden, Netherlands: J. Brill.
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 1999. Zambia: Statistical Appendix. Washington, DC.
Kalaluka, M., and I. Noyoo. 2008. “Sata Sees Light at the End of the Tunnel.” The Post,
     September 26: 1, 4.
                                             THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  263




Larmer, M., and A. Fraser. 2007. “Of Cabbages and King Cobra: Populist Politics and Zambia’s
     2006 Election.” African Affairs 106: 611–627.
Mason, N. M., T. S. Jayne, A. Chapoto, and C. Donovan. 2011. “Putting the 2007/2008 Global
     Food Crisis in Longer-Term Perspective: Trends in Staple Food Affordability in Urban
     Zambia and Kenya.” Food Policy 36: 350–367.
Mason, N. M, T. S. Jayne, A. Chapoto, and R. J. Myers. 2010. “A Test of the New Variant Famine
     Hypothesis: Panel Survey Evidence from Zambia.” World Development 38 (3): 356–368.
Mason, N. M., T. S. Jayne, and R. Mofya-Mukuka. 2013. “Zambia’s Input Subsidy Programs.”	
     Agricultural Economics 44: 613–628.
Mason, N. M., T. S., Jayne, and N. van de Walle. 2013. “Fertilizer Subsidies and Voting Behavior:
     Political Economy Dimensions of Input Subsidy Programs.” Unpublished manuscript.
Mason, N. M., and R. J. Myers. 2013. “The Effects of the Food Reserve Agency on Maize Market
     Prices in Zambia.” Agricultural Economics 44 (2): 203–216.
McMillan, M., D. Rodrik, and I. Verduzco-Gallo. 2014. “Globalization, Structural Change, and
     Productivity Growth, with an Update on Africa.” World Development 63: 11–32.
Miti, C. 2008. “Rupiah’s Campaign Speech in Katete.” The Post, September 18: 2.
Nchito, W. 2006. “A City of Divided Shopping: An Analysis of the Location of Markets in Lusaka,
     Zambia.” Paper presented at the 42nd International Society of City and Regional Planners
     (ISoCARP), Istanbul, Turkey, September 14–18.
—. 2007. “Flood Risk in Unplanned Settlements in Lusaka.” Environment and Urbanization
     19 (2): 539–551.
Nyimbili, K. 2012. State of the Nation Report on Young People in Zambia. Lusaka: Restless
     Development—The Youth-Led Development Agency.
Otto, J., C. Andrews, F. Cawood, M. Doggett, P. Guj, F. Stermole, J. Stermole, and J. Tilton. 2006.
     Mining Royalties: A Global Study of Their Impact on Investors, Government, and Civil Society.
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
Phillips, M. 2007. “In Africa, Mortgages Boost an Emerging Middle Class.” Wall Street Journal,
     July 20: 14.
The Post. 2005. “Matero Turns Out for Sata.” November 28. Retrieved October 14, 2009, from
     LexisNexis Academic Database.
Potts, D. 2005. “Counter-urbanisation on the Zambian Copperbelt? Interpretations and
     Implications.” Urban Studies 42 (4): 583–609.
Rakner, L. 2003. Political and Economic Liberalisation in Zambia. Uppsala, Sweden: The Nordic
     Africa Institute.
Redvers, L. 2011. “Personality Trumps Policy in Zambia’s Election Battles.” Mail and Guardian,
     September 2.
264 Chapter 6




Resnick, D. 2013. Urban Poverty and Party Populism in African Democracies. New York:	
     Cambridge University Press.
Resnick, D., and J. Thurlow, 2009. “Development Strategies, Macroeconomic Policies, and
     the Agricultural Sector in Zambia.” In Food Policy for Developing Countries: The Role of
     Government in the Global Food System, edited by P. Pinstrup-Andersen and F. Cheng. New
     York: Cornell University Press.
RoZ/CSO (Republic of Zambia/Central Statistical Office). 1993. Social Dimensions of Adjustment:
     Priority Survey I 1991. Lusaka.
—. 2004. Living Conditions Monitoring Survey Report 2002–2003. Lusaka.
—. 2009. State of Governance National Governance Survey. Lusaka.
—. 2011. National Gross Domestic Product Time Series (June 26, 2011). Lusaka.
—. 2012. Living Conditions Monitoring Survey Report 2006 and 2010. Lusaka.
RoZ/MoFNP (Republic of Zambia/Ministry of Finance and National Planning). 2006. Fifth
     National Development Plan, 2006–2010. Lusaka. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
     INTPRS1/Resources/Country-Papers-and-JSAs/ZAMBIA-FNDP.pdf.
Seccombe, A. 2006. “Miners Warn of Zambia Meltdown.” The Post, September 19.
Simatele, D., and M. Simatele. 2009. “The Evolution and Dynamics of Urban Poverty in Zambia.”
     In Poverty in Africa, edited by T. Beasley. Washington, DC: Nova Science Publications.
Sitko, N., and T. Jayne. 2014. “Structural Transformation or Elite Land Capture? The Growth of	
     ‘Emergent’ Farmers in Zambia.” Food Policy 48: 194–202.
Taylor, S. 2006. Culture and Customs of Zambia. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Thurlow, J., S. Benin, X. Diao, H. Kalinda, and T. Kalinda. 2012a. “Zambia.” In Strategies and
     Priorities for African Agriculture: Economywide Perspectives from Country Studies, edited
     by X. Diao, J. Thurlow, S. Benin, and S. Fan. Washington, DC: International Food Policy
     Research Institute.
Thurlow, J., X. Diao, and T. Zhu. 2012b. “Current Climate Variability and Future Climate
     Change: Estimated Growth and Poverty Impacts for Zambia.” Review of Development
     Economics 16 (3): 394–411.
Thurlow, J., and P. Wobst. 2006. “Not All Growth Is Equally Good for the Poor: The Case of
     Zambia.” Journal of African Economies 15 (4): 603–625.
Times of Zambia. 2007. “Mwanawasa to Launch Keep Zambia Clean Campaign.” June 22.
Tschirley, D., and S. Kabwe. 2009. The Cotton Sector of Zambia. Africa Region. Working Paper
     Series 124. Washington, DC: World Bank.
UN Comtrade. International trade statistics database. http://comtrade.un.org/.
                                             THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ZAMBIA’S RECOVERY  265




UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 2011. An Investment Guide
     to Zambia: Opportunities and Conditions 2011. Geneva.
UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). 2010. State of African Cities 2010:
     Governance, Inequality, and Urban Land Markets. Nairobi, Kenya.
World Bank. 2007. Zambia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment. Washington, DC: International
     Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
—. 2011. More Jobs and Prosperity in Zambia: What Would It Take? Report 62376-ZM.
     Washington, DC.
—. 2012. Agribusiness Indicators: Zambia. Washington, DC.
—. 2013. World Development Indicators database. Accessed June 22, 2013. http://data
     .worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
Zhiying X., Z. Guan, T. S. Jayne, and B. Black. 2009. “Factors Influencing the Profitability of
     Fertilizer Use on Maize in Zambia.” Agricultural Economics 40 (4): 437–446.
                                                                   Chapter 7


                 STRUCTURAL CHANGE, PRODUCTIVITY
                GROWTH, AND TRADE POLICY IN BRAZIL

                                                  Sergio Firpo and Renan Pieri




T
      hroughout the course of only a few decades in the postwar period, the
      Brazilian economy experienced an intense and fast process of industrial-
      ization, which went hand in hand with a major increase in labor produc-
tivity and periods of annual growth rates above 10 percent. The rapid growth
of the industrial sector was not unintentional. It was driven by a set of policies
introduced in the 1950s to protect domestic industries from foreign competi-
tion. However, by the early 1980s, these isolationist policies had turned into
a curse, with the economy hobbled by high inflation rates and unremarkable
economic growth rates.
    In the late 1980s, with a return to civilian rule, Brazil started to revive,
thanks to a major opening up of the economy to foreign competition that con-
tinued in the 1990s. Then in the 2000s, Brazil experienced phenomenal eco-
nomic growth, mostly induced by the rise in commodity prices, which helped
to sharply reduce poverty and catapult Brazil into middle-income status—
now the world’s seventh wealthiest economy. Yet despite these achievements,
income inequality remains unacceptably high in the country, and the quality
of education leaves a lot to be desired.
    The nature of Brazil’s economic transformation—characterized by bursts
of progress interrupted by little or no progress—underscores the importance
of understanding the key factors that induce economic growth. As there is
no consensus on what those factors are, growth-enhancing policies in devel-
oping countries have varied substantially over time and across nations. What
can be inferred from the Brazilian experience is that “one-size-fits-all” poli-
cies cannot work for all countries and in all periods uniformly. In fact, some of
the policies designed to foster economic growth are likely to be effective only
under specific circumstances.
    To learn more about Brazil’s experience, this chapter investigates how much
of the growth in labor productivity—a key component of economic growth—
reflected growth within sectors versus movements between sectors (known
as structural change). We start with an overview of Brazil’s institutional

                                                                               267
268 Chapter 7




background, highlighting how it changed from an autarchy to a more open
economy. We then examine Brazil’s experience with structural change since
1950, focusing on trends in GDP and labor in agriculture, manufacturing, and
services. In the process, we try to better understand the finding of a major study
of 38 countries (29 developing and 9 high-income) by McMillan and Rodrik
(2011) that, between 1990 and 2005, Asian countries experienced productivity-
enhancing structural changes, whereas African and Latin American countries
did not experience the same changes. A direct interpretation of these findings
would be that, for the Brazilian case, economic reforms toward openness could
have negatively affected economic growth, and that the country was experienc-
ing a reverse structural change. The rationale would be that openness can trap
a developing economy and keep it specialized within sectors with comparative
advantages, like agriculture and mineral extraction, but with low labor produc-
tivity levels. It is indeed remarkable that, for most of the period being analyzed,
the Brazilian agriculture sector was able to dominate several world agricultural
export markets—thanks to the country’s relative abundance of land—but, at
the same time, was a low labor productivity sector.
    As it turns out, our findings suggest that structural change indeed played
an important role in the diversification and growth of the Brazilian economy
for the period 1950–1980, being responsible for about 40 percent of increases
in labor productivity. However, after that period, most of the increase in pro-
ductivity came from the within-sector component. In fact, for the whole
period between 1950 and 2005, labor productivity grew by 156 percent—or
1.46 percent per year—with about 85 percent of that growth attributable to
the within-sector component. That result, in combination with the empir-
ical evidence of the benefits that trade liberalization has on the Brazilian
economy in terms of productivity (Muendler 2004; Ferreira and Rossi 2003),
allows us to interpret the relative slowdown of Brazilian economic growth
from 1995 to 2005 as an upper bound for growth. Without the liberaliza-
tion process, the most likely scenario for the country’s economic performance
would have been worse. At the sectoral level, we find that the most dynamic
sectors—which did not include manufacturing—were those that were able to
attract better-qualified workers in more stable labor contracts. Thus, policies
designed to protect the industrial sector do not seem to have been very effec-
tive on overall labor productivity growth.
    How do we reconcile our results with those of McMillan and Rodrik
(2011)? Although their interpretation seems to be appropriate for countries
that had not experienced a structural change before trade openness—as is
the case for most African countries—for an emerging economy like Brazil,
              Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and Trade Policy in Brazil   269




reintegration into the world economy may have helped its economy instead
of harming it. In fact, trade openness is an economic policy that acts in the
direction of improving productivity within each sector, as incentives are cre-
ated to adopt efficient technologies, not only by the export-driven sectors, but
also in the manufacturing sector, whose main market in Brazil is domestic
(Ferreira and Rossi 2003). We contend that structural changes have become
less important to explaining productivity growth in the Brazilian economy
than in the past, mainly because Brazil is an emerging economy, with a rela-
tively diversified industrial sector, but with a relatively low level of labor pro-
ductivity. Thus, for Brazil, policies that could induce overall increases in
labor productivity, such as increases in educational quality, will certainly have
larger impacts on growth than those strictly concerned with deepening an
unfinished structural change.


How Brazil’s Economy Opened Up

Import Substitution System and the Beginning of
Industrialization
Between 1950 and 2005 in Brazil, the share of workers participating in the
agriculture sector dropped from 63 percent to 19 percent (Timmer and de
Vries 2009). Throughout the course of a few decades, the population in the
country migrated from rural areas to urban areas, and an internal market
emerged. Overall, Brazil experienced a structural change during this period.
The country underwent an intense and fast process of industrialization and
urbanization driven by external constraints and internal market growth.
    The process of industrialization began in the 1930s as a consequence
of chronic current account deficits (Abreu 2000). As US dollars started to
become scarce in Brazil after the Great Depression, there was a shortage of
imported consumption goods and production inputs. In fact, the scarcity of
those imported goods generated incentives for the Brazilian economy to pro-
mote substituting foreign industrial goods with their domestic counterparts.
The systematic process of substitution became a policy goal in the postwar era
and was named the Import Substitution System (ISS). This process was at the
heart of Brazilian industrial policies until the end of the 1970s.
    Industrialization may also be viewed against a background of declining
income coming from Brazil’s traditional exports, which consisted mainly of
coffee, cocoa, sugar, and cotton (Baer and Kerstenetzky 1964). This argu-
ment views the ISS as a natural response to problems with the national
270 Chapter 7




current account, rather than a conscious state program. But by the 1950s, a
set of policies was applied with the explicit objective of protecting Brazilian
industries from foreign competition—including creating systems of multiple
exchange rates and import licensing. The establishment of “the law of simi-
lar” was also significant in that manufacturers who were producing—or even
intended to produce—goods similar to the ones being imported could apply
for protection.
    As a result of such measures, the share of agriculture in the net domestic
product declined from 27 percent in 1947 to 22 percent in 1961, while indus-
try increased from 21 percent to 34 percent during the same period (Baer
and Kerstenetzky 1964). In addition, there was a strong population migra-
tion from rural areas to cities, which explains much of the reduction in pov-
erty observed between 1960 and 1970 (Fields 1977). Earnings became higher
in urban areas than in rural areas, as well as higher in the industrial sector
than in the land-abundant agriculture sector. As a result, Brazil experienced
a shift in its income distribution and a reduction of poverty, led by the trans-
fer of the population from rural to urban areas and from the agriculture sector
to the industrial sector. However, given that the industrialization process did
not affect the whole population, a rapid industrialization process may have
also contributed to increased earnings inequality, as the sectoral wage gap
increased (Fishlow 1972; Fields 1977; Langoni 2005).
    Together, the labor force migration to urban areas and the expansion of the
manufacturing sector directly boosted productivity growth. Another growth-
inducing factor was the strong process of vertical integration that had been
occurring since the early 1950s (Baer, Fonseca, and Guilhoto 1987). It is worth
noting that the efficiency gains from rearrangements in the production chain
had happened in both periods: the years of economic autarchy and those after
the economy opened up. In fact, vertical integration was an important factor,
especially in light of the rising export shares of various industrial sectors.
    The end of using the ISS as an instrument for economic policy coincided
with the long recession of the 1980s, which began after the two oil crises cre-
ated large current account deficits and hyperinflation (Abreu 2004a). Within
this context, the political support and economic basis for the ISS were no
longer available, and a new trade policy was needed for recovering the path of
productivity growth.

New Era of Trade Liberalization
In the late 1980s, with the return to civilian rule, Brazil experienced an
intense and fast-paced process of unilateral trade liberalization. Until that
             Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and Trade Policy in Brazil   271




time, the Brazilian trade protection system was characterized by four main
aspects: (1) the widespread presence of tariffs with redundant plots; (2) the
collection of various additional taxes; (3) an extensive use of nontrade barriers
(NTBs), such as a list of products with the issuance of a suspended import
list prior to authorizations specific to certain products (steel, computers) and
annual quotas for the import company; and (4) the existence of 42 special
regimes, allowing the exemption or reduction of taxes (Kume, Piani, and Bráz
de Souza 2003).
    The first phase of trade liberalization occurred between 1988 and 1989.
Tariffs were decreased, even though they were kept higher than initially pro-
posed; the collection of taxes on some imports (such as those created to
fund ports’ maintenance) was abolished; and special import regimes were
partly eliminated.
    During the second phase from 1991 to 1993, tariffs fell heavily. Almost
all products experienced drastic reductions in tariffs, except for sectors that
included information technology, fine chemicals, and automobiles, and others
considered high tech. However, it was the elimination of NTBs that caused
the greatest impact in terms of openness, especially given that the list of prod-
ucts being suspended from import licenses was extinguished (Abreu 2004b;
Kume, Piani, and Bráz de Souza 2003). In addition, special import regimes
and import programs for companies were abolished. It was only after the end
of NTBs that tariffs became the main instrument of trade protection and
directly reflected a degree of protection for each industry.
    The third phase occurred in 1994, following monetary stabilization.
Import tariffs were set at 0 or 2 percent for products, with greater weight
on the price index and the anticipated implementation of the Mercosur
Common External Tariff in 1995. Thus, by 1994, tariff rates in Brazil aver-
aged 10.2 percent—a level that is compatible with other developing econo-
mies open to international trade (Abreu 2004b; Kume, Piani, and Bráz de
Souza 2003).
    Overall, the opening up of the Brazilian economy was a mixed bag. One
estimate asserts that observed tariff reduction between 1988 and 1994
brought a 6 percent increase in total factor productivity, with a similar
impact on labor productivity (Ferreira and Rossi 2003). Nevertheless, those
gains were unevenly distributed. In fact, the fall in prices of final goods pro-
duced by tradable sectors directly affected by trade liberalization depressed
wages paid in those sectors. Sectors producing goods that faced a 10 percent
liberalization-induced price decline experienced a 9.4 percent wage decline
(Kovak 2011).
272 Chapter 7




Uneven Patterns of Structural Change
So how did policies, such as the ISS and the trade liberalization of the 1990s,
accelerate or block the structural change process initiated in Brazil during
the postwar period? And how did productivity evolve over time between and
within sectors between 1950 and 2005? For our analysis, we use the frame-
work from McMillan and Rodrik (2011), which looks at a sample of devel-
oping countries, including Brazil, from 1990 to 2005. It decomposes labor
productivity growth into two components: (1) “within,” which captures
growth within sectors; and (2) “structural change,” which captures growth
resulting from labor reallocation across sectors that differ in their labor pro-
ductivity (see the Overview in this book for details on the methodology).1 For
our data, we use both the Groningen data (a collection of aggregate statistics
for many countries) and the Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios
(PNAD)—the annual Brazilian Household Survey—enabling us to include
the informal sector, which accounts for about half of the Brazilian workforce.
We aggregate the sectors into eight major groups (see Appendix 7A for details
on the data sources).
     Our results show that for the whole period, Brazil experienced a classi-
cal structural change—that is, higher labor sector productivity went hand in
hand with labor movements from less productive to more productive sectors
(Figure 7.1a). Moreover, this correlation is the strongest in the first period,
1950–1964 (Figure 7.1b), which we characterize as the “golden age” for struc-
tural change. This period benefited from a rapid urbanization process, with a
large share of the labor force migrating from rural areas.
     However, this good news becomes progressively worse as time passes. This
is illustrated in Figures 7.2a–7.2c, which show that for the periods 1965–1979,
1980–1994, and 1995–2005, the fitted line gets closer to a null-slope line for
more recent years. Even changing the dataset to use PNAD data from 1993 to
2008, we can see that there is a positive but very weak correlation between sec-
tor productivity and changes in employment shares (Figure 7.2d).

 1	 Algebraically, the decomposition is:
                                              N                      N
                                     Δ Pt =   ∑θ
                                              i–1
                                                    i,t−k Δ pi,t +   ∑p
                                                                     i–1
                                                                           i,tΔθi,t

	   where Δ Pt is the change in aggregate labor productivity between period t − k and t. The ﬁrst
    term is the “within-sector” component, which is a weighted average of the change in labor pro-
    ductivity in each of the N sectors, with the weight for sector i being the labor share of that sector
    in period t − k, measured by θi,t−k . The second term is the “structural change” component, which
    is a weighted average of the change in labor shares in the N sectors, with the weights captured by
    the labor productivity of the sector in period t.
                                            Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and Trade Policy in Brazil   273



FIGURE 7.1a  Structural change played a positive role for Brazil . . .


                                                            Correlation between sectoral productivity and
                                                         changes in employment shares in Brazil, 1950–2005
                                     2.0
                                            y = 3.3345x + 0.4142
                                     1.5
  productivity/total productivity




                                            R 2 = 0.68726                               pu                                 fps
                                     1.0                                                           con
                                                                                       mfg
        Log of sectoral




                                     0.5                                                                          wrt
                                                                                                   min
                                     0.0
                                    –0.5                                                       tsc
                                    –1.0
                                    –1.5              agr
                                    –2.0
                                       –0.6     –0.5     –0.4  –0.3    –0.2     –0.1         0.0          0.1      0.2    0.3     0.4
                                                   Changes in employment shares (∆emp. shares), percentage points


FIGURE 7.1b  . . . especially in the golden age, although manufacturing wasn’t the main draw


                                                            Correlation between sectoral productivity and
                                                         changes in employment shares in Brazil, 1950–1964
                                     2.0
                                            y = 17.259x + 0.4142
                                     1.5
 productivity/total productivity




                                            R 2 = 0.74471                               pu         con                   fps
                                     1.0
       Log of sectoral




                                     0.5                                                                    wrt
                                                                                       min       mfg
                                     0.0
                                                                                              tsc
                                    –0.5
                                    –1.0
                                    –1.5            agr
                                    –2.0
                                       –0.12 –0.10 –0.08 –0.06        –0.04    –0.02     0.00            0.02     0.04   0.06    0.08
                                                   Changes in employment shares (∆emp. shares), percentage points

Source: Timmer and de Vries (2009).
Note: The size of the circles represents employment shares in the initial year. The line represents fitted values of a linear
regression of changes in sectoral productivity to total productivity by changes in employment shares. agr = agriculture;
con = construction; fps = financial and personal services; mfg = manufacturing; min = mining; pu = public utilities;
tsc = transport and communications; wrt = wholesale trade.



   How big a role has manufacturing played in this structural change story?
Interestingly, we note that in all figures, the manufacturing sector is not, as
was customarily thought, the highest-productivity sector. This sector also was
not the main attractor of the labor force, with its employment share remain-
ing basically constant for the entire period. For all years, the service sectors—
including the financial and personal services and the public utilities
274 Chapter 7



FIGURE 7.2a  Structural change becomes less important after 1964 . . .


                                                               Correlation between sectoral productivity and
                                                            changes in employment shares in Brazil, 1965–1979
                                         2.0
                                                y = 8.1027x + 0.2577
                                         1.5
      productivity/total productivity




                                                R 2 = 0.733
                                         1.0                                         min mfg                          fps
                                                                                             con
            Log of sectoral




                                         0.5                                          pu
                                         0.0
                                        –0.5                                          tsc      wrt
                                        –1.0
                                        –1.5              agr
                                        –2.0
                                           –0.25 –0.20 –0.15 –0.10           –0.05     –0.00     0.05         0.10          0.15   0.20
                                                      Changes in employment shares (∆emp. shares), percentage points


FIGURE 7.2b  . . . a lot less so between 1980 and 1994 . . .


                                                               Correlation between sectoral productivity and
                                                            changes in employment shares in Brazil, 1980–1994
                                         1.5
                                                y = 8.7099x + 0.1458            pu
                                         1.0
 productivity/total productivity




                                                R 2 = 0.34775                         mfg
                                         0.5                                   min
                                                                           con                          fps
                                                                                      tsc
       Log of sectoral




                                         0.0
                                        –0.5                                                            wrt
                                        –1.0
                                        –1.5
                                                      agr
                                        –2.0
                                        –2.5
                                          –0.15           –0.10      –0.05       0.00            0.05                0.10          0.15
                                                      Changes in employment shares (∆emp. shares), percentage points

Source: Timmer and de Vries (2009); Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).
Note: The size of the circles represents employment shares in the initial year. The line represents fitted values of a linear
regression of changes in sectoral productivity to total productivity by changes in employment shares. agr = agriculture;
con = construction; fps = financial and personal services; mfg = manufacturing; min = mining; pu = public utilities;
tsc = transport and communications; wrt = wholesale trade.



sector—were the most productive, mostly attracting displaced workers from
rural areas.
    Next we try to quantify how big a role structural change has played in terms
of productivity gains for Brazil since 1950. For Latin American countries during
1990–2005, McMillan and Rodrik (2011) estimate that most of the produc-
tivity gains stemmed from the within-sector effect and little came from the
                                           Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and Trade Policy in Brazil   275



FIGURE 7.2c  . . . and even weaker between 1995 and 2005 . . .


                                                            Correlation between sectoral productivity and
                                                         changes in employment shares in Brazil, 1995–2005
                                    2.5
                                    2.0    y = 10.01x + 0.3737                            pu
 productivity/total productivity




                                    1.5    R 2 = 0.06927                                        min
                                    1.0
       Log of sectoral




                                                                                                con
                                    0.5                                        mfg
                                                                                                      tsc            fps
                                    0.0
                                   –0.5
                                   –1.0                                                                            wrt
                                                   agr
                                   –1.5
                                   –2.0
                                     –0.08        –0.06      –0.04         –0.02           0.00             0.02               0.04    0.06
                                                   Changes in employment shares (∆emp. shares), percentage points


FIGURE 7.2d  . . . including through 2008


                                                            Correlation between sectoral productivity and
                                                   changes in employment shares in Brazil, 1993/1995–2007/2008
                                    1.0
                                    0.8    y = 6.724x + 0.0802                       pu
 productivity/total productivity




                                    0.6    R 2 = 0.23985                             mfg
                                    0.4
       Log of sectoral




                                    0.2                                       min                                        fps
                                                                     wrt                       tsc
                                    0.0
                                   –0.2                                               con
                                   –0.4
                                   –0.6                agr
                                   –0.8
                                   –1.0
                                     –0.08      –0.06      –0.04      –0.02        0.00           0.02        0.04              0.06   0.08
                                                   Changes in employment shares (∆emp. shares), percentage points

Source: Timmer and de Vries (2009); Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).
Note: The size of the circles represents employment shares in the initial year. The line represents fitted values of a linear
regression of changes in sectoral productivity to total productivity by changes in employment shares. agr = agriculture;
con = construction; fps = financial and personal services; mfg = manufacturing; min = mining; pu = public utilities;
tsc = transport and communications; wrt = wholesale trade.



structural change component. Their interpretation of this finding is that the
region was experiencing a reverse structural change, during which the labor
force migrated from the most to the least productive activities. However, this
interpretation is not necessarily true for the Brazilian case. In fact, informal-
ity, which is associated with low-productivity jobs, and the percentage of work-
ers who live in rural areas decreased over the period (Appendix Table 7C.1). In
276 Chapter 7




general, half of Brazilian workers do not have formal contracts, and their earn-
ings in real terms were kept constant throughout the period. That said, there
has been a huge increase in years of schooling, from six years to more than eight
years on average. Moreover, there seems to have been an increase in the participa-
tion of women and nonwhite workers in the labor market.
    The decline in the structural change effect over time may serve as evidence
that policies (like the Brazilian ISS) that protected some specific sectors have
lost their effectiveness when compared with the first several post-World War
II years. Although the agriculture sector still employs almost 20 percent of
the labor force, it is no longer a net supplier of workers. Thus, in more recent
years, the most effective policies oriented at promoting economic growth in
an emerging economy like Brazil, a country that has already gone through a
structural change, seem to be policies oriented at increasing within-sector pro-
ductivity for all economic sectors.
    This interpretation is endorsed by our empirical evidence. We find that
for the entire period from 1950 to 2005, labor productivity increased by
156 percent—corresponding to an annual increase of 1.46 percent—of which
the within-sector component contributed 84 percent and the structural change
component, 16 percent (Figure 7.3). At the subperiod level, we see that the with-
in-sector component was typically higher than the structural change component,
with the only exception being the period 1980–1994, in which the within-sector

FIGURE 7.3  Within-sector changes swamp structural changes


                                       Decomposition of productivity growth by period and database

           GGDC 1950–2005
           GGDC 1995–2005
           GGDC 1980–1994
           GGDC 1965–1979
           GGDC 1950–1964
           GGDC 1990–2005                                                                                Within-sector
   PNAD 1993/95–2007/08                                                                                  Structural

                            –20        0       20       40        60      80    100          120       140      160      180
                                                                        Percent

Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years); Timmer and de Vries (2009); Groningen Growth and
Development Centre (various years).
Note: GGDC = Groningen Growth and Development Centre; PNAD = Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios. The bars
correspond to growth rates for the whole period indicated. The main reasons for the differences between results using GGDC
and PNAD data are differences in the initial and final years of the periods and differences in methodologies. For the latter com-
ponent, we note that while GGDC data are based on national accounts and projections, PNAD is a household survey, so it does
not provide a direct measure of productivity. We use individual earnings as a proxy for productivity in PNAD.
                    Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and Trade Policy in Brazil   277




TABLE 7.1  Within-sector changes swamp structural changes

                                   Labor productivity annual growth rates (%)
Datasets and periods                             Overall           Within-sector change         Structural change
GGDC 1950–2005                                    1.46                       1.23                       0.23
GGDC 1995–2005                                    0.79                       0.59                       0.20
GGDC 1980–1994                                    0.15                      –0.46                       0.61
GGDC 1965–1979                                    3.75                       1.90                       1.85
GGDC 1950–1964                                    3.08                       2.05                       1.02
GGDC 1990–2005                                    0.78                       0.83                      –0.06
PNAD 1993/95–2007/08                              0.54                        0.31                      0.23
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years); Timmer and de Vries (2009); Groningen Growth and
Development Centre (various years).
Note: GGDC = Groningen Growth and Development Centre; PNAD = Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios.



component turned negative (Table 7.1). In fact, the period 1980–1994, which
includes the end of the autarchic regime, was the worst period in terms of produc-
tivity growth. Only after the consolidation of the trade liberalization process did
the Brazilian economy recover its productivity growth—with most of the growth
between 1995 and 2005 resulting from higher within-sector productivity.
    As for the 1990–2005 period, which is the one analyzed by McMillan
and Rodrik (2011), we find that there was a very small and negative structural
change. Overall labor productivity increased by 12 percent—for an annual
increase of 0.78 percent—with all of the observed positive changes coming
from the within-sector component. One possible explanation is that the econ-
omy became more exposed to international competition during this period.
Indeed, Muendler (2004) verifies a modest, but positive, impact of trade liber-
alization on eliminating inefficient firms and increasing productivity.
    Also PNAD data for 1993–2008 show annual growth rates in labor produc-
tivity were 0.54 percent, of which structural change accounted for 0.23 percent-
age points (or 43 percent of overall increase in labor productivity), while the
within-sector component accounted for 0.31 percentage points (or 57 percent of
overall increase in labor productivity). PNAD microdata also provide answers
to the following important question: What were the main forces driving pro-
ductivity between 1993 and 2008? A closer look at the economic sectors tells
us that workers in the agriculture and mining sectors encountered the highest
increases in earnings (up 17.68 and 37.42 percentage points, respectively), while
those in the public utilities sector faced the greatest losses (down 20.65 percent-
age points) (Table 7.2a).
    One possible explanation for this phenomenon is related to sectoral employ-
ment shares. As agriculture experienced a sharp decrease in its employment
278 Chapter 7




TABLE 7.2a  Agriculture and mining rose most in earnings . . .

               Average monthly earnings by sector (in 2008 reais), 1993–1995 and 2007–2008
Sectors                                                    1993–1995 2007–2008      Percentage change
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                            508.586    598.487          17.68
Mining and quarrying                                        1,120.166   1,539.344         37.42
Manufacturing                                               1,135.916   1,029.030         –9.41
Construction                                                  794.869    819.726           3.13
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants           974.233    978.760           0.46
Public utilities                                            2,052.403   1,628.540        –20.65
Transport, storage, and communications                      1,278.819   1,202.321         –5.98
Financial and personal services                             1,073.234   1,199.739         11.79


TABLE 7.2b  . . . but changes in earnings don’t correlate with changes in employment share

       Employment shares by economic sector and period (percentage), 1993–1995 and 2007–2008
Sectors                                                    1993–1995 2007–2008 Percentage point change
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                             16.4       11.4           –4.98
Mining and quarrying                                             0.5       0.5           –0.02
Manufacturing                                                  15.3       16.6            1.28
Construction                                                     7.9       8.5            0.60
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants            21.9       19.4           –2.59
Public utilities                                                 0.7       0.6           –0.11
Transport, storage, and communications                           4.7       5.6            0.89
Financial and personal services                                32.5       37.4            4.94
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).



shares (down 5 percentage points), it is plausible that productivity within the
sector increased, as globalization facilitated technology transfer and contributed
to efficiency gains in agricultural production (McMillan and Rodrik 2011). But
for other sectors, we see no obvious relationship between earnings and employ-
ment share changes (Table 7.2b). For example, public utilities, which faced a
substantial loss in earnings, did not suffer any change in terms of employment
shares throughout the period. Moreover, financial and personal services, which
took third place in earnings growth, thanks to a 12 percentage point increase,
also saw its employment shares rise by about 5 percentage points.
    Sectors (like mining and agriculture) that have typically adopted more of
the labor-saving technologies are those for which a growth in earnings coexists
with a negative growth in employment share. The correlation between changes
in earnings and employment share for all sectors is weakly negative at around
12 percent. Besides technology adoption, market rigidities caused by labor legis-
lation contribute to this phenomenon.
                    Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and Trade Policy in Brazil   279




TABLE 7.3  More education corresponds to higher earnings

                       Average years of schooling by sector, 1993–1995 and 2007–2008
                         Sectors                              1993–1995   2007–2008   Percentage change
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                               2.376      3.797           59.81
Mining and quarrying                                             4.789      8.262          72.52
Manufacturing                                                    6.426      8.430          31.19
Construction                                                     4.224      5.923          40.22
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants              6.544      8.721           33.27
Public utilities                                                 8.610      9.585          11.32
Transport, storage, and communications                           6.433      8.364           30.02
Financial and personal services                                  7.884      9.934          26.00
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).


    Another potential explanation for the changes in sectoral earnings is edu-
cation. In all sectors, workers have acquired more years of schooling than had
been obtained 20 years ago (Table 7.3). However, we note that for the sectors
whose increase in years of schooling was below overall growth (36 percent),
earnings either fell or did not grow—except for financial and personal ser-
vices. The top-two performers in earnings—agriculture and mining—also
enjoyed substantial increases in the levels of schooling received by their labor
force (60 percent and 73 percent, respectively). Positive selection into these
sectors is thus the most likely explanation for our findings.
    Moreover, the interpretation of positive selection into agriculture and min-
ing, and negative selection into some other sectors, is corroborated by changes
in sectoral informality (Table 7.4). The few sectors that saw an increase in
informality—manufacturing, public utilities, and transport, storage, and
communications—also sustained lower earnings and education increases that
were below the national average. Here a possible explanation is that informal-
ity can be understood as a barrier to creating longer capital–work relation-
ships. Thus, sectors with higher levels of informality also have larger turnover
rates, and their workers accumulate less experience or specific human capi-
tal. We also find that the main explanation for the decrease in informality
between 1993 and 2008 is the movement of the labor force from sectors with
lower rates of formality to those with higher rates, and not an overall reduc-
tion in the informality across all sectors (Appendix 7E).
    How does trade liberalization fit in? Our results suggest that opening up
the economy was not the reason for any movements in the employment shares
of the manufacturing and agriculture sectors (Figure 7.4). While employment
shares in agriculture decreased between 1950 and 2005, manufacturing kept
280 Chapter 7




TABLE 7.4  Manufacturing, public utilities, and transport saw a rise in informality

             Proportion of formal contract workers by sector (percentage), 1993–1995 and 2007–2008
                                                                                                  Difference
Sectors                                                         1993–1995      2007–2008    (in percentage points)
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                                   19.9          25.2              5.30
Mining and quarrying                                                 54.5          76.1             21.60
Manufacturing                                                        75.2          70.3            –4.90
Construction                                                         31.2          32.9              1.70
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                  40.9          54.9             14.00
Public utilities                                                     95.1          85.6             –9.50
Transport, storage, and communications                               64.3          59.0             –5.30
Financial and personal services                                      62.6          62.0             –0.60
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).


its shares at about 14 percent of employed workers. This suggests that, regard-
less of the choice of policy, there was a natural trend of the labor force mov-
ing out of the agriculture sector, which has never been fully absorbed into the
manufacturing sector. Therefore, after the rapid industrialization process that
was consolidated by the 1960s, the most effective way policies could affect
productive growth in Brazil did not seem to be selecting winning sectors, such

FIGURE 7.4  Trade liberalization didn’t seem to alter major sectoral trends


                           Employment shares for selected sectors (percentage), 1950–2005
             7

             6                  Agriculture, forestry, and ﬁshing

             5

             4
   Percent




             3

             2

             1                  Manufacturing

             0
             1950   1955    1960      1965      1970     1975      1980     1985   1990    1995   2000   2005

Source: Timmer and de Vries (2009).
Note: The green rectangle represents the period of trade liberalization.
             Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and Trade Policy in Brazil   281




as the industrial sector, but instead creating the right incentives for economic
agents to invest in efficient technologies and allow workers to accumulate
human capital.
    We reconcile our findings with the results for Latin American countries in
McMillan and Rodrik (2011) by emphasizing that in an emerging economy
like Brazil, structural changes have become much less important to explain-
ing productivity growth than in the past. One possible explanation is that the
country has already become industrialized, and the economy’s surplus labor
force that historically migrated from agriculture has found destinations other
than manufacturing where future earnings appeared higher. This indicates
that productivity growth has spilled over to other sectors, mainly as a result of
increases in the human capital of individual workers.


A Post-structural Change Era
From the early 1950s to the mid-2000s, it is clear that Brazil has been going
through a major process of structural change, with employment shares shift-
ing from the least productive to the most productive sectors—accounting for
about 16 percent of labor productivity growth—and the rest of the growth
coming from within sectors. However, by breaking this period down into
shorter segments, we have shown that structural change was mostly import-
ant until the 1980s, as it contributed about 40 percent of the gains in produc-
tivity. By then, Brazil had increased the participation of industry (defined here
as the manufacturing and construction sectors) as a whole in overall GDP to
about 36 percent (Table 7.5a), and thus the scope for continuous and long-
term structural change had lost momentum.
     In fact, we argue that policies that tried to invert this natural trend—that
is, expanding manufacturing and reducing agriculture—were unsuccessful,
and the early years of the 1980s of slow economic growth can serve as evidence
of those efforts. Indeed, both manufacturing and industry as a whole have
fallen as a share of GDP since the late 1970s—although in terms of employ-
ment, manufacturing’s share rose slightly from 13 percent in 1950–1964 to
15 percent in 1980–1994, before slipping back to 13 percent in 1995–2005,
with industry following a similar trend (Table 7.5b).
    The key to promoting productivity growth in the Brazilian economy after
the 1980s seems to have been investing in within-sector productivity growth.
Indeed, more efficient firms and technologies—and workers with higher lev-
els of schooling—explain a large part of Brazil’s economic gains in the 2000s.
Table 7.5a  GDP shares for manufacturing and construction peaked in the late 1970s . . .

                                                     Gross domestic product share by sector of economic activity (percentage)
                                                                                                                                                                             282 Chapter 7




                  Agriculture,                                                                           Wholesale and        Transport,  Finance, insurance, Community,
                 forestry, and    Mining and                            Public                         retail trade, hotels, storage, and   real estate, and  social, and
   Period           fishing       quarrying       Manufacturing         utilities     Construction      and restaurants communications business services personal services
1950–2005              8                2                23                3                9                    7                5            20                23
1950–1964             15                1                25                3                8                    9                3            15                22
1965–1979              8                1                26                2               10                    8                4            20                22
1980–1994              7                2                23                2                9                    7                5            24                21
1995–2005              8                2                22                3                8                    7                5            17                26


Table 7.5b  . . . but their employment shares peaked in the mid-1990s

                                                              Employment share by sector of economic activity (percentage)
                  Agriculture,                                                                           Wholesale and        Transport,  Finance, insurance, Community,
                 forestry, and    Mining and                            Public                         retail trade, hotels, storage, and   real estate, and  social, and
   Period           fishing       quarrying       Manufacturing         utilities     Construction      and restaurants communications business services personal services
1950–2005             34                0                14                1                6                   15                4             6                22
1950–1964             59                1                13                1                4                    8                3             2                10
1965–1979             44                0                14                1                6                   11                3             5                16
1980–1994             29                1                15                1                7                   15                3             7                23
1995–2005             21                0                13                0                6                   20                4             7                29
Source: Groningen Growth and Development Centre 10-sector database, June 2007, http://www.ggdc.net/ (Timmer and de Vries 2009).
              Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and Trade Policy in Brazil   283




 This movement toward efficiency began in the late 1980s with the democratic
 regime and reached its peak during the late 1990s. Also, our analysis suggests
 that the trade liberalization of the 1990s did not have an impact on structural
 change, but was probably the major reason for productivity increases within
 sectors. One channel for these productivity gains may well have been the
“competitive push” (Muendler 2004). Induced by a more competitive market
 after openness, firms were pushed to innovate more, undertaking cost-reduc-
 ing innovations and increasing production.
     During the 2000s, policy makers were able to focus more on another key
 by-product of the country’s rapid process of urbanization and industrializa-
 tion: high levels of income inequality. Thus, policies oriented at mitigating
 economic inequalities were implemented—such as those based on condi-
 tional cash transfers—sometimes at the expense of efficiency. It is well docu-
 mented that during the industrialization period, income inequality increased,
 as growth benefits were unevenly distributed (Langoni 2005), but that the
 re-integration into international markets, after a long period of economic
 isolationism, was very important in terms of inequality reduction (Gonzaga,
 Menezes-Filho, and Terra 2006).
     Today, Brazilian policy makers seem too focused on the short term, which
 translates into little serious follow-through on improving economic efficiency.
 But the lessons from the past, especially those from the 1980s, should serve as
 a warning. We learned that protecting national companies from foreign com-
 petition could nullify an important channel that boosts productivity growth
 and reduces income inequality (Gonzaga, Menezes-Filho, and Terra 2006).
 For that reason, the recent setback in trade liberalization—a rise in tariffs for
 cars, electronics, and other manufactured goods—may no longer be justified
 as a growth-enhancing policy. Moreover, if the policy goal is to increase wel-
 fare, then policy makers should pursue this goal in all sectors through invest-
 ments in universal policies, such as improving the quality of education.


Appendix 7A: Data
Our data come from two sources: Groningen Data, which comprises data
from the GGDC (Timmer and de Vries 2009), and the PNAD.
     Groningen Data is a collection of annual aggregate statistics from several
countries. It reports macro and sectoral variables used in national account sys-
tems. For Brazil, it covers the period from 1950 to 2005. Its main advantage
is its time coverage, but its main weakness is that it does not include the infor-
mal sector, which is about half of the Brazilian workforce. Finally, Groningen
284 Chapter 7




Data provides us with the number of employees and the gross value-added of
each economic sector from 1950 to 2005.
    The PNAD is the annual Brazilian Household Survey, collected by the
Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (Brazilian Census Bureau). The
PNAD covers the whole country, with the exception of some rural areas. It is the
largest and most important household survey in Brazil, interviewing more than
75,000 households every year, which corresponds to about 300,000 individuals.
We have used several PNAD waves, beginning with 1993 and ending with 2008.
    The main advantage of using the PNAD is that we have information at
the individual level about several demographic and labor characteristics for
individual workers, including gender, years of schooling, tenure, weekly hours
worked, and some other variables. For example, by using the PNAD, we are
able to shed some light on the role that informality played recently. The main
weakness of this type of data is its limited time coverage. Also, we have no
direct measure of labor productivity; therefore, we have to use earnings and
hourly wages as proxies.
   We aggregate sectors into eight major groups, or sectors: agriculture, for-
estry, and fishing; mining and quarrying; manufacturing; construction;
wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants; public utilities; transport,
storage, and communications; and financial and personal services.


Appendix 7B: Methodology
For the Groningen Data, we define productivity in sector i at time t as the log-
arithm of the share of the gross value added per capita in the overall economy.
Mathematically, we have,

   	Pt,i,GR = ln         (      / ) (
                         VAt,i,GR VAt,GR
                         Lt,i,GR Lt,GR
                                         = ln
                                              VAt,i,GR
                                              Lt,i,GR   ) (
                                                       – ln
                                                            VAt,GR
                                                             Lt,GR    )
   	              = ln   (      ) (
                         VAt,i,GR
                         VAt,GR
                                  – ln
                                       Lt,GR
                                       Lt,i,GR)	(B.1)

where “ln” is the natural logarithm operator, P refers to the productivity level,
t denotes the year, i denotes the economic sector, GR means Groningen Growth
and Development Centre, VA means gross value-added, L means number of
workers employed, such that VAGR = ∑9   j=1VAj,GR and LGR = ∑ j=1Lj,GR .
                                                                  9

    For the PNAD, we do not observe the productivity of each sector.
Therefore, we assume that productivity can be approximated by wages paid in
                Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and Trade Policy in Brazil   285




each sector. Thus, our measure of productivity of an individual worker m will
be the logarithm of his or her hourly wage. In other words,
    	                 Pm,t,i,PNAD = ln(HourlyWagem,t,i,PNAD).	(B.2)
   Although equation (B.2) may not be an accurate measure of productivity,
in equilibrium we expect that labor productivity equals wages. In this sense,
we expect that a strong correlation between productivity and hourly wages
should at least exist.2
    Given our measures of productivity, we can implement McMillan and
Rodrik’s (2011) decomposition of time changes in productivity, Δ Pt, through
two terms: “structural” and “within.”

    	Δ Pt = ∑θt,i Δ Pt,i + ∑ Pt,iΔθt,i,	(B.3)
                                     i=9               i=9

where Pt,i denotes the sectoral labor productivity level and θt,i is the share of
employment in sector i. The Δ operator designates time changes in productiv-
ity or employment shares between t-1 and t.
    Equation (B.3) allows us to decompose the productivity change into two
terms: the first one is the “within effect,” in which we keep constant the ini-
tial labor share and measure variation coming from sectoral labor produc-
tivity. The second term, defined as “structural change,” captures changes in
labor shares across sectors, once we keep the final productivity level of each
sector constant.

 2	 Calculating productivity using Groningen Data and the PNAD for 1995–2005 (excepting 2000
   and 2001), we found a 55 percent Pearson correlation coefficient. Regressing the productivity
   coefficient calculated from equation (B.1) by productivity calculated from equation (B.2), we
   found a coefficient of 2.25 and a standard deviation of 0.031. This presents some evidence that
   both measures of productivity we use in this chapter are positively correlated.
 286 Chapter 7




 Appendix 7C: Overall Descriptive Statistics
 Table 7C.1  Key characteristics of Brazil’s labor force

 Key characteristics       1993–1995        1996–1997 1998–1999              2002–2003       2004–2006        2007–2008
 Formal contract                0.505             0.500           0.496           0.511           0.526             0.552
 employees
 Employed                       0.920             0.906           0.882           0.883           0.891             0.908
 Earnings                    963.53          1,064.34        1,020.95          917.06          932.89         1,022.51
 White                          0.567             0.570           0.563           0.547           0.525             0.509
 Male                           0.644             0.630           0.620           0.603           0.594             0.589
 Age                           34.085           34.367           34.641         35.168           35.472           36.054
 Weekly hours                  43.528           43.528           43.327         43.170           42.683           42.146
 Rural area                     0.161             0.157           0.158           0.118           0.127             0.120
 Tenure                        84.240           85.857           86.439         86.297           86.961           88.633
 Experience (years)            21.275           21.121           21.538         21.687           21.755           21.915
 Schooling years                6.098             6.437           6.726           7.504           7.924             8.309
 North region                   0.045             0.045           0.047           0.056           0.072             0.072
 South region                   0.161             0.162           0.162          0.159            0.157             0.157
 Southeast region               0.480             0.476           0.471           0.468           0.459             0.456
 Central-West region            0.072             0.074           0.076           0.076           0.077             0.078
 Northeast region               0.243             0.243           0.244          0.240            0.236             0.236
 Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).
 Note: “Formal contract employees” is the proportion of the employed labor force under formal labor contracts. “Employed” is
 the proportion of the labor force that is employed. “Earnings” are monthly earnings measured in 2008 reais. “White,” “Male,”
“Rural area,” and regional dummies are proportions of the labor force. “Age” and “Schooling years” are averages of the labor
 force. “Weekly hours” and “Experience” are for employed labor force. “Tenure” is average job tenure, or average duration of
 current job for employed workers, and is measured in months.
                    Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and Trade Policy in Brazil   287




Appendix 7D: Other Descriptive Statistics by
Sectors
Table 7D.1  Percentage of whites by sector

                                                                                               Difference
Sectors                                                        1993–1995    2007–2008     (percentage points)
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                                 44.5       38.8              –5.70
Mining and quarrying                                               42.8       42.8               0.00
Manufacturing                                                      64.5       56.6              –7.90
Construction                                                       47.7       39.8              –7.90
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                62.0       55.4              –6.60
Public utilities                                                   61.9       53.8              –8.10
Transport, storage, and communications                             59.8       53.3              –6.50
Financial and personal services                                    59.2       54.3              –4.91
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).


Table 7D.2  Percentage of males by sector

                                                                                               Difference
Sectors                                                        1993–1995    2007–2008     (percentage points)
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                                 89.7       89.6              –0.10
Mining and quarrying                                               93.6       90.9              –2.70
Manufacturing                                                      74.1       65.7              –8.40
Construction                                                       97.7       97.4              –0.30
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                64.5       63.4              –1.10
Public utilities                                                   85.3       80.1              –5.20
Transport, storage, and communications                             89.8       86.1              –3.70
Financial and personal services                                    37.7       36.7              –1.02
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).


Table 7D.3  Average age by sector

Sectors                                                         1993–1995     2007–2008        Growth (%)
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                                 38.726       41.053             6.01
Mining and quarrying                                               34.369       37.101             7.95
Manufacturing                                                      32.362       35.052             8.31
Construction                                                       34.991       37.977             8.53
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                33.705       34.566             2.55
Public utilities                                                   38.072       38.359             0.75
Transport, storage, and communications                             36.163       37.299             3.14
Financial and personal services                                    34.314       37.257             8.58
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).
288 Chapter 7




Table 7D.4  Average tenure (months) by sector

Sectors                                                         1993–1995         2007–2008        Growth (%)
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                                143.173          153.497              7.21
Mining and quarrying                                               75.710           89.546            18.27
Manufacturing                                                      63.700           74.521            16.99
Construction                                                           73.617       93.171            26.56
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                66.480           69.139             4.00
Public utilities                                                  134.968          111.872           –17.11
Transport, storage, and communications                             82.348           79.057            –4.00
Financial and personal services                                    78.143           88.610            13.39
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).


Table 7D.5  Average experience (years) by sector

Sectors                                                         1993–1995         2007–2008         Growth (%)
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                                 28.028           29.663             5.83
Mining and quarrying                                               21.893           22.484             2.70
Manufacturing                                                      18.981           20.544             8.23
Construction                                                       22.638           24.495             8.20
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                20.143           19.789            –1.76
Public utilities                                                   23.585           23.100            –2.06
Transport, storage, and communications                             22.681           22.722             0.18
Financial and personal services                                    19.506           21.527            10.36
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).


Table 7D.6  Percentage of workers in the North region by sector

                                                                                                   Difference
Sectors                                                        1993–1995        2007–2008     (percentage points)
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                                     2.9         8.7               5.80
Mining and quarrying                                                   5.6         9.1               3.50
Manufacturing                                                          3.1         5.9               2.80
Construction                                                           4.2         8.2               4.00
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                    5.2         7.7               2.50
Public utilities                                                       5.5         7.6               2.10
Transport, storage, and communications                                 4.4         6.6               2.20
Financial and personal services                                        5.0         7.1               2.05
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).
                    Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and Trade Policy in Brazil   289




Table 7D.7  Percentage of workers in the South region by sector

                                                                                              Difference
Sectors                                                        1993–1995     2007–2008   (percentage points)
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                                 17.1        15.5            –1.60
Mining and quarrying                                               10.0        09.2            –0.80
Manufacturing                                                      21.2        20.7            –0.50
Construction                                                       15.1        15.0            –0.10
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                15.7        16.5             0.80
Public utilities                                                   17.0        19.2             2.20
Transport, storage, and communications                             15.2        15.8             0.60
Financial and personal services                                    14.9        14.9            –0.02
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).


Table 7D.8  Percentage of workers in the Southeast region by sector

                                                                                              Difference
Sectors                                                        1993–1995     2007–2008   (percentage points)
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                                 29.8        26.9            –2.90
Mining and quarrying                                               44.4        48.2             3.80
Manufacturing                                                      58.0        52.6            –5.40
Construction                                                       50.2        44.7            –5.50
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                48.7        44.9            –3.80
Public utilities                                                   46.8        47.9             1.10
Transport, storage, and communications                             54.8        50.6            –4.20
Financial and personal services                                    50.5        47.4            –3.11
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).


Table 7D.9  Percentage of workers in the Central-West region by sector

                                                                                              Difference
Sectors                                                        1993–1995     2007–2008   (percentage points)
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                                     8.4      8.2            –0.20
Mining and quarrying                                               11.5         6.8            –4.70
Manufacturing                                                          3.7      5.5             1.80
Construction                                                           7.4      8.5             1.10
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                    7.3      8.1             0.80
Public utilities                                                       8.5      7.2            –1.30
Transport, storage, and communications                                 6.6      7.0             0.40
Financial and personal services                                        8.0      8.6             0.58
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).
290 Chapter 7




Table 7D.10  Percentage of workers in the Northeast region by sector

                                                                                                     Difference
Sectors                                                        1993–1995        2007–2008       (percentage points)
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing                                 41.8              40.8                –1.00
Mining and quarrying                                               28.5              26.8                –1.70
Manufacturing                                                      14.0              15.4                 1.40
Construction                                                       23.1              23.8                 0.70
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants                23.1              22.8                –0.30
Public utilities,                                                  22.1              18.2                –3.90
Transport, storage, and communications                             19.0              19.9                 0.90
Financial and personal services                                    21.6              22.1                 0.56
Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).



Appendix 7E: Decomposition of Informality
Here we decompose the informality growth (variation in the percentage of
informal contract workers) by the following equation:
                                                           9                9
     	Δ It = It – Iτ = ∑ j Δ Ijt Ej + ∑ j Δ Ejt ij.	(E.1)
where Ejt is the share of industry j ’s employment by total employment at time
t, ijt is the share of informal workers by total employment in industry j,
Ej = 0.5(Ejt + Ejτ), and ij = 0.5(ijt + ijτ). The first term of the decomposition is
the “within effect” and represents changes in informality in each sector, keep-
ing employment shares constant. The second term is the “between effect” and
denotes changes in informality resulting from the migration of workers across
sectors, keeping the rate of informality of each sector constant.
     Figure 7E.1 presents the decomposition for the period 1993–2008. The
figure suggests that the greatest decrease in informality observed in the period
is caused by the movement of the labor force to the direction of sectors with
higher rates of formality.

Figure 7E.1  Decomposition of informality growth, 1993/1995–2007/2008



                                                                                                Across

                                                                                                Within

               –6           –5           –4           –3               –2       –1          0
                                                    Percent

Source: Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios (various years).
                 Structural Change, Productivity Growth, and Trade Policy in Brazil   291




References
Abreu, M. de P. 2000. “Contrasting Histories in the Political Economy of Protectionism: Argentina
     and Brazil, 1880–1930.” Economí a 1 (1): 93–110.

—. 2004a. The Political Economy of High Protection in Brazil before 1987. Special Initiative
     on Trade and Integration, Working Paper SITI-08a. Washington, DC: Inter-American
     Development Bank.

—. 2004b. Trade Liberalization and the Political Economy of Protection in Brazil since 1987.
     Special Initiative on Trade and Integration, Working Paper SITI-08b. Washington, DC:
     Inter-American Development Bank.

Baer, W., M. A. R. Fonseca, and J. J. M. Guilhoto. 1987. “Structural Changes in Brazil’s Industrial
     Economy, 1960–80.” World Development 14: 275–286.

Baer, W., and I. Kerstenetzky. 1964. “Import Substitution and Industrialization in Brazil.”
     American Economic Review 54 (3): 411–425.

Ferreira, P., and J. L. Rossi, Jr. 2003. “New Evidence from Brazil on Trade Liberalization and
     Productivity Growth.” International Economic Review 44 (4): 1383–1405.

Fields, G. S. 1977. “Who Benefits from Economic Development? A Reexamination of Brazilian
     Growth in the 1960’s.” American Economic Review 67 (4): 570–582.

Fishlow, A. 1972, “Brazilian Size Distribution.” American Economic Review 62 (2): 391–402.

GGDC (Groningen Growth and Development Centre). GGDC 10-Sector Database. Version 2014.
     www.rug.nl/research/ggdc/data/10-sector-database.

Gonzaga, G., N. Menezes-Filho, and C. Terra. 2006. “Trade Liberalization and the Evolution of
     Skill Earnings Differentials in Brazil.” Journal of International Economics 68: 345–367.

Kovak, B. 2011. “Local Labor Market Effects of Trade Policy: Evidence from Brazilian
     Liberalization.” American Economic Review 103 (5): 1960–1976.

Kume, H., G. Piani, and C. F. Bráz de Souza, 2003. “A Política Brasileira de Importação no Período
     1987–1998: Descrição e Avaliação.” In A Abertura Comercial Brasileira nos Anos 1990:
     Impactos sobre Emprego e Salário, edited by C. H. Corseuil and H. Kume, 1–37. Rio de
     Janiero: Ministerio do Trabaho e Emprego/Instituto do Pesquisa e Economia Aplicada.

Langoni, C. G. 2005, Distribuição da Renda e Desenvolvimento Econômico do Brasil. Rio de Janeiro:
     FGV Editora.
McMillan, M., and D. Rodrik. 2011. Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity Growth.
     NBER Working Paper 17143. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Muendler, M. A. 2004. Trade, Technology, and Productivity: A Study of Brazilian Manufacturers,
     1986–1998. CESifo Working Paper 1148. Munich: CESifo Group.
292 Chapter 7




PNAD (Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios). Annual Brazilian Household Survey.
     http://ibge.gov.br/home/estatistica/pesquisas/pesquisa_resultados.php?id_pesquisa=40.
Timmer, M. P., and G. J. de Vries. 2009. “Structural Change and Growth Accelerations in Asia and
     Latin America: A New Sectoral Data Set.” Cliometrica 3 (2): 165–190.
                                                        Contributors




Adedeji Adeyinka was the head of the Demographic and Social Statistics
unit at the National Bureau of Statistics of Nigeria until his retirement. He has
a professional Diploma in Statistics from the University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
He also attended the International Statistical Education Centre (ISEC) in
Kalkata, India where he graduated with a Diploma in Computer and Statistics.

Reshad N. Ahsan (rahsan@unimelb.edu.au) is a lecturer in Economics at the
University of Melbourne. His primary areas of research are international trade
and development economics. His recent research has been at the interface of
trade, labor, and development. His past work has focused on the impact of trade
liberalization on unemployment and labor bargaining power in India as well as
the impact of trade on firm productivity. He holds a PhD in Economics from
Syracuse University.

Sergio Firpo (firpo@insper.edu.br) is an associate professor of Economics
at the São Paulo School of Economics of the Getulio Vargas Foundation
(FGV) in Brazil. His main research interests are microeconometrics, pol-
icy evaluation, labor economics, development economics and empirical
political economy. He is a member of the Standing Committee of the Latin
American Chapter of the Econometric Society and was the editor of the
Brazilian Review of Econometrics. He received his PhD in Economics from
the University of California at Berkeley.
294  Contributors



Rémi Jedwab (jedwab@gwu.edu) is an associate professor of Economics and
International Affairs at the Department of Economics and the Elliott School
of International Affairs of George Washington University. His main field of
research is development economics, urban economics, and public economics.
Some of the issues he has studied include urbanization and structural transfor-
mation, the economic effects of transportation infrastructure, and agricultural
and economic development in Africa south of the Sahara. He is a co-founder of
the World Bank-GWU Research Conference on Urbanization and Poverty
Reduction and the Washington Area Development Economics Symposium. He
received his PhD in Economics from the Paris School of Economics.

Keith Jefferis (keith@econsult.co.bw) is a development macroeconomist and
financial sector specialist. He is Managing Director of Econsult Botswana
(Pty) Ltd, and is a former Deputy Governor of the Bank of Botswana. His cur-
rent activities include work on a range of macroeconomic, financial and other
development policy issues in Botswana and elsewhere in Africa south of the
Sahara. He received his bachelor’s degree from the University of Bristol. He
holds a master’s degree from the University of London and a PhD from the
Open University in the UK.

Brian McCaig (bmccaig@wlu.ca) is an assistant professor of Economics at
Wilfrid Laurier University. His research explores how households, workers, and
firms respond to globalization in low-income countries, with a focus on Viet
Nam. He earned a PhD in Economics from the University of Toronto.

Margaret McMillan (m.mcmillan@cgiar.org) is a senior research fel-
low in the Development Strategy and Governance (DSG) division of the
International Food Policy Research Institute. From 2009–2011 she was the
director of DSG. She is also a professor of Economics at Tufts University and a
research associate in the National Bureau of Economic Research’s program on
International Trade and Investment. She is the recipient of numerous awards
for her research and in 2005, she was named the William and Flora Hewlett
Foundation Fellow at the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study. She holds
a PhD in Economics from Columbia University, a master’s degree in Public
Administration from Princeton University and a bachelor’s in Mathematics
and Economics from Boston University.
                                                              Contributors 295



Devashish Mitra (dmitra@maxwell.syr.edu) is professor of Economics and
the Cramer Professor of Global Affairs at the Maxwell School of Citizenship
and Public Affairs at Syracuse University. He is a fellow of the Center for
Economic Studies (CESifo) network and of the Institute of Labor Economics
(IZA). He is also a research professor at the Ifo Institute in Munich. He is
Coeditor of Economics and Politics and the Indian Growth and Development
Review. He is also on the editorial boards of the Review of International
Economics, ISRN Economics and Economies. His research areas are interna-
tional trade, political economy and development economics. His current
research interests are at the interface of trade and labor. He holds a PhD in
Economics from Columbia University.

Robert Darko Osei (rdosei@yahoo.co.uk) is a senior economist at the
Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research in Accra, Ghana. His
research areas include capital flows and growth, poverty and macroeconomics.
He earned his master of science degree from the University of Warwick and
his PhD from Nottingham University both in the UK.

Nina Pavcnik (Nina.Pavcnik@dartmouth.edu) is the Niehaus Family
Professor of International Studies and Professor of Economics at Dartmouth
College. Her research interests are at the intersection of international trade,
economic development, and industrial organization, with a particular focus on
how households, workers, and firms respond to globalization. She is a research
associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research, a research affiliate
at the Centre for Economic and Policy Research, and a senior fellow at the
Bureau for Research and Economic Analysis of Development. She currently
serves as a Coeditor of the Journal of International Economics, associate edi-
tor of the American Economic Review and editor of the World Bank Economic
Review, and is a member of the World Bank Research Committee. She
received a bachelor’s degree in Economics from Yale University and earned a
PhD in Economics from Princeton University.

Renan Pieri (renanpieri@yahoo.com.br) is an academic coordinator at
Sinapse—Centro Aplicado de Inteligência, Inovação e Gestão Educacional, in
São Paulo (Brazil). He is a professor at Mackenzie Presbiterian University. His
main research interests are policy evaluation, economics of education, empiri-
cal political economy, development economics, applied law and economics, and
labor economics. He is a PhD candidate of Economics at the São Paulo School
of Economics of the Getulio Vargas Foundation (FGV) in Brazil.
296  Contributors



Danielle Resnick (d.resnick@cgiar.org) is a senior research fellow in the
Development Strategy and Governance division at the International Food
Policy Research Institute. Her work focuses on party politics, electoral behav-
ior, and the political economy of development in urban and rural areas. In addi-
tion to a number of journal articles, she is the author of Urban Poverty and Party
Populism in African Democracies (Cambridge University Press, 2013), coeditor
of Democratic Trajectories in Africa: Unraveling the Impact of Foreign Aid (Oxford
University Press, 2013), and coeditor of African Youth and the Persistence of
Marginalization: Employment, Politics, and Prospects for Change (Routledge,
2015). She received her PhD in political science from Cornell University.

Dani Rodrik (dani_rodrik@harvard.edu) is the Ford Foundation Professor
of International Political Economy at Harvard’s John F. Kennedy School of
Government. He rejoined the Kennedy School in July 2015 after two years
at the Institute for Advanced Study as the Albert O. Hirschman Professor
in the School of Social Science. He also holds a visiting appointment at the
London School of Economics as Centennial Professor (2013-2016). His
research covers globalization, economic growth and development, and politi-
cal economy. He is affiliated with the National Bureau of Economic Research,
Centre for Economic Policy Research (London), and the Center for Global
Development among other research organizations. He is the recipient of
numerous awards, including the inaugural Albert O. Hirschman Prize of the
Social Science Research Council, and honorary doctorates from universities
in Europe and Latin America. He currently serves as Vice-President of the
International Economic Association. His most recent book is Economics Rules:
The Rights and Wrongs of the Dismal Science (W.W. Norton, 2015). His arti-
cles have been published in the American Economic Review, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Journal of Political Economy, Journal of Economic Growth, Journal
of International Economics, Journal of Development Economics, and other aca-
demic journals. He holds a bachelor’s degree from Harvard College, and a mas-
ter’s degree in Public Administration and a PhD in Economics from Princeton
University.

Sheu Salau (ssalau@worldbank.org) is an agricultural economist at the World
Bank office in Nigeria and a co-task team leader for the Nigeria West Africa
Agricultural Productivity Project (WAAPP). Before joining the World Bank
in 2012, he worked at the International Food Policy Research Institute from
2008–2012. His research is on the effect of agricultural commercialization
                                                                Contributors 297



on fertilizer use intensification and nonfarm employment with theoretical
foundations from Boserup and Agricultural Transformation theories. He has
a master’s degree in Agricultural Economics from the University of Ibadan
in Nigeria and is completing his PhD in Agricultural Economics and Farm
Management at the University of Ilorin in Nigeria.

Claudia Sepúlveda (csepulveda@worldbank.org) is lead economist in
the Development Economics Vice Presidency at the World Bank. She has
held positions in various units of the World Bank (Latin America and the
Caribbean region and the Development Research Group) working on trade,
labor, and fiscal issues. She was also a member of the World Development
Report 1997 on “The State in a Changing World” and is the coauthor of the
book Post-Crisis Growth and Development: A Development Agenda for the G-20.
She was a leader of the Jobs Knowledge Platform, an interactive website facilitat-
ing the exchange of data, research findings and opinion on how to expand job
opportunities in developing countries. She holds degrees in Economics from the
Universidad de Chile and the University of California at Los Angeles.

James Thurlow (J.Thurlow@cgiar.org) is a senior research fellow at the
International Food Policy Research Institute and formerly a Research Fellow at
the United Nations University-World Institute for Development Economics
Research (UNU-WIDER). His research analyzes the interactions between poli-
cies, economic growth, and poverty, primarily using computable general equi-
librium and micro-simulation modeling. He has worked with governments and
researchers throughout Africa south of the Sahara and Asia. He holds a bachelor’s
degree, master of science, and PhD from the University of Natal in South Africa.

Íñigo Verduzco-Gallo was a senior research analyst at the International Food
Policy Research Institute. He is currently a project manager at Lateritet, a
data, research and technical advisory firm dedicated to social and economic
development located in Rwanda. His research focuses on the role of struc-
tural transformation in economic development and its links to trade, employ-
ment, and food security policies in developing countries. He has also worked
as a consultant for the World Bank and as a trader/analyst for the Central
Bank of Mexico. He holds a master’s degree in Public Administration in
International Development from Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government
and a Licenciatura in Economics from the Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo
de México (ITAM).
298  Contributors



Dietrich Vollrath (devollrath@uh.edu) is an associate professor of Economics
at the University of Houston. His research focuses on long-run growth and
development, the transition of economies out of agriculture and into indus-
try, the determinants of agricultural productivity, and the impact of rapid
urbanization on growth. In addition to his original research, he has coau-
thored an undergraduate textbook on economic growth. He holds a PhD from
Brown University.
                                                                                Index


Africa: quality of statistics, 12–13; regional   Banda, Rupiah, campaign platforms,
    structural change patterns, 27–28, 127,         256–257
    161–164, 165–166, 184, 259; uncon-           Botswana, 125–160; agricultural employ-
    ditional convergence in, 29–30                  ment and productivity, 126–128,
Agricultural employment: Botswana                   151–152; construction sector, 125–
    patterns, 126–128, 151–152; Brazil              128, 143–144; early history, 128–129;
    patterns, 269–270, 281–283; Ghana               future development challenges, 148–
    patterns, 172–174; India patterns,              151; industrial policy reforms, 136–
    39–40, 49–50, 51–52, 61–62; Nigeria             138; labor force patterns, 140–144,
    patterns, 19, 21–22, 199–204; non-              151–152; labor productivity trends,
    traditional, 32; reform policies and,           129–134; labor reallocation patterns,
    93–95, 136–138, 169–172; in stan-               130–140, 143–144; manufacturing
    dard structural change model, 164;              employment, 125–128; political eco-
    Viet Nam patterns, 81–86, 87–88,                nomic factors, 35, 149–150; repatria-
    93–95; Zambia patterns, 22–23                   tion of agri­cultural workers, 134–135;
Agricultural inputs: as constraint in               sectoral productivity patterns, 132–
    Nigeria, 213–214; in Zambia’s poli-             134; services sector employment, 125–
    tics, 256                                       128; structural change conclusions, 24,
                                                    25–26, 27–28, 125–128; trade liberal-
Agricultural productivity: Botswana                 ization, 128, 144–148, 153–158; trade
    trends, 126–128, 131–135, 151–152;              reform and structural change, 144–
    Brazil and technology transfer, 277–            148, 153–158; appendix of datasets,
    278; Ghana trends, 170–174; India               151–158
    trends, 49–50, 52; Nigeria trends,
    199–204; in standard structural change       Brazil, 267–292; agricultural employment
    model, 164; Viet Nam trends, 84–89;             and productivity, 269–270, 281–283;
    Zambia trends, 238–241, 248–249. See            education and growth, 35, 279; Import
    also specific country                           Substitution System (ISS), 269–270;
                                                    manufacturing employment and pro-
ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian               ductivity, 273–274, 281–283; post-
    Nations), Viet Nam as member, 98                structural change era, 281–283;
Asia, regional structural change patterns,          sectoral employment and productivity,
    27–28, 82, 87, 127                              27, 28, 277–281, 281–283, 286–290;
300  Index



Brazil (continued)                           Dual-economy approach, as growth model
   structural change conclusions, 24–25,        basis, 1, 3–6
   26, 27–28, 267–269, 272, 281–283;
   trade liberalization, 270–271, 279–       Econometric analysis, structural change
   281, 283; uneven structural change            and growth: for Botswana, 129–
   trends, 272–281; appendix of datasets,        140; for Brazil, 272–281, 284–
   283–284, 286–290                              285, 290; for Ghana, 179–185; for
BRIC countries, differences among, 41–42         India, 57–62; for Nigeria, 203–208,
                                                 231–232; for Viet Nam, 84–91; for
Cash crop revolution, cocoa in Ghana,            Zambia, 238–244
   167–168                                   Economic convergence, 1–2; industrial-
Cato Index, 17                                   ization and, 30–32; natural resource-
China: GDP comparison with India,                based growth and, 32; nontraditional
   41–42; labor productivity comparison          agricultural and, 32; requirements for,
   with India, 48–49                             7–8; services productivity and, 32–34,
                                                 107–108; unconditional convergence,
Cocoa, in Ghana’s economy, 167–169,
                                                 29–30
   172–174
Communications sector: in Nigeria, 207–      Economic dualism, in Ghana’s economy,
   208, 209, 210, 220; in Zambia, 237,           178n6
   239, 241, 252                             Economic growth: patterns and outcomes,
Community and social services sector:            7–8; traditional models, 1–6, 164–
   India’s productivity, 49–50; Viet Nam’s       167. See also Econometric analysis; spe-
   productivity, 86                              cific country
Construction sector: in Botswana, 125–       Economic zones, 6, 15; in Nigeria, 217; in
   128, 143–144; in Ghana, 176; in India,        Viet Nam, 95; in Zambia, 247
   49–50, 61–62; in Viet Nam, 86; in         Education: Brazil improvements, 276,
   Zambia, 237, 241, 252                         279; and economic growth, 35, 221–
Convergence. See Economic convergence            222, 276, 279; as FIREBS sector fac-
                                                 tor, 61; Nigeria challenges, 221–222;
Copper, Zambian mining, 237, 241,
                                                 and structural change, 64, 65–66, 69,
   244–246
                                                 74–75, 185. See also Human capital
Country studies: data and measurement,
                                             Electric power: as constraint in Ghana,
   11–13; methodology, 8–11
                                                 187, 189; as constraint in Nigeria, 22,
Data and measurement, in country studies,        35, 197, 219–220
   4, 11–13                                  Employment share. See specific country or
Demographic changes: in Botswana, 135–           sector
   136; in Nigeria, 197–198; in Viet         Enterprise Law, of Viet Nam, 96–97
   Nam, 89–91; in Zambia, 241–244            Enterprise sector reforms: in Botswana,
Diamonds, in Botswana’s economy, 125–            136–138; in Ghana, 168–170; in Viet
   126, 129, 135, 145, 148, 149                  Nam, 95–97, 105–108
Doi Moi reforms, 82, 93–101; agricultural,   Enterprise surveys, for Viet Nam,
   93–95; enterprise sector, 95–97; inter­       119–121
   national integration, 97–101              European Union–South Africa Trade,
Doing Business database (World Bank): on         Devel­opment and Cooperation
   Ghana, 186n12, 188; on Nigeria, 217;          Agreement (TDCA), effects on
   on Viet Nam, 97, 98                           Botswana, 145–148
                                                                              Index 301



Exchange rates: Botswana’s status, 136, 137;   Gender and labor force participa-
   Ghana adjustments, 169; Nigerian naira,        tion: Botswana, 142, 143; Nigeria,
   217–219; and Zambian copper, 246               202–203
Exports and imports: Botswana trade            Ghana, 161–196; agriculture and struc-
   flows, 146–148, 153–158; Brazil’s nat-         tural change, 172–174; constraints
   ural resources, 25, 269–271; Ghana’s           on growth, 35, 186–189; construc-
   natural resources, 32, 161–162, 170,           tion sector, 176; domestic reform poli-
   172–174, 176, 183, 187–188; liber-             cies, 169–170, 185–188; economic
   alization in India, 45; liberalization         growth and structural change, 179–
   in Viet Nam, 18, 97–101, 115–117;              185; evolution of economy, 167–172;
   Nigeria constraints, 199–200, 215–             industrialization lack, 175–177; infor-
   219; Zambia’s copper, 237, 245–246             mal economy, 181–183, 190–191;
                                                  potential gains, 183–185; sectoral
Finance: banking in Zambia, 252–253; as           employment and productivity trends,
    constraint in Ghana, 186–188; as con-         170–179; services sector, 177–179;
    straint in Nigeria, 214–215                   structural change conclusions, 13–18,
                                                  27–28, 161–164, 171–172, 179–185;
FIREBS (finance, insurance, real estate,
                                                  Viet Nam compared to, 13–18; appen-
    and business services): in Botswana,
                                                  dix of datasets, 190–192
    144; in Brazil, 273–275, 277–280;
    in Ghana, 177–178; in India, 50–52,        Globalization: and Indian growth, 40–41,
    56–58, 61; in Nigeria, 201–202, 207–          63–64, 68; management of, 41, 63–64;
    208, 209, 210; in Viet Nam, 86; in            Viet Nam’s integration, 97–101,
    Zambia, 237, 241, 252–253                     115–116
Food processing, in Zambia’s economy,          Government-owned businesses.
    238, 248                                      See State-owned enterprise (SOE)
Foreign direct investment (FDI): con-          Green revolution, lack of in Ghana, 172–
    straints in Ghana, 186–188; in India’s        174, 184
    evolution, 45; lack of in Ghana, 186–      Groningen Growth and Development
    187; in Viet Nam, 84, 95–97, 105–             Centre database: African data, 28;
    107, 111–112; in Zambia, 245–248,             Botswana data, 126, 130–134, 138–
    256. See also Trade liberalization            140; Brazil data, 24, 272, 276–277,
Free trade zones (FTZs), in Nigeria, 217          282–284; India data, 47–55, 70
Fundamentals challenge: in Botswana, 26,       Gujarat (India), growth patterns, 56–62
    150–151; in Brazil, 25, 279, 281; in
    Ghana, 18, 185–189; in India, 39–41,       HIV/AIDS: and Botswana labor force,
    59–62, 65–69; key factors in, 35; in         140–141; and Zambia’s agriculture,
    Nigeria, 21–22, 197, 199, 214–215,           249
    219–222, 229–230; and structural           Household surveys: for Brazil, 272, 284;
    change, 3–8, 18; in Viet Nam, 18, 35,        for Nigeria, 201–204, 225–226; for
    93–97; in Zambia, 23–24, 257–259             Viet Nam, 119–121
                                               Human capital: Brazil’s trends, 25,
GDP growth: in Botswana, 129; in Brazil,         279–281; and economic data, 8,
  281–283; in BRIC countries, 41–42;             12; Ghana’s policies, 168, 185, 186;
  in Ghana, 163–164, 172–173, 175,               Nigeria challenges, 221–222, 229–
  177–179; in India, 39–42; in Nigeria,          230; productivity in Nigeria, 209–212,
  197–198; in Viet Nam, 81–83; in                229–230; reform issues, 34–36. See
  Zambia, 236–237, 252, 259–260                  also Education
302  Index



IMF. See International Monetary Fund              trends, 66–67, 68–69, 76; Nigeria
    (IMF)                                         trends, 202; Viet Nam trends, 84, 102–
Imports and exports: Botswana trade flows,        105; Zambia trends, 250–251, 253–
    146–148, 153–158; Brazil’s natu-              255, 258–259
    ral resources, 25, 269–271; Ghana’s       Infrastructure: and Botswana’s growth,
    natural resources, 32, 161–162, 170,          133–134, 150; as constraint in Ghana,
    172–174, 176, 183, 187–188; India             187; and economic growth, 35, 68;
    liberalization and, 45; Nigeria con-          Gujarat development of, 59; Nigeria’s
    straints, 199–200, 215–219; Viet Nam          challenges, 197, 199, 214–215,
    liberalization and, 18, 97–101, 115–          219–221
    117; Zambia’s copper, 237, 245–246        Innovation, in economic growth, 42–43
Import Substitution System (ISS), in
                                              Institutions, as factor in economic growth,
    Brazil, 269–270
                                                  35, 166–167, 185–188
Income inequality: in Botswana, 129; in
                                              International Monetary Fund (IMF):
    Brazil, 283
                                                  data for Zambia, 259–260; Indian aid
India, 39–79; agricultural employment             (1991), 45
    and productivity, 18–20, 39–40,
    49–50, 52, 60, 62; China compared to,     Investment. See Finance; Foreign direct
    41–42, 48–49; community and social            investment (FDI)
    services sector, 49–50; construction      ISIC (International Standard Industrial
    sector, 49–50, 61–62; desirable struc-        Classification), subsector data for
    tural change, 62–69, 72–76; evolu-            Nigeria, 208–210, 223–225
    tion of economy, 44–47; Gujarat and       ISI (import-substitution industrialization),
    Maharashtra case studies, 56–62; labor        in Ghana, 161–162
    regulations in, 35, 39–40, 43, 44–47,
    68; manufacturing employment,             ISS (Import Substitution System), in
    18–20, 39–40, 56; relative productiv-         Brazil, 269–270
    ity trends, 52–53, 56, 58, 60; sectoral
    employment, 18–20, 39–40, 51–52,          Labor force participation: Botswana pat-
    58–62; sectoral productivity trends,         terns, 140–144; Brazil patterns, 276,
    49–51, 53–56, 58–62, 73; structural          286–290; Nigeria patterns, 202–203;
    change conclusions, 18–21, 27–28,            Zambia patterns, 241–244
    53–56, 62–67; appendix of datasets,       Labor market flexibility: and agricultural
    69–76                                        share in Botswana, 136, 137; and struc-
Industrialization: in Botswana, 129;             tural change in India, 65–66, 74–75;
    Brazil’s protectionism, 269–270,             and structural change in Viet Nam,
    283; as convergence pathway, 30–32;          115–116
    Ghana’s lack of, 175–177; in Viet Nam,    Labor productivity: in Botswana, 25–26,
    81–82, 108–111                               129–134; in Brazil, 24–25, 268–269,
Industrial policy reforms: in Botswana’s         276–277; in Ghana, 163–164, 179–
    evolution, 136–138; in Brazil’s evolu-       185; in India, 18–21, 39–43, 47–56,
    tion, 269–270; in India’s evolution,         58–60; in Nigeria, 21–22, 198–199,
    45–47; Zambia’s mining, 245–246              200–208, 229–230; and structural
Informal economy: Botswana trends, 142,          change patterns, 27–28; in Viet Nam,
    143; Brazil trends, 275–276, 279–280,        14–15, 85–86, 117–118; in Zambia,
    290; and economic data, 11; Ghana            22–24, 238–241, 252
    trends, 181–183, 190–191; India           Labor pull, 164–167
                                                                              Index 303



Labor push, 164–167                           Neoclassical growth model (Solow), as
Labor reallocation: across firm types            growth model, 3–6
    within sectors, 102–108; in Botswana,     Nigeria, 197–234; agricultural constraints,
    130–140, 143–144; in Brazil, 272–            213–215; agricultural employment
    276; in Ghana, 183–185; from house-          and productivity, 19, 21–22, 199–204;
    hold businesses to registered firms,         communications sector, 207–208, 209,
    102–105, 181–183; in India, 39, 43,          210, 220; evolution of economy, 199–
    51–52, 69–76; in Nigeria, 200–208;           203; financial constraints, 214–215;
    in Viet Nam, 102–108, 111, 112, 117–         human capital challenges, 221–222,
    118; in Zambia, 238–241                      229–230; infrastructure challenges and
Labor regulations: effects on economic           constraints, 35, 197, 199, 214–215,
    growth, 35; in India, 35, 39–40, 43,         219–221; manufacturing employment,
    44–47, 68                                    21–22, 201–202, 207, 208–209, 210;
                                                 petroleum industry in, 198–199, 204–
Labour Force Surveys (LFSs), Botswana            208, 213; potential structural change
    labor force data, 138–144                    gains, 212–213, 231–232; sectoral
Latin America, regional structural change        employment and productivity, 200–
    patterns, 27–28, 281                         208; structural change conclusions, 19,
Lewis, Arthur: as Ghana advisor, 163,            21–22, 27–28, 197–199, 203–208,
    167–168; on productivity gaps, 127           222–223; trade liberalization, 215–
                                                 219; appendix of datasets, 223–232
Maharashtra (India), growth patterns,         Nkrumah, Kwame, ISI strategy of, 168
   56–62
                                              Nontraditional agriculture, as economic
Manufacturing: in Brazil’s growth, 272–          convergence pathway, 32
   274, 281–283; Ghana’s lack of, 175–
   176; in India, 39–41, 43, 45–47,           Patriotic Front (PF), campaign platform,
   49–50, 51–52; in Nigeria, 201–202,             235–236, 253–257
   207, 208–209, 210; unconditional
                                              Per capita GDP: factors in evolution of,
   convergence, 29–30; in Viet Nam,
                                                  166–167. See also Econometric analysis
   14–15, 81–84, 86, 108–111, 112; in
   Zambia, 237, 241, 246–248                  Petroleum industry: and Ghana’s economy,
Methodology, of country studies, 8–11             188; and Nigeria’s economy, 21–22,
                                                  198–199, 204–208, 213
Migration, African agricultural workers,
   134–135                                    Political economy: in Botswana’s economic
                                                  growth, 35, 149–150; in Ghana’s eco-
Mining: in Botswana, 125–128, 131–133;            nomic growth, 167–172; in Zambia’s
   in Ghana, 176; in India, 49–50; in Viet        economic growth, 35, 253–257
   Nam, 81–84, 86; in Zambia, 237, 241,
   244–246                                    Population growth, and structural change,
                                                  166
Movement for Multiparty Democracy
   (MMD), campaign platform, 235–             Poverty reduction: in Botswana, 150–151;
   236, 253–257                                   in Brazil, 270; in India, 53, 69; struc-
                                                  tural change and poverty traps, 163; in
Natural resources: in Brazil’s economy, 25,       Viet Nam, 92–93
   269–271; as constraint in Botswana,        Private sector enterprise: in Botswana, 133–
   150–151; as economic convergence               134; in Ghana, 168–170, 186–189; in
   pathway, 32; in Ghana’s economy, 188,          India, 44, 59, 62; in Nigeria, 220–221,
   189; “revolution” effects, 165                 222; in Viet Nam, 93, 102–108
304  Index



Privatization: in Viet Nam, 15; in Zambia,    South Korea, GDP comparison with India,
    245–248                                       41
Productivity growth, methodology and          State-owned enterprise (SOE): in
    measurement, 8–11                             Botswana, 133–134; in Brazil, 283; in
Property rights: in Ghana, 173, 188; in           Ghana, 168, 175–176, 178; in India,
    Viet Nam, 93–94                               61, 62; in Viet Nam, 84, 95–97, 105–
Public administration sector: Botswana            108, 111, 112; in Zambia, 245–248
    shifts, 143–144; Ghana under              Structural change: in developing regions,
    Nkrumah, 168                                  127; education as factor in, 221–222,
Public sector enterprise.                         276, 279; and fundamentals, 3–8;
    See State-owned enterprise (SOE)              labor push versus labor pull, 164–
                                                  167; role of state in, 68; versus within-
Public utilities: Brazil patterns, 277–280;       sector productivity growth, 27–28,
    Ghana’s productivity, 176–177; India’s        127, 166, 238–241, 277–280; without
    productivity, 49–50; partnerships in          transformation, 257–259
    Nigeria, 220–221; Viet Nam’s produc-
    tivity, 86                                Structural transformation challenge, and
                                                  fundamentals relationship, 3–8
Rawlings, Jerry, Ghana structural adjust-
   ments, 169–170                             Tariff policies: in Botswana, 128, 144–
                                                  149, 151, 153–158; in Brazil, 270–
Regional structural patterns: Africa,
                                                  271, 283; in India, 65–66, 71–72,
   27–28, 127, 161–164, 165–166, 184,
                                                  74–75; in Nigeria, 215–219; in Viet
   259; Asia, 27–28, 82, 87, 127; Latin
                                                  Nam, 98; in Zambia, 247, 250
   America, 27–28, 281
                                              Taxation: business taxes in Ghana, 188; on
Retail sector. See Wholesale and retail
                                                  mining in Zambia, 255
   sector
Rice, Viet Nam markets, 93–95                 Technological advances: and agricultural
                                                  productivity, 277–278; and business
Sata, Michael, campaign issues, 235,              service sector, 151
    253–257                                   Telecommunications: in Nigeria, 220; in
Services sectors: in Botswana, 125–128,           Zambia, 252, 253
    144; in Brazil, 273–275, 277–280;         Textiles and clothing, in Zambia’s econ-
    in Ghana, 177–179; in India, 39–41,           omy, 247–248
    49–50; in Nigeria, 200–204, 209,          Tourism, in Ghana’s economy, 178–179
    210; productivity and convergence,
                                              Trade liberalization: in Botswana, 128,
    32–34, 107–108; in standard struc-
                                                  144–148, 153–158; in Brazil, 270–
    tural change model, 165; in Viet Nam,
                                                  271, 279–281, 283; in Ghana, 174; in
    81–84; in Zambia, 235–236, 237, 241,
                                                  India, 65–66, 68, 74–75; in Nigeria,
    252–253. See also FIREBS
                                                  215–219; in Viet Nam, 93–101, 115–
Smallholder farmers, in Zambia, 248–249           116; in Zambia, 247–248
Social assistance programs, and productiv-    Trade services sector: African sector data,
    ity measurements, 136                         140; in Zambia, 237, 239, 241, 251,
Social change, Zambia sectoral drivers,           258–259
    244–253                                   Transport and storage sector: in Botswana,
Southern African Development                      131–135, 142, 144; in Ghana, 177–178,
    Community (SADC) Free Trade                   180, 187; in India, 49–50, 51–52; infor-
    Protocol, effects on Botswana, 145–148        mality in Brazil, 279, 280; in Nigeria,
                                                                                Index 305



   201–202, 207–208, 209, 210, 212–213,         Vocational training, and structural change
   222; Viet Nam’s productivity, 86; in            in Nigeria, 221–222
   Zambia, 237, 240, 245, 252, 260–261
Typology of growth patterns, 7–8, 18, 24,       Water resources, Botswana constrained by,
   26                                              150–151
                                                Wholesale and retail sector: Botswana
Unconditional convergence, in manufac-             trends, 143–144; Brazil trends, 278,
   turing, 29–30                                   279, 282; Ghana trends, 177–178,
                                                   179, 183; India trends, 49–50, 51–52;
Unemployment: Botswana patterns, 125,
                                                   Nigeria trends, 200–203; Viet Nam
   129, 141–143, 148–149; Ghana pat-
                                                   trends, 86; Zambia trends, 251
   terns, 189; Nigeria patterns, 197,
   202–203, 221; Zambia patterns, 235,          Within-sector productivity growth: in
   241–244                                         Botswana, 130–136; in Brazil, 27, 28,
                                                   268–269, 276–283; in developing
Urbanization: and Brazil’s economic
                                                   economies, 127; fundamentals of, 35;
   growth, 270, 272; overurbanization,
                                                   in Ghana, 179–185; in India, 27, 28,
   165; and structural change, 64, 69,
                                                   49–56; in Nigeria, 210–211, 222–223;
   165–166; and Zambia’s economic
                                                   versus structural change, 27–28; in Viet
   growth, 241–244
                                                   Nam, 85–86; in Zambia, 236, 238–241
Value-added data: for Botswana, 125–126,        World Trade Organization (WTO), Viet
    152–153; countries compared, 47–49;            Nam as member, 98
    for India, 47–56, 58, 60; for Nigeria,
    209–212, 227–228; for Zambia,               Youth unemployment: Botswana patterns,
    259–261                                        125, 141–143; Nigeria patterns, 197,
                                                   202–203, 221; Zambia patterns, 235,
Vertical integration, in Brazil’s economic         243–244, 254–255
    growth, 270
Viet Nam, 81–124; agricultural employ-          Zambia, 235–265; agricultural employ-
    ment and productivity, 81–84, 87–89;           ment and productivity, 238–241, 248–
    agricultural reforms, 93–95; commu-            249, 258; communications sector, 237,
    nity and social services sector, 86; con-      239, 241, 252; construction sector, 237,
    struction sector, 86; domestic reforms         241, 252; economic decline of 1990s,
    and productivity, 88–89, 93–101,               236‑–237; future government policy
    115–116; enterprise sector reforms,            goals, 257–259; high-value services
    95–97; Ghana compared to, 13–18;               and middle class, 252–253, 257–258;
    globalization and, 97–101, 115–116;            informal economy, 250–251, 253–255;
    institutional challenges, 35; interna-         manufacturing decline, 246–248; min-
    tional perspective, 111–116; labor             ing as enclave sector, 244–246; politi-
    reallocation, 102–108, 117–118; man-           cal aspects of uneven transformation,
    ufacturing employment, 82–84, 88,              35, 253–257; sectoral drivers of social
    108–111, 112; service sector employ-           change, 244–253; sectoral employment
    ment, 82–84, 88; SOE versus FDI                shares, 259–261; sectoral productivity
    employment, 111, 112; structural               trends, 238–241, 257–260, 261; struc-
    change conclusions, 13–18, 27–28,              tural change conclusions, 22–24, 27–28,
    84; structural change patterns, 84–91;         235–236, 238–241, 257–259; urban-
    trade liberalization, 93–101, 115–116;         ization and youth unemployment, 241–
    appendix of datasets, 119–121                  244; appendix of datasets, 259–261k
Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth:
A Framework and Case Studies, written by leading scholars from
both developed and developing countries, lays out context and
background for thinking about economic growth. The book offers
seven countries’ experiences that identify problems, explain various
approaches, and show how policies address specific needs and challenges.

;❱;❱;❱;❱;❱;❱;❱;❱;❱;❱;❱
“Through its country case studies the book offers a fascinating account of the diverse paths to
 economic growth that have been taken by these developing countries. The common analytical
 framework and overview give a coherence to Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth: A
 Framework and Case Studies that is usually absent in edited volumes.”
       —Hans Binswanger-Mkhize, Professor Extraordinaire, Institute for Economic Research
                   on Innovation, Tshwane University of Technology, Tshwane, South Africa
                                  and Senior Fellow, Amsterdam Institute for Development
 
“Using careful case studies, this book offers us a rich understanding of transformational change
 or lack of it. The contrasting experiences and the difficulties in getting the fundamentals right
 are striking. A key message is that new miracles are unlikely to be around the corner: there are
 no shortcuts to development. This sobering thought alone makes reading Structural Change,
 Fundamentals, and Growth: A Framework and Case Studies worthwhile for all those involved in
 research and policy work to promote more rapid structural change and development.”
                            —Stefan Dercon, Professor of Economic Policy, University of Oxford
                            and Chief Economist, UK Department for International Development

“This important book represents a valuable and in-depth look at structural transformation in sub-
 Saharan Africa. The detailed case studies, written by leading scholars, help to show the diversity
 of country experiences. Anyone trying to understand the ways in which African economies
 are transforming—and the challenges that they face—will want to read Structural Change,
 Fundamentals, and Growth: A Framework and Case Studies.”
                                              —Doug Gollin, Professor of Development Economics,
                                                      Department of International Development
                                                                       at the University of Oxford




1201 Eye Street, NW, Washington, DC 20005 USA
T. +1-202-862-5600 | F. +1-202-467-4439 | Email: ifpri@cgiar.org

www.ifpri.org

Cover design: Anne C. Kerns, Anne Likes Red, Inc.
Cover photos: Adobe Stock, Siegfried Schnepf; © 2011 Sandipan Majumdar,
    Courtesy of Photoshare; Adobe Stock, diego cervo;
    Background: © 2007 Lee Mantini, Courtesy of Photoshare
