                                      ECONOMIC IMPACTS
                                      OF CHILD MARRIAGE:
                                     GLOBAL
                                     SYNTHESIS REPORT
                                      (CONFERENCE EDITION) JUNE 2017




Page 1 · ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF CHILD MARRIAGE: GLOBAL SYNTHESIS BRIEF    July, 2017
                     Economic Impacts of Child Marriage:
                          Global Synthesis Report
                By Quentin Wodon, Chata Male, Ada Nayihouba, Adenike
             Onagoruwa, Aboudrahyme Savadogo, Ali Yedan, Jeff Edmeades,
               Aslihan Kes, Neetu John, Lydia Murithi, Mara Steinhaus and
                                    Suzanne Petroni

                                   CONFERENCE EDITION
                                      JUNE 27, 2017

                 EMBARGOED FOR RELEASE 9:30 A.M. EST, 6/27/2017

The Economic Impacts of Child Marriage project is a collaborative effort by the International
Center for Research on Women (ICRW) and the World Bank, with funding from the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation and the Children’s Investment Fund Foundation, and additional support from
the Global Partnership for Education. This series of papers is jointly produced by the International
Center for Research on Women and the World Bank and is available at
www.costsofchildmarriage.org. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
paper are entirely those of the authors and should not be attributed in any manner to the World
Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the
countries they represent. Citation and the use of material presented in this series should take into
account this provisional character. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data
included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any
map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal
status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

                                     Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Information and illustrations contained in this
report may be freely reproduced, published, or otherwise used for noncommercial purposes
without permission from the World Bank or ICRW. However, the World Bank and ICRW request
that the original study be cited as the source. The recommended citation is Wodon, Q., C. Male,
A. Nayihouba, A. Onagoruwa, A. Savadogo, A. Yedan, J. Edmeades, A. Kes, N. John, L. Murithi,
M. Steinhaus and S. Petroni (2017). Economic Impacts of Child Marriage: Global Synthesis
Report, Washington, DC: The World Bank and International Center for Research on Women.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World
Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax:
202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Correspondence Details

Quentin Wodon, World Bank, 1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA. Telephone: +1-
202-473-1446. Email: qwodon@worldbank.org.

Suzanne Petroni, International Center for Research on Women, 1120 20th St NW #500 North,
Washington, DC 20036, USA. Telephone: +1-202-797-0007. Email: spetroni@icrw.org.

© 2017 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank and The
International Center for Research on Women (ICRW), Washington, DC. All rights reserved.




                                                 i
                        Economic Impacts of Child Marriage:
                             Global Synthesis Report

        By Quentin Wodona, Chata Malea, Ada Nayihoubaa, Adenike Onagoruwaa,
     Aboudrahyme Savadogoa, Ali Yedana, Jeff Edmeadesb, Aslihan Kesb, Neetu Johnb,
                 Lydia Murithib, Mara Steinhausb and Suzanne Petronib

a
    Education Global Practice, World Bank, Washington DC, USA
b
    International Center for Research on Women, Washington DC, USA



  Paper prepared for the Economic Impacts of Child Marriage project, a collaborative
  effort by the International Center for Research on Women and the World Bank with
funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Children’s Investment Fund
     Foundation, and additional support from the Global Partnership for Education.


Abstract: The international community is increasingly aware of the negative impacts of
child marriage on a wide range of development outcomes. Ending child marriage is now
part of the Sustainable Development Goals. Yet investments to end the practice remain
limited across the globe and more could be done. In order to inspire greater
commitments towards ending child marriage, this study demonstrates the negative
impacts of the practice and their associated economic costs. The study looks at five
domains of impacts: (i) fertility and population growth; (ii) health, nutrition, and violence;
(iii) educational attainment and learning; (iv) labor force participation and earnings; and
(v) participation, decision-making, and investments. Economic costs associated with the
impacts are estimated for several of the impacts. When taken together across countries,
the costs of child marriage are very high. They suggest that investing to end child
marriage is not only the right thing to do, but also makes sense economically.

Keywords: child marriage, economic cost, early childbirths, education, health




                                              ii
                            Table of Contents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                                                            v

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                          1

CHAPTER I – INTRODUCTION                                                  12

CHAPTER II – CHILD MARRIAGE AND EARLY CHILDBIRTHS                         16
    Extent of Child Marriage and Early Childbirths                        16
    Share of Early Childbirths Likely Due to Child Marriage               19
    Factors Leading to Child Marriage and Early Childbirths               22
    Profile of Child Marriage by Level of Wealth                          27
    Geographic Profile of Child Marriage                                  29

CHAPTER III – IMPACTS ON FERTILITY AND POPULATION GROWTH                  31
    Impact of Child Marriage on Total Fertility                           31
    Impact of Child Marriage and Early Childbirths on Population Growth   35
    Welfare Benefits from Reduced Population Growth                       37
    Education Budget Savings from Reduced Population Growth               40

CHAPTER IV – IMPACTS ON HEALTH, NUTRITION, AND VIOLENCE                   43
    Child Marriage, Early Childbirths, and Health                         43
    Potential Impact of Early Childbirths on Maternal Mortality           44
    Impact of Early Childbirths on Under-five Mortality and Stunting      46
    Impact of Child Marriage on Intimate Partner Violence                 50

CHAPTER V – IMPACTS ON EDUCATION, LABOR, AND EARNINGS                     53
    Child Marriage, Early Childbirths, and Education for Girls            53
    Impact of Child Marriage and Early Childbirths on Girls’ Education    55
    Impact of Child Marriage on Labor Force Participation                 59
    Impact of Child Marriage on Earnings and Productivity                 61
    Impact of Child Marriage on Household Welfare                         63
    Intergenerational Impact of Child Marriage on Education               63

CHAPTER VI – SELECTED OTHER IMPACTS                                       64
    Impact of Child Marriage on Women’s Decision Making                   64
    Impact of Child Marriage on Land Ownership                            66
    Impact of Child Marriage on Women’s Knowledge of HIV/AIDS             67
    Impact of Child Marriage on Birth Registrations                       68

CHAPTER VII – CONCLUSION                                                  70




                                    iii
ANNEX 1 – METHODOLOGICAL NOTE                         73

ANNEX 2 – DATA SOURCES                                76

ANNEX 3 – CORE SET OF COUNTRIES FOR THE ESTIMATIONS   78

ANNEX 4 – STRATEGIES TO END CHILD MARRIAGE            79

REFERENCES                                            83




                            iv
                             ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This report was produced as part of the Economic Impacts of Child Marriage study, a
joint project of the International Center for Research on Women (ICRW) and the World
Bank’s Education Global Practice. The project is funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation (BMGF) and the Children’s Investment Fund Foundation (CIFF) with
additional support from the Global Partnership for Education (GPE).

The conceptual framework for this study was created jointly by the ICRW and World
Bank teams. This global report was drafted by the World Bank team with inputs from the
ICRW team. Comments from colleagues at the World Bank as well as peer reviewers,
including Diana Arango, Manav Bhattari, Luis Benveniste, Rafael Cortez, Benedicte de
la Briere, Michele Gragnaloti, Sarah Haddock, Louise Mvono, Elizabeth Ninan,
Margareta Norris Harrit, Qaiser Khan, Hasley Rogers, and Lakshmi Sundaram (Girls Not
Brides) are gratefully acknowledged. The team is also grateful for comments as well as
continuous support provided by staff at the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (Haven
Ley and Julie Wroblewski), the Children’s Investment Fund Foundation (Miles Kemplay,
Erin McCarthy, and Linda Weisert), and the Global Partnership for Education (Louise
Banham and Karen Mundy). The opinions expressed in the report are those of the
authors only and need not reflect the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, of
the countries they represent.




                                          v
                             EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                               MOTIVATION FOR THE STUDY

1. Child marriage is defined as a marriage or union taking place before the age of
   18. In many countries, a large share of girls still marry before the age of 18.
   According to data from Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) for about 60
   countries, in the past 30 years the prevalence of child marriage has decreased, but
   not very rapidly (Nguyen and Wodon, 2015; see also UNFPA, 2012, and UNICEF,
   2014). Estimates produced for this study for 25 countries accounting for an
   overwhelming majority of child marriages worldwide also suggests a decline, but the
   prevalence of child marriage remains high. According to the latest DHS, the share of
   women between the ages 18-22 who married before the age of 18 in the 25
   countries was 36.7 percent. Child marriage is deeply entrenched in many
   communities, with girls often marrying as soon as they reach puberty. In addition,
   almost one in five women in the 18-22 age group have their first child before the age
   of 18 in these 25 countries, a proportion that has also declined over time but remains
   high. In some countries, many early childbirths (defined as women having a child
   before the age of 18 or children being born of mothers younger than 18) takes place
   outside of marriage. In most countries, however, early childbirths are in most cases
   a direct consequence of child marriage.

2. The international community and country governments are increasingly aware
   of the negative impacts of child marriage, yet investments to end the practice
   remain limited. Ending child marriage is now part of the Sustainable Development
   Goals. But few countries have adopted comprehensive strategies to end the
   practice, and investments in terms of programs and policies to do so remain limited.
   In Africa, under an initiative of the African Union, and similarly across other regions,
   many countries are adopting national strategies to prevention and eliminate child
   marriage. In addition, some countries are investing funding – either their own or in
   partnership with donors - to delay the age at marriage. One example of such an
   initiative is the World Bank’s Sahel Women Empowerment and Demographic
   Dividend regional project. Another example is a multi-country initiative by UNFPA
   and UNICEF to tackle child marriage, with a dozen countries participating, including
   in Africa and Asia. These efforts should help to drive change, but still, far more could
   be done given the large negative impacts of child marriage.

3. In order to inspire greater commitments towards ending child marriage, this
   study demonstrates the negative impacts of the practice and its economic
   costs globally. The study looks at five domains of impacts of child marriage: (i)
   fertility and population growth; (ii) health, nutrition, and violence; (iii) educational
   attainment; (iv) labor force participation, earnings, and productivity; and (v) decision-
   making and other areas. The conceptual framework guiding the study follows in
   Figure 1 below. For some of these impacts, the economic costs associated with the
   impacts are estimated. Overall, the impacts and economic costs associated with
   child marriage are high. They suggest that investing to end child marriage is not only
   the right thing to do, but also makes sense from an economic point of view. The
   conceptual framework for the study is displayed in Figure 1. Annex 1 provides a
   more detailed visualization of the analysis undertaken in order to document the


                                           1
   pathways – both direct and indirect - through which child marriage as well as early
   childbirths may affect child brides, their children, their community, and society at
   large.

   Figure 1: Framework for Assessing the Economic Impacts of Child Marriage




                               Source: Wodon et al. (2015).

Box 1: What Do We Mean by “Impacts” and Associated Costs?

The aim of this study is to estimate the impacts of child marriage on a wide range of
development outcomes and the economic costs associated with some of these impacts.

The term “impact” is used for simplicity, but one must be careful about not necessarily
inferring causality. Estimates of impacts in this study are typically obtained through
regression analysis aiming to isolate the potential impact of child marriage or early
childbirths on various outcomes, controlling for other factors affecting those outcomes.
In the literature, this approach is known as “association studies”. What is measured is a
statistical association between child marriage or early childbirths and outcomes. This is
not necessarily an impact as could be observed with a randomized control trial. Since
child marriage cannot be randomized, the study must rely on regression analysis to
estimate impacts, but there is always a risk of bias in the measures of likely impacts.

Based on measures of likely impacts, costs associated with some of these impacts are
computed. These costs are based on a number of assumptions that could be debated
including discount rates. Therefore, cost estimates only represent an order of magnitude
of potential costs, as opposed to precise estimations.

Source: Wodon (2017a); see also Annex 1.




                                          2
                                  IMPACTS OF CHILD MARRIAGE

4. Child marriage has a large impact on fertility and population growth. Total
   fertility is defined as the number of live births that women are (statistically) expected
   to have over their lifetime under current conditions. Controlling for other factors
   affecting total fertility, on average across 15 countries, a girl marrying at 13 will have
   26 percent more children over her lifetime than if she had married at 18 or later. If a
   girl marries at 17, she would still have on average 17 percent more children versus
   marrying at 18 or later. Considering the rate of child marriage in the country and the
   characteristics of the girls who marry early, ending child marriage would reduce the
   national rate of total fertility by 11 percent, a rather large effect. A large part of the
   impact of child marriage on total fertility comes from the fact that women marrying
   earlier tend to have children earlier. Across 18 countries, child marriage is likely to
   be the cause of early childbirths for 75 percent of the girls who have their first child
   before the age of 18. Marrying early also often has a small negative impact on
   modern contraceptive use later in life (in some countries the impact is positive,
   perhaps because when women marry early desired fertility is also achieved earlier).
   Overall, ending child marriage without any associated changes in programs or
   policies would however not, in itself, have a large effect on contraceptive use
   nationally. Finally, ending child marriage and early childbirths could reduce
   population growth, with impacts that depend on each country but reach up to 0.39
   percentage points in Niger, which is again a substantial effect, as was observed with
   total fertility. The magnitude of these various impacts is summarized in table 1.

Table 1: Impacts on Fertility and Population Growth
Indicators                          Estimated Impacts
(1) Number of live births over lifetime      Depending on the age at marriage, child marriage
                                             increases total fertility for women by 17% to 26%
(2) National rate of total fertility         Ending child marriage would reduce the estimate of the
                                             national total fertility rate on average by 11%
(3) Early childbirth (first child before 18) Child marriage is likely the cause of at least 75 percent
                                             of girls having children before the age of 18
(4) National rate of early childbirths       Ending child marriage could reduce the share of girls
                                             having a child before 18 by three fourths
(5) Use of modern contraception              Marrying early may reduce the likelihood of using
                                             modern contraceptives later, but not in all cases
(6) National rate of contraceptive use       Ending child marriage would not have a large effect
                                             nationally on modern contraceptive use
(7) Population growth                        Ending child marriage and early childbirths could
                                             reduce population growth substantially
Sources: Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017a) for (1) & (2); Wodon, Male, and Onagoruwa (2017) for
(3) & (4); Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017b) for (5) & (6); Wodon and Yedan (2017a) for (7).

5. Through early childbirths, child marriage has large impacts on the health and
   nutrition of the children of young mothers, but probably less impact on
   maternal mortality ratios and intimate partner violence. The literature suggests
   that adolescent girls have in many countries a higher level of maternal morbidity and
   mortality than women ages 20-24. At the same time, while avoiding pregnancy at a
   very young age is essential, it does not follow that ending child marriage and thereby
   reducing early childbirths would necessarily result in a decrease in maternal mortality
   ratios at the national level. Other health impacts of child marriage and early
   childbirths are more clear-cut. First, child marriage is the likely cause of more than


                                                3
    four in five children being born of mothers younger than 18. In turn, when a child is
    born of a young mother, this increases at the margin (that is, controlling for other
    factors) the risk for the child of dying by age 3.5 percentage points on average
    across 15 countries. The impact on under-five stunting is estimated at 6.3
    percentage points on average across the 15 countries. However, ending child
    marriage and early childbirths would not have a large effect on national rates of
    under-five mortality nor stunting simply because only a relatively small share of
    children is born of mothers younger than 18 at the time of their birth. Finally, the
    literature suggests linkages between intimate partner violence (IPV) and marrying at
    a very early age. This study finds some evidence of impact, especially when
    marrying at age 15 or earlier. Noting that the study does not address all aspects of
    health that may be affected by child marriage, such as maternal morbidity, mental
    health or sexually-transmitted infections (including HIV and AIDS), for example, the
    magnitude of the impacts on some aspects of health, nutrition, and violence are
    summarized in table 2.

Table 2: Impacts on Health, Nutrition, and Intimate Partner Violence
Indicators                                Estimated Impacts
(1) Maternal mortality                    The direct impact that ending child marriage has on
                                          maternal mortality ratios is not fully clear
(2) Being born of a young mother          Child marriage is likely the cause of at least 84 percent
                                          of births of children from mothers younger than 18
(3) Risk for children of dying by age 5   Being born of a mother younger than 18 increases the
                                          risk of under-five mortality by 3.5 percentage points
(4) National rate of under-five mortality On average, three in 100 deaths among children under
                                          five are directly attributable to early childbirths
(5) Risk for children of being stunted    Being born of a mother younger than 18 increases the
                                          risk of under-five stunting by 6.3 percentage points
(6) National rate of under-five stunting On average, one in 100 stunted children under five are
                                          stunted directly because of early childbirths
                                          Marrying very early in some countries has a statistically
(7) Intimate partner violence             significant direct impact on intimate partner violence.
                                          There may also be indirect impacts through lower
                                          educational attainment.
Sources: Wodon (2017b) for (1); Wodon, Male, and Onagoruwa (2017) for (2); Onagoruwa and
Wodon (2017c) for (3) & (4); Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017d) for (5) & (6); Savadogo and Wodon
(2017a) for (7).

6. Child marriage has a large negative effect on educational attainment for girls
   and on the educational prospects of children of child brides. Two approaches
   can be used to assess the impact of child marriage on educational attainment for
   girls. The first approach consists of asking parents in household surveys why their
   daughters dropped out of school. According to these surveys, marriage is one of the
   main reasons for dropping out of school for adolescent girls. The second approach
   consists of estimating the impact of child marriage on educational attainment
   econometrically. Estimates for sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America and the
   Caribbean, and South Asia suggest a statistically significant impact of child marriage
   on secondary school enrollment and completion. Together, the two approaches point
   to a large impact of child marriage on education for girls. This is confirmed by the
   fact that the option for (or given to) girls in many countries is often to either be
   married or be in school, and once a girl is married, it is very rare that she is also in
   school. Finally, child marriage may reduce the education prospects of children (boys



                                              4
    and girls) indirectly by curtailing a mother’s education. The impacts of child marriage
    on education are summarized in table 3. Importantly, estimates also suggest that
    increasing girls’ education is probably one of the best ways to avoid child marriage.
    Each year of secondary education may reduce the likelihood of marrying as a child
    or having a first child before the age of 18 by six percentage points on average
    across 15 countries.

Table 3: Impacts on Educational Attainment
Indicators                              Estimated Impacts
(1) Girls dropping out of school        According to parents in national surveys, marriage is a
                                        key reason for dropping out of school for girls
(2) Educational attainment for girls    Marrying as a child reduces the likelihood of enrolling in
                                        and completing secondary school substantially
(3) Marriage vs. schooling trade-off    Once an adolescent girl is married, it is very rare that
                                        she remains in school
(4) Intergenerational effects           Child marriage affects the education of the children of
                                        girls marrying early
(5) Education’s impact on marriage      Each year of secondary education may reduce the risk of
                                        child marriage by six percentage points on average
Sources: Wodon (2017f) for (1), (2) & (3); Wodon and Yedan (2017b) for (4); Wodon and Yedan
(2017c) for (5).

Box 2: Child Marriage and Education: A Complex Relationship

For many adolescent girls, the options are to continue formal schooling or to marry, but
not both. This comes out clearly not only in household surveys, but also in qualitative
work. More generally, support for girls’ education remains limited in many areas. A lack
of education facilities nearby can force girls to drop out, either because schools are
simply too far or because walking long distances to schools represents a risk for
adolescent girls to be harassed on the way to school. But low quality in the education
provided in schools is also a factor, and there is a perception in some communities that
if adolescent girls go to public schools, they are at risk of being harassed. The cost of
schooling is also an obstacle for many girls to pursue their education.

Child marriage reduces education prospects for girls, and conversely better education
opportunities may reduce the likelihood of marrying early. Estimates (Wodon and
Yedan, 2017c) as well as the literature (Kalamar et al. 2016) suggest that keeping girls
in schools is one of the best ways to delay marriage. This is why Brown (2012)
suggested to look at tipping-point policies in education for ending child marriage,
including programs to reduce the cost for girls to transition to secondary school.

7. While child marriage does not directly affect labor force participation much, it
   reduces women’s education and thereby expected earnings and household
   welfare. Child marriage may not necessarily be associated directly with a significant
   increase or decrease in labor force participation, although through indirect effects,
   especially through its impact on educational attainment for girls, ending child
   marriage could lead in some countries to a small reduction in female labor force
   participation. According to results from wage regressions and simulations of
   earnings, women who married as children have expected earnings (actual or
   imputed) in adulthood that are lower than women who married after the age of 18
   (the average loss in earnings is nine percent). As a result, taking into account the



                                              5
    earnings of all women and men, ending child marriage could increase earnings and
    productivity nationally across the population by about one percent on average across
    15 countries. In most cases, estimates suggest that child marriage does not itself
    have a direct impact on household consumption per capita or food adequacy after
    controlling for household size and the education level of the household head and
    spouse. However, through its impact on fertility and thereby household size, as well
    as through its impact on education, child marriage reduces household welfare. The
    magnitude of the impacts of child marriage on labor force participation, women’s
    earnings, and household welfare and food security are summarized in table 4.

Table 4: Impacts on Labor Force Participation, Earnings, and Welfare
Indicators                            Estimated Impacts
(1) Women’s labor force participation In general, child marriage does not have a large
                                      statistically significant impact on labor force participation
(2) Impact on women’s earnings        Through its impact on education, child marriage reduces
                                      earnings in adulthood for women marrying early by 9%
(3) National impact on earnings       Ending child marriage could increase the population’s
                                      earnings and productivity nationally by 1.0%
                                      Child marriage typically does not affect household
(4) Household consumption
                                      welfare directly, but it has an impact through lower
                                      education and higher fertility
(5) Household food adequacy           Child marriage typically does not affect food adequacy
                                      directly, but it has an impact through education/fertility
Sources: Savadogo and Wodon (2017b) for (1); Savadogo and Wodon (2017c) for (2) & (3);
international evidence for (4) & (5).

8. The impacts of child marriage on various dimensions of women’s agency tend
   to be smaller, and in some cases no direct impacts are observed. For this
   study, we consider measures of household decision-making, land ownership,
   knowledge of HIV and AIDS, and birth registrations as elements of women’s agency.
   While these are not ideal proxies for agency, they are amongst the more widely
   collected variables that could, together, provide some estimate of women’s agency.
   Controlling for other variables, child marriage has a negative direct effect in some
   but not all countries on an index of women’s household decision-making ability and it
   may also have indirect effects through its impact on education (given that a higher
   level of education is associated with higher decision-making ability within the
   household). The effects are however not necessarily very large at the national level.
   Child marriage is associated with a higher likelihood of land ownership for women,
   with the positive impact ranging from one to three percentage points depending on
   the measure used for most countries. Child marriage is typically not associated
   directly with a reduction in women’s knowledge of HIV/AIDS in adulthood in most
   countries, nor is it associated with a higher risk of not registering a child’s birth in
   comparison to marrying at age 18 or later. The magnitude of the impacts in these
   areas is summarized in table 5.




                                              6
Table 5: Impacts on Women’s Decision-making and Other Impacts
Indicators                      Estimated Impacts
(1) Women’s decision making ability   In some countries child marriage affects decision-
                                      making, and it also matters indirectly through education.
(2) Women’s land ownership            Child marriage is associated with a higher likelihood of
                                      land ownership for women of 1-3 percentage points
(3) Women’s knowledge of HIV/AIDS     Child marriage is often not associated with a reduction in
                                      adulthood in women’s knowledge of HIV/AIDS
(4) Birth registration for children   Child marriage is not associated with a reduction in the
                                      rate of birth registrations for young children
Sources: Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017e) for (1); Savadogo and Wodon (2017d) for (2);
Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017f) for (3); Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017g) for (4).

9. Overall, the impacts of child marriage are large for fertility, population growth,
   and education as well as earnings, but somewhat smaller in other dimensions.
   The discussion so far suggests that the impacts of child marriage on fertility and
   population growth, as well as on educational attainment for girls, tend to be
   substantial. Impacts on women’s earnings and productivity are also fairly large,
   principally due to the fact that child marriage curtails girls’ education, and
   educational attainment is a key factor affecting earnings. Some of the impacts on
   health, nutrition, and violence are large at the margin for the girls marrying early or
   their children. This is especially the case for children born of young mothers, but
   ending child marriage would not necessarily make a large difference for national
   level indicators such as under-five mortality and stunting. Other direct impacts of
   child marriage, including on women’s decision-making, intimate partner violence,
   knowledge of HIV/AIDS and birth registrations are not always statistically significant,
   but even in such cases child marriage could still have an impact indirectly through
   the fact that it curtails girls’ educational attainment.


                                      ECONOMIC COSTS

10. The impacts of child marriage and early childbirths on multiple development
    outcomes have implications for economic well-being. Child marriage profoundly
    affects the girls who marry early as well as their children in multiple ways. It leads
    girls and women to have children earlier and more children over their lifetime than if
    they had married later. It affects girls’ educational attainment negatively, thereby
    curtailing future opportunities for them to compete for well-paying jobs. Child
    marriage may also lead to higher health risks for young mothers and especially for
    their children. Finally, child marriage may in some cases directly or indirectly reduce
    agency for women and increase other risks such as that of intimate partner violence.
    These impacts have negative consequences not only for the girls marrying early, but
    also for their children and for communities and societies as a whole. While it is not
    feasible to provide a monetary valuation of all costs associated with the negative
    impacts of child marriage, estimates can be provided for some of the largest
    impacts/costs. This study provides estimates of selected annual costs associated
    with the impacts of child marriage (on the difference between annual and lifetime
    costs, see Box 3).




                                             7
Box 3: Annual versus Lifetime Costs of Child Marriage

The costs of child marriage can be computed on an annual or lifetime basis. This study
focuses mostly on annual costs. For example, we estimate losses in annual earnings for
women who married early in comparison to what they might have earned if they had
married later. Similarly, we provide estimates of annual as opposed to lifetime benefits
from reduced population growth when ending child marriage. The one exception to the
reliance on annual losses/benefits is for child mortality and stunting, where lifetime
losses are estimated for the number of children avoiding death or stunting each yera.

Instead of relying mostly on annual costs, lifetime costs could be estimated, considering
for example the net present value of future earning losses over their lifetime for women
marrying early. While such estimates are not provided in this study, they could be the
focus of future work relying on new data to be released by the World Bank on the
Wealth of Nations, including for the first time human capital wealth. In general, the
resulting lifetime costs of child marriage would be substantially larger than annual costs.

Source: Wodon (2017a).

11. The global economic costs associated with the impacts of child marriage on
    fertility and population growth, children’s health, and education are
    particularly large. Given that the impacts of child marriage on fertility and
    population growth, children’s health, and education and earnings tend to be the
    largest, these are the impacts for which a monetary value is estimated in this study.
    Tentative global estimates of the annual costs (see Box 3) associated with the
    impacts of child marriage – or equivalently, estimates of the benefits from ending
    child marriage - are provided in table 6. These estimates should not be considered
    as precise given that they depend on (1) econometric estimates of impacts that have
    themselves standard errors and (2) a range of assumptions for costing that could be
    debated. Still, the estimates provide an order of magnitude of the potential costs of
    child marriage. Estimates are provided in terms of annual costs or benefits. For the
    purposes of this study, we posit the total elimination of child marriage (and in some
    cases early childbirths) in 2014. This choice of starting date is done in order to be
    closer to the latest available data sources in the estimations. Estimates of
    costs/benefits are provided for 2015 and for 2030, as the reference year for
    achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.

      Welfare benefits from lower fertility and population growth: The welfare benefits
       from lower population growth when ending child marriage are estimated globally
       (for 106 countries) at $22 billion in 2015 and $566 billion in 2030, as shown in
       table 6. The rapid increase in the benefits stems from the fact that the impact of
       child marriage and early childbirths on population growth is cumulative. That is,
       each year the gains become larger because the cumulative reduction in
       population growth keeps growing from one year to the next. In addition, as
       standards of living (GDP per capita) improve, the valuations also become larger.

      Benefits from the reduction in under-five mortality and malnutrition: Ending child
       marriage would not reduce national rates of under-five mortality and stunting
       dramatically, but many children would nevertheless survive at least until their fifth


                                           8
       birthday and more would avoid stunting. The benefits from saved lives and
       children not being stunted are not primarily monetary. But with all necessary
       caveats, a tentative monetary value can be associated with avoiding the death of
       young children as well as stunting. The valuation is based on the discounted
       value of future wages and welfare levels for the children who survive past age
       five or avoid stunting. Globally, for 106 countries, using a discount rate of five
       percent, the estimated benefits rise from $42 billion (PPP) in 2015/16 to $82
       billion in 2030 in the case of under-five mortality. In the case of stunting
       estimates the estimated benefits rise from $9 billion (PPP) in 2015/16 to $16
       billion in 2030.

Table 6: Order of Magnitude of the Benefits from Ending Child Marriage –
Selected Global Estimates
                                                        Annual Benefit    Annual Benefit
                                                             in 2015         in 2030
(1) Welfare benefit from reduced population growth         $22 billion     $566 billion
(2) Benefit from reduced under-five mortality              $42 billion      $82 billion
(3) Benefit from reduced under-five stunting                $9 billion      $16 billion
Sources: Wodon (2017b) for (1); Wodon (2017d) for (2) and (3).

12. In addition to global cost estimates related to changes in population growth
    and child health that would result from ending child marriage, the study
    provides cost estimates for some other impacts for a subset of countries.
    These estimates are calculated for budget savings to government education budgets
    that would result from slower lower population growth and for increased earnings for
    women if child marriage were ended. As for global estimates, these figures should
    be considered tentative given that they are based on statistical estimations which
    have standard errors as well as costing assumptions.

      Budget savings from lower fertility and population growth: Budget savings can be
       reaped from lower population growth. For the provision of public education, for
       example, benefits start to be reaped six years after child marriage and early
       childbirths are ended, since this is the time needed for fewer children to enter
       primary school. Savings are estimated as the reduction in the anticipated cost of
       reaching universal secondary education by 2030 in 18 countries. The benefits
       increase over time and could reach up to $17 billion in current US dollars by
       2030 if just these 18 countries were to achieve universal secondary education by
       then (Wodon, 2017e). While this is an upper bound estimate of potential savings
       for these countries (as they may not reach universal secondary education by
       2030), the estimates globally would be significantly larger since only 18 countries
       are included. When considering the elimination only of child marriage (as
       opposed to child marriage and early childbirths), the estimates would be a bit
       smaller.

      Education and earnings: The costs related to earnings losses for women married
       as children are high. These costs are related for the most part to the fact that
       child marriage curtails the educational attainment of some of the girls who marry
       early, and higher educational attainment leads to higher expected lifetime
       earnings. The gains in earnings and productivity that would have been observed
       today if women had not married early for a core set of 15 countries are estimated
       at $26 billion (Savadogo and Wodon, 017c). These gains would increase over


                                           9
       time due to population growth and higher standards of living and wages in most
       countries.

Box 4: Why Are Some Impacts and Costs Large and Others Smaller?

In economic terms, the fact that child marriage or early childbirths may only lead to a
small reduction in national measures for some outcomes does not imply that the
economic costs associated with those impacts are small. For example, across countries,
child marriage tends to reduce the earnings of populations as a whole by about one
percent on average. One percent may not appear to be a very large proportion, but the
associated economic cost is very large, and for the women and households affected, the
losses in earnings have even larger impacts.

This said, when considering costs at the national level, the largest impacts of child
marriage in terms of their economic costs tend to be related to fertility and population
growth, education and earnings, and the health of the children born of young mothers.
These impacts are closely related. Particularly when use of modern contraception is low,
child marriage leads to early childbirths, which increases health risks for mothers and
the children born of young mothers. The timing of child marriages and early childbirths
conflicts with the ability of girls to continue their education, which depresses earnings in
adulthood. All those effects are at work at the time of marriage or soon after. By
contrast, impacts in other domains – from violence to labor force participation and
decision-making, are observed throughout a woman’s life and depend on many other
factors than whether girls marry early. For example, intimate partner violence and a lack
of decision-making ability are the result, at least in part, of widespread gender inequality.
Child marriage contributes to perpetuating gender inequality, but delaying marriage by a
few years may not be sufficient on its own to fundamentally change gender roles and
social norms. This is probably why in these domains, while ending child marriage may
help, impacts tend to be smaller.

Source: Wodon (2017a).

                              CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS

13. While economic costs should not be the sole rationale for investment
    decisions related to child marriage, they are an important consideration.
    Ending child marriage is the right thing to do from a moral and ethical standpoint.
    The eradication of child marriage has also been identified as a priority, as
    exemplified by its inclusion in the Sustainable Development Goals and increasing
    attention to the issue from a human rights perspective (UN General Assembly 2016).
    The primary motivation for ending the practice should be the fact that it may lead to
    substantial risks and suffering for the girls who marry early and their children. Child
    marriage curtails the opportunities provided to young girls and their children. The
    evidence of the negative impacts of the practice on a wide range of outcomes is
    clear. But in addition, the practice has large economic costs. The hope is that the
    demonstration of these costs will help generate higher investments aiming to end
    child marriage and early childbirths, and promote instead girls’ education.

14. Importantly, the negative impacts of child marriage tend to be larger for the
    poor and the likelihood of marrying early is also higher among the poor.


                                           10
   Although this is not discussed in details in this study, it can be shown that the poor
   are likely to suffer more from some of the negative impacts of child marriage than
   the better off due to various constraints they face (such as barriers in access to
   health and education services). In addition, girls living in poverty are more likely to
   face child marriage. This implies that ending child marriage would benefit the poor
   the most. As a result, implementing programs and policies to end the practice would
   reduce poverty and also be pro-poor.

15. While this study does not focus on interventions that could be implemented to
    end child marriage, the literature provides insights in terms of what may work.
    A discussion of some potential interventions is provided in Annex 4. In one of the
    first reviews child marriage prevention programs, Malhotra et al. (2013) identify five
    types of strategies that can be used to prevent or delay early marriage: (1)
    Empowering girls with information, skills, and support networks; (2) Educating and
    mobilizing parents and community members; (3) Enhancing the accessibility and
    quality of formal schooling for girls; (4) Offering economic support and incentives for
    girls and their families; and (5) Fostering an enabling legal and policy framework. A
    more recent review by Kalamar et al. (2016) suggests that interventions to promote
    education, including cash transfers, school vouchers, free school uniforms,
    reductions in school fees, teacher training, and life skills curricula, are among the
    most likely to help. In some cases, the evidence is mixed, but in many cases such
    interventions are found to reduce child marriage, or at least increase the age at first
    marriage. This is also underscored under the tipping point approach suggested by
    Brown (2012).

16. In practice, interventions must be adapted to the context of each country or
    even region within a country. Interventions need to be adapted to country context,
    but they also need to target specific groups in order to be effective. As an example,
    Perlman et al. (2017a) propose as a first cut for a typology of potential programs
    according to four main target groups whose needs tend to differ: (1) younger girls in
    school and not married; (2) young girls out of school but not yet married; (3) older
    girls still in school and not married; and (4) Married girls out of school. Many of the
    interventions proposed by Perlman et al. (2017a) as well as the broader literature
    are already being implemented or at least tested under projects supported by donors
    such as the World Bank, UNFPA, and UNICEF. It will be important to learn from
    these experiences and ultimately scale up the interventions that prove most
    successful.

Box 5: Economic Impacts of Child Marriage for Boys

This study focuses on the impact of child marriage on child brides, their children, and
societies at large. Information related to child marriage among boys is limited, but
available data indicate that girls are far more likely to marry before the age of 18 than
boys in every region of the world. This does not mean that child marriage does not also
affect boys. Boys may have to drop out of school when they marry early, and they may
take low-paying jobs in order to support their newly formed family, further perpetuating
poverty. While the economic impacts and costs of child marriage for boys are likely to
be lower than for girls, they may still be substantial. Estimating their orders of magnitude
could be the topic of further work.




                                          11
                                      CHAPTER I
                                    INTRODUCTION

        Ending child marriage is a target under the Sustainable Development Goals, yet
        investments to end the practice remain limited. In many countries, governments
        have begun to adopt strategies to end the practice and investments are being
        made to that effect, including by promoting girls’ education. Still, more could be
        done. In order to inspire greater commitments towards ending child marriage,
        this study documents the impacts of the practice more comprehensively than
        existing studies. The study also estimates a number of monetary costs
        associated with these impacts globally. Separate country reports are being
        prepared at the country level. This first chapter provides the rationale and
        framework for this study.

Ethiopia: “I use to sit and think about building a very big house with brick walls… My
grandmother used to take me to Bahir Dar… I used to see the kinds of houses they
have there and used to think ‘I will have this and I will a build a house like this.’ That was
my dream, but what made my dream to not come true is this harmful tradition of child
marriage. This old outdated culture that took away my dream.” (ICRW, 2017)

Burkina Faso: “Girls should read and write. But what I consider as a priority is marriage.
At 16 years of age, the place of a woman is in the home with her husband and children.
If she starts to work she will abandon her family” (Gemignani and Wodon, 2017).

17. Child marriage is defined as a marriage or union taking place before the age of
    181. The practice has a wide range of negative impacts for girls, their children,
    and communities. The practice primarily affects girls and is widely considered a a
    violation of human rights2. It profoundly affects the girls who marry early as well as
    their children in multiple ways. Child marriage leads women to have children earlier
    and more children over their lifetime than if they had married later. It affects girls ’
    educational attainment and literacy negatively, thereby curtailing future opportunities
    for them to compete for well-paying jobs. Child marriage also leads to higher health
    risks for young mothers and their children. Finally, it may reduce voice and agency
    for women and it may also increase other risks such as the risks of intimate partner
    violence and of sexually transmitted infections, including HIV. These impacts have
    negative consequences not only for girls, but also for their children and for
    communities and societies as a whole.



1The threshold of 18 years to define child marriage is used in a number of conventions, treaties,
and international agreements, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention
on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against Women, and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, as well as resolutions of the UN Human Rights Council and most recently, the UN
General Assembly.
2 As enshrined in UN General Assembly Resolution 71/175 of December, 2016, “child, early and
forced marriage is a harmful practice that violates, abuses or impairs human rights.”



                                             12
18. Worldwide, the prevalence of child marriage has been declining slowly over
    time, but due to population growth, the total number of child brides continues
    to increase in many countries. Trends in child marriage worldwide show a decline,
    although the decline is slow. As a result, today child marriage affects more than
    41,000 girls each day, especially in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. In a set of
    25 countries that account for the bulk of child marriage in the world, estimates from
    this study suggest that more than one in three girls still marry before the age of 18,
    and almost one in five have their first child before the age of 18 (this is referred to as
    an early childbirth). The prevalence at the global level is lower, as countries not
    included in the table tend to have much lower rates of child marriage on average
    than the countries included in the table. Still, the trends in table 1.1 suggest that
    without decisive interventions to end the practice, child marriage is likely to remain
    high for the foreseeable future.

19. There is broad support to end child marriage on moral and ethical grounds,
    but while adopting legal provisions for the minimum age at marriage is a first
    step, this is not sufficient to create lasting change. Increasing awareness of the
    negative impacts of child marriage has led the practice to be prohibited by law in
    many countries. Ending child marriage is a target adopted under the Sustainable
    Development Goals (Goal 5.3). But laws and policies are not enough. Targeted
    interventions are needed to end the practice. These must not only to deal with
    economic constraints contributing to child marriage, but also to tackle social norms
    and cultural traditions that contribute to the persistence of the practice in many parts
    of the world. Such interventions require significant and long-term financial
    investments and political will. While a number of countries have adopted projects
    and in some cases national strategies to end child marriage, insufficient domestic
    and donor resources are being allocated to programs and policies that could reduce
    child marriage over time. In other words, while there is a consensus that child
    marriage has a wide range of negative impacts, investments to end the practice are
    limited.

20. The lack of adequate investments in many countries to end child marriage is
    likely due in part to the fact that the economic case for ending the practice has
    not yet been made forcefully. The fact that child marriage may be primarily
    perceived as a social or human rights issue, and not necessarily an economic issue,
    may be one of the reasons why ending the practice has not received sufficiently
    targeted investment. The objective of this global study is to document in detail some
    of the main impacts of child marriage and early childbirths on development
    outcomes as well as the costs associated with those impacts. The study was
    prepared together with a dozen country studies under the Economic Impacts of Child
    Marriage (EICM) project (see www.costsofchildmarriage.org). By documenting the
    economic impacts and costs of child marriage, this study supports the case for
    investments by governments and other stakeholders to reduce child marriage.

21. A simple conceptual framework guides the analysis. The framework developed
    for this study is shown in Figure 1.1 (for information on the actual methodology used
    for the study, see Annex 1). Five domains of impacts of child marriage are
    considered: (i) fertility and population growth; (ii) educational attainment and
    learning; (iii) labor force participation; (iv) participation, decision-making, and
    investments; and (v) health, nutrition, and violence. In turn, impacts in these


                                           13
   domains may lead to three types of costs or benefits related to (i) earnings,
   productivity, and household consumption per capita; (ii) public and private
   expenditures (mostly for education and health); and (iii) non-monetary social and
   health costs. These impacts and associated costs have broader consequences at
   the national level in terms of the perpetuation of extreme poverty and inequality.
   Annex 1 provides a more detailed visualization of the analysis undertaken in order to
   document the pathways – both direct and indirect - through which child marriage as
   well as early childbirths may affect child brides, their children, their community, and
   society at large.

Figure 1.1: Framework for Assessing the Economic Impacts of Child Marriage




                                Source: Wodon et al. (2015).

22. Apart from measuring the impacts of child marriage, this study also considers
    the impacts of early childbirths. In this study, early childbirth is defined in two
    different ways. At the level of women, we define early childbirth as having a first child
    before the age of 18. At the level of children, we define early childbirth as being born
    of a mother younger than 18. While the framework in Figure 1.1 does not explicitly
    mention early childbirths, several of the negative impacts of child marriage on girls
    marrying early and their children are related to early childbirths, which is often but
    not always a consequence of child marriage. This is especially the case for the
    impacts of child marriage through early childbirths on fertility and health outcomes,
    and it may be the case for education outcomes. Therefore, the impacts of both child
    marriage and early childbirths are discussed in the study. As appropriate, a
    distinction is made for the impacts of each (child marriage or early childbirths). This
    also means that for several impacts, an assessment is made of the share of the
    impacts – when occurring through early childbirths – that can be attributed to child
    marriage. More details on the methodology used for the analysis are provided in
    Annex 1.




                                           14
Box 1.1: What Do We Mean by “Impacts” and Associated Costs?

The aim of this study is to estimate the impacts of child marriage on a wide range of
development outcomes and the economic costs associated with some of these impacts.
The term “impact” is used for simplicity, but one must be careful about not necessarily
inferring causality. Estimates of impacts in this study are typically obtained through
regression analysis aiming to isolate the potential impact of child marriage or early
childbirths on various outcomes controlling for other factors affecting those outcomes. In
the literature, this approach is known as “association studies”. What is measured is a
statistical association between child marriage or early childbirths and outcomes. This is
not necessarily an impact as could be observed with a randomized control trial. Since
child marriage cannot be randomized, the study must rely on regression analysis to
estimate impacts, but there is always a risk of bias in the measures of likely impacts.

Based on measures of likely impacts, costs associated with some of these impacts are
computed. These costs are based on a number of assumptions that could be debated,
including in some cases discount rates. Therefore, cost estimates only represent an
order of magnitude of potential costs, as opposed to precise estimations.

Source: Wodon (2017a); See also Annex 1.

23. The study is based fro the most part on existing data, with additional data
    collection in three countries to document selected impacts. Demographic and
    Health Surveys have information on child marriage or early childbirths (Box 1.2)
    which can be used to measure the impacts of child marriage on a wide range of
    outcomes as well as (with cost data) associated monetary costs. For the impact of
    child marriage on earnings, simulations are carried with the World Bank’s I2D2
    database. In addition, a number of other surveys and data sources are used on a
    country by country basis, and for Niger and Ethiopia, a complementary survey was
    implemented specifically for this study. Qualitative analysis is also based on both
    existing data (including through reference to published qualitative studies) and new
    data collected for this study in Niger, Nepal, and Ethiopia. More information on data
    sources and their use for estimations is provided in Annex 2.

24. The structure of this report broadly follows the conceptual framework, with a
    chapter providing a rapid contextual analysis of child marriage followed by
    four chapters on its domains of impacts and a conclusion. Chapter 2 discusses
    the extent of child marriage and early childbirths, as well as some of the factors
    leading to child marriage. The next four chapters consider the five domains of
    impacts of child marriage listed in Figure 1.1 (education and labor force participation
    are combined in one chapter because of the close relationship between education
    and earnings). In each of these chapters, analysis is provided to measure the impact
    of child marriage and/or early childbirths. For some of the impacts, an assessment of
    the associated economic costs is provided. In some cases, contemporaneous costs
    are provided. In other cases, costs from 2015 to 2030 are estimated. The year 2030
    is chosen because it corresponds to the target date for the completion of the
    Sustainable Development Goals. A conclusion summarizes the findings. A series of
    annexes provide more information on methodology and data, as well as on
    programmatic approaches to end child marriage.


                                          15
                           CHAPTER 2
              CHILD MARRIAGE AND EARLY CHILDBIRTHS

        This chapter provides estimates of the extent of child marriage and early
        childbirths in 25 countries. Trends over time in child marriage and early
        childbirths are estimated, as is the share of early childbirths likely due to child
        marriage. A brief discussion of some of the factors that may lead to child
        marriage and early childbirths is also provided. Finally, an assessment is made
        for the prevalence of child marriage and early childbirths by quintiles of
        household wealth and, for illustrative purposes, by geographic location for a few
        countries.

Uganda: “They get married because they are looking for a way of helping their families,
which are poor. [Others] are impregnated by older men [due to sex for money] and they
are forced to get married to them because after a girl has produced before getting
married, it is hard to get a man for marriage.” (Schlecht et al., 2013).

Niger: “Age is not a criteria for girls’ marriage. There is no tradition that says a girl must
be married at a particular age. We judge a girl ready when her mother notices that she
is menstruating and her breasts have developed” (Perlman et al., 2017b).


                    EXTENT OF CHILD MARRIAGE AND EARLY CHILDBIRTHS

25. Child marriage has decreased in the developing world fairly slowly but due to
    population growth, the total number of child brides continues to increase.
    According to DHS data for about 60 countries, in the past 30 years the prevalence of
    child marriage decreased by only 11 percentage points in those countries (Nguyen
    and Wodon, 2015; see also UNFPA, 2012, and UNICEF, 2014). For this study, new
    estimates of the prevalence of child marriage were prepared for 25 countries that
    account for a majority of child marriages globally. As shown in table 2.1, the share of
    women ages 18-223 who married before the age of 18 in those 25 countries was
    36.7 percent in the latest period available (the dates of the surveys differ between
    countries, but estimates are based on population data for 2014). This share is lower
    than the share observed among older age groups, and the rate of decline that has
    accelerated in recent years. Yet rates of child marriage remain high. In addition,
    almost one in five women ages 18-22 have their first child before the age of 18 in
    those countries. There has also been a decrease in this share in comparison to older

3 The prevalence of child marriage, sometimes referred to as prevalence, has been estimated in
previous reports among others by UNICEF and UNFPA for women ages 20 to 24. In this study,
however, the analysis is carried out for women ages 18 to 22, which tracks more closely the
conditions prevailing in countries at the time of the survey. Measures of child marriage could also
be estimated solely among girls 18 years of age, but using a larger bracket in terms of years
provides more robustness in terms of statistical results. In addition to estimating the prevalence of
the practice, it is useful to estimate other measures following the approach outlined in Nguyen and
Wodon (2012, 2015). These other measures are available in background work.



                                              16
    women. In some countries, a substantial share of early childbirths at the level of
    women or children (i.e., children born of mothers younger than 18) may take place
    outside of marriage. In most countries however, as will be discussed below, early
    childbirths are a direct consequence of child marriage and the two phenomena are
    closely related. Table 2.1 also provides the share of girls marrying or having their
    first child before age 15, with overall similar trends over time.

Table 2.1: Trends in Child Marriage and Early Childbirths for Mothers, 25 High
Prevalence Countries – Estimates Weighted by Population Size (%)
                               Child marriage (women)             Early childbirth (women)
                           Before 18 years Before 15 years    Before 18 years Before 15 years
All women ages 18-49            47.01           16.95              26.33              4.90
Age group in 2012
18-22 years                      36.66                10.62       18.92            2.80
23-30 years                      45.75                16.29       26.91            4.99
31-40 years                      51.63                19.63       29.47            5.92
41-49 years                      54.50                21.61       29.31            5.68
Source: Male and Wodon (2017a). Data source: DHS.
Note: The list of countries is provided in table 2.2.

Box 2.1: Defining Child Marriage and Early Childbirths

Child marriage is defined as a marriage or union taking place before a boy or a girl
reaches the age of 18. The practice affects mostly girls, so the focus is on girls in this
study. The term early childbirth is used in the study in two different ways. At the level of
women/mothers, early childbirth is defined as having a first child before the age of 18. At
the level of children, early childbirth is defined as a child being born of a mother younger
than 18 at the time of the child’s birth. Because DHS surveys have been vetted for many
years and provide estimates that can be compared to those obtained in other countries,
these are the surveys used for measuring child marriage and early childbirths in this
chapter.

Source: On the relationship between child marriage and early childbirths, see Wodon,
Male, and Onagoruwa (2017).

26. It is useful for perspective to compare results obtained for various countries.
    Depending on the topic, a total of 15 to 25 countries are considered for international
    comparisons in this study. As mentioned earlier, for comparisons of trends in the
    prevalence of child marriage, detailed analysis has been conducted for 25 countries.
    The first four columns in table 2.2 provide trends over time in the prevalence of child
    marriage among women ages 18 to 22 years in the larger set of 25 countries. The
    prevalence of child marriage measured among women ages 18 to 22 ranges from
    16.5 percent in Egypt to 76.8 percent in Niger, according to the latest publicly
    available DHS in each country. In most countries, the prevalence of the practice has
    been reduced over time. This is visualized in Figure 2.1 by comparing the
    prevalence of the practice among women ages 23-30 with those ages 18-22. Most
    countries lie below the diagonal (plain line), suggesting a decline over time. On
    average, the regression through the scatter plot (dotted line) suggests a reduction of
    11 percent in prevalence between the two age groups (coefficient of 0.89, not
    weighted by population shares). But there are exceptions, including for example for
    several Sahelian countries that have high prevalence rates.


                                                17
Table 2.2: Child Marriage and Early Childbirth (for Mothers) by Age Group (%)
                             Share of women with first
                                                             Share of women with first child
                          marriage before age 18 by age
                                                              before age 18 by age group
                                      group
                        18-22 23-30 31-40 41-49             18-22   23-30     31-40    41-49
Bangladesh                59.4    71.9     76.4      82.3    33.7    48.3      49.9     46.3
Burkina Faso              49.8     52      53.5       51     25.2    30.1      29.1     27.7
Chad                      68.7    73.5     73.8      69.7    44.8     49       48.9     40.3
Cote d’Ivoire              32     32.9     36.5      42.7    29.7    31.2      33.6     39.9
Dem. Rep. of Congo        35.9    40.3      42       47.9    25.6    26.3      28.6     32.6
Dominican Republic        34.6    40.7      40       35.2    20.4    27.1      25.1     20.9
Egypt                     16.5    18.6     23.6      30.3     6.6     7.8      10.9     13.3
Ethiopia                  36.4     55      63.8       71     18.7    32.1      39.5     42.5
Ghana                     17.2    24.1     28.7      34.2    15.5    18.6      21.5     25.4
Guinea                    51.1    56.5     60.1      60.1     41     41.6      43.6     37.7
India                      40     51.5     58.6      58.2    17.8    28.5      31.6     28.4
Indonesia                 16.2    20.3     27.3      39.4     6.4     9.6      13.8     23.2
Malawi                    45.9     51      51.3      55.3    31.7    35.5       35      38.6
Mali                      59.9    56.3     46.9      42.8    44.9    42.2       31      31.9
Mauritania                35.2     45      59.6      60.1    19.8    26.5      32.5     33.2
Mozambique                51.5    46.5     39.3       42      39     39.6      31.7     33.8
Nepal                     38.5    48.7     56.7      59.4    17.4    23.2      23.7     19.5
Niger                     76.8    76.1     76.6      80.1    47.1    47.4      42.7     37.2
Nigeria                   42.1     47      47.8       51      28     32.1      31.1     34.4
Pakistan                 18.73   27.04    36.83     43.15     6.8    11.7      15.5     18.6
Peru                      17.3    21.7     21.3      22.7    14.4    15.4      15.8     16.6
Rep. of Congo             34.0    33.2     33.2      39.6    31.8    28.0      31.7     34.7
Senegal                   31.4    33.1     35.2      39.6    17.2    20.4      19.7     22.1
Uganda                    36.5    46.3     53.3      52.8    28.6    39.2      42.6     40.4
Zambia                    28.5    39.5     44.4      51.5    29.5    33.1      33.8     37.6
Source: Male and Wodon (2017a). Data source: DHS.

Box 2.2: Measuring Child Marriage and Early Childbirths

For simplicity, only the share of girls marrying before the age of 18, and the share of
girls having their first child before the age of 18 are reported as measures of child
marriage and early childbirths in this study. However, the impacts of child marriage and
early childbirths on development outcomes tend to be more severe when girls marry
very early. Higher order measures of child marriage and early childbirths inspired from
the poverty literature can be defined to properly take into account how early girls marry
or have a child. These measures are available in the background papers for this study.

Source: On higher order measures of child marriage, see Nguyen and Wodon (2012);
Male and Wodon (2017a).

27. For early childbirths as well, there has been a decline in prevalence in many,
    but not all countries. Table 2.2 also provides trends in early childbirth at the level
    of women in the 25 countries. In the age group 18-22, the prevalence of early
    childbirths at the level of women ranges from just under seven percent in Egypt to
    47.1 percent in Niger. As was the case with child marriage, and as shown in Figure
    2.2, the prevalence of early childbirths has been reduced in recent years in many
    countries. The regression through the scatter plot (dotted line) suggests a reduction
    (not weighted by the population shares of the various countries) of about 13 percent


                                          18
   in prevalence between women ages 18-22 and those ages 23-30. But in some
   countries, no reduction has been achieved.




                    Source: Male and Wodon (2017a). Data source: DHS.


             SHARE OF EARLY CHILDBIRTHS LIKELY DUE TO CHILD MARRIAGE

28. Since several negative impacts of child marriage occur through early
    childbirths, it is important to assess the share of early childbirths that are
    likely due to child marriage. While factors leading to early childbirths differ
    between countries, child marriage is clearly a major factor at play. Table 2.2 shows a
    strong relationship between the prevalence of child marriage and early childbirths
    across countries, which varies between countries. If most early childbirths are due to


                                         19
    child marriage, we would expect the measures of early childbirths for women to be
    lower than those for child marriage since a girl marrying at, say, age 17, is not likely
    to have her first child before 18. This is typically the case, as expected. But there are
    a few exceptions4.

29. Estimating the share of early childbirths at the level of mothers likely due to
    child marriage is not straightforward, but simple statistical approaches can be
    used as an approximation. The relationships between child marriage and early
    childbirths are complex. For some girls, having one or more children before the age
    of 18 may be the consequence of child marriage. For others, marriage may result
    from an early childbirth or pregnancy. For yet others, early childbirths may not be
    related to child marriage at all. Still, using simple assumptions, it is feasible to get a
    rough measure of the share of early childbirths likely due to child marriage (see Box
    2.3 for the methodological approach used to derive estimates). It is important
    however to note that our methodology does not establish causality – only plausibility.

Box 2.3: Measuring the Share of Early Childbirths Due to Child Marriage

A simple statistical approach is used the estimate the share of early childbirths likely due
to child marriage. Consider first early childbirths as it is defined at the level of mothers
(having a first child before age 18). An upper bound for the share of early childbirths for
mothers likely due to child marriage can be defined as one minus the share of mothers
who had their first child before the age of 18 but did not marry before 18. A lower bound
can be defined by subtracting from the upper bound the share of women who did marry
before the age of 18, but had their first child less than nine months after their first
marriage, which could suggest that marriage was not the cause of the early childbirth.

An intermediate estimate could use a threshold of six months instead of nine months for
the comparison of the timing of the first birth and first marriage. Indeed, if a girl/woman
does not know for sure that she is pregnant, the pregnancy may not affect the decision
to marry. In addition, in some countries, even in traditional contexts, cohabitation and
sexual activity is permitted before a formal marriage as long as the marriage has been
agreed to. The same approach and definitions can be used when looking at the share of
early childbirths as defined at the level of children as opposed to mothers.

Essentially, we consider early childbirths as likely to be due to child marriage when they
occur within marriage (and more specifically after six months of marriage under the
intermediate estimate). While this approach has the benefit of being simple, it remains
tentative and additional work would be useful to triangulate the results with a more
detailed framework, for example based on Bongaarts’ model.

Source: Wodon, Male and Onagoruwa (2017).




4 In some countries such as Cote d’Ivoire, the prevalence of early childbirth and child marriage are
close to each other, suggesting that many early childbirths may take place outside of marriage. In
Zambia, the prevalence of early childbirth is higher than that of child marriage. By contrast, in a
few countries, early childbirths are rare even if child marriage is not. This is the case in Egypt.


                                              20
30. For the 25 countries considered in this chapter, estimates suggest that at the
    level of mothers, three in four early childbirths may be due to child marriage.
    At the level of children, 84.4 percent of early childbirths may be due to child
    marriage. Across all 25 countries, the share of women having their first child before
    18 due to child marriage is 75.2 percent according to the intermediate estimate
    defined in Box 2.2. In addition, 84.4 percent of children born of mothers younger
    than 18 are attributed to child marriage. These intermediate estimates are provided
    in Figure 2.3. These estimates may be affected by how the variables are measured
    in the DHS as compared to existing practices in the country. But they do suggest
    that a large majority of early childbirths are likely due to child marriage. Ending child
    marriage should therefore have a major positive impact towards reducing early
    childbirths, whether at the level of mothers or that of children.




               Source: Wodon, Male, and Onagoruwa (2017). Data source: DHS.

31. It is however important to note that there are differences between and within
    countries in the relationship between child marriage and early childbirths.
    Especially in Latin America, which is not an area of focus in this study, as well as in
    parts of sub-Saharan Africa, there appears to be a trend towards earlier sexual


                                           21
    activity along with an increase in the average age at first marriage, suggesting less
    of a direct connection between marriage and sexual activity as well as early
    childbearing5. This trend also suggests the need for policy and programmatic
    interventions to help meet the needs of adolescents for sexual and reproductive
    health information and services (which would be important no matter the age at
    marriage). Indeed, providing adolescents with access to comprehensive sexuality
    education and adolescent-friendly reproductive health information and services are
    critical ways to ensure that adolescents do not face unintended pregnancies within
    or outside of marriage.


              FACTORS LEADING TO CHILD MARRIAGE AND EARLY CHILDBIRTHS

32. Multiple factors contribute to the perpetuation of child marriage and early
    childbirths. Factors leading to child marriage and early childbirths include socio-
    economic factors such as poverty, a lack of educational and employment
    opportunities for girls, and cultural factors as well as social norms. In some societies,
    it is often an “either/or” option between getting married or remaining in school.
    Recent qualitative evidence also indicates that child marriage may also be related to
    elopement and “love marriages,” which often stem from adolescents’ desires for
    sexual relationships in contexts where sex outside of marriage is not culturally
    permitted (e.g., Human Rights Watch 2016, Murithi, 2016). As noted in multiple
    reviews (e.g., UNICEF 2005; National Research Council 2005; Santhya et al. 2006;
    Jain et al. 2007; Malhotra et al. 2011; Vogelstein 2013; UNFPA 2012; UNICEF 2014;
    Klugman et al. 2014; Parsons et al., 2015; Wodon, 2015a, 2017a), the importance of
    social and cultural norms that relate to gender roles and gender inequality cannot be
    understated. When overlaid with a culture that assigns specific gender roles to men
    and women, poverty and a lack of education and formal employment opportunities
    often leave few options for girls but to marry early, contributing further to a lack of
    empowerment for women in adulthood and the perpetuation of child marriage and
    patterns of gender discrimination.

33. Causality related to child marriage is complex. This can be illustrated with the
    relationship between child marriage and poverty. The drivers of child marriage
    and early childbirths are complex, and causality often runs both ways, with child
    marriage affecting various outcomes, but some of those outcomes also potentially
    affecting child marriage. This can be illustrated in the case of poverty. On the one
    hand, girls from poorer socio-economic backgrounds are more likely to marry early,
    but on the other hand, marrying early may lead to a higher likelihood of being poor
    later in life. The pathways through which poverty may increase the likelihood of
    marrying early are themselves multiple. When poverty makes it hard for a household
    to send all children to school, prevailing gender norms may mean that boys receive

5In terms of the validity of the estimations, it should also be noted that at the margin ending child
marriage could lead to more births among young mothers outside of marriage. The extent to
which this could be observed would need to be estimated using more advanced models as
opposed to simple statistics. But the simple statistics provided in table 2.3 do suggest that even if
such behavioral responses were to be observed in some cases, it is still likely that ending child
marriage should lead in most countries to a major reduction in early childbirths. It is important to
note, however, that ending child marriage would not be sufficient for avoiding all early pregnancies
and childbirths.



                                              22
   preferential treatment for household investments in schooling, at least at the
   secondary level. Moreover, girls may be kept home from school to help take care of
   the housework that needs to be completed. Parents in traditional societies may
   place a lower value on girls than boys simply because the benefits of educating girls
   are likely to accrue to in-laws, while the benefits of educating boys are more likely to
   benefit the family of origin. In many cultures, girls are likely to have to marry early
   because parents prefer not to take the risk of their daughter becoming sexually
   active outside of marriage. In addition, a lack of formal employment opportunities for
   young women may mean that secondary education is devalued, such that parents
   find little benefit to investing in girls’ education. Further, in countries where many
   poor families face food insecurity, having a girl marry early gives that family one less
   mouth to feed.

34. Financial transactions around marriage may also contribute to the practice of
    child marriage, especially in contexts of poverty and vulnerability. In
    communities where the groom or his family pays a bride price at the time of
    marriage, which is often the case in parts of Africa, parents may benefit from
    marrying their daughters early if waiting increases bride prices. By contrast, in
    communities where the bride brings resources at the time of marriage (dowry, which
    is more prevalent in South Asia), the required dowry to be paid by parents may be
    lower if the bride is younger. Marrying a daughter at a younger age also reduces the
    investments that a family has to make in her education, without necessarily curtailing
    future returns to those investments if those returns benefit mostly the groom’s
    family. This may lead parents to reap immediate benefits from an early marriage
    even if this is not in the long term interest of the girl marrying early.

35. While poverty and vulnerability may contribute to child marriage, child
    marriage may also contribute to poverty. Early marriage leads girls to have
    children earlier and more children over their lifetime, which may reduce consumption
    per capita or per equivalent adult in the household in adulthood, thereby increasing
    the likelihood of being poor. Girls marrying early often must leave school and a lower
    education level is likely to curtail the girls’ earnings potential as adults. These are but
    two of the channels through which child marriage may lead to higher poverty. Given
    these relationships between poverty and child marriage, not all girls are equally likely
    to marry early, or have their first child early. Girls from poorer socio-economic
    backgrounds as well as girls from rural areas or lagging regions tend to be much
    more likely to marry early and/or have their first child before reaching 18 than girls
    from urban or more privileged backgrounds. This is true even if differences in the
    prevalence of child marriage and early childbirth between areas as well as by socio-
    economic status are not uniform across countries. The same can typically be said of
    early childbirths.

36. Qualitative work helps to understand why child marriage and early childbirths
    remain so entrenched, with many parents wishing to marry their daughters
    when they reach puberty. For example, in the case of Niger, the country with the
    highest prevalence of child marriage in the world, Perlman et al. (2017b) rely on
    ethnographic methods with researchers embedded in communities in the Maradi
    region for several months to better understand the factors leading to child marriage.
    They suggest that parents see marriage in part as a way to keep their daughters
    safe. Menarche and the development of secondary sexual characteristics are seen


                                            23
   by girls and parents as key factors in determining readiness for marriage. If she is
   not enrolled in school—due to disinterest, failing the primary school completion
   exam, or lack of income to pay school fees—most parents would prefer seeing their
   daughter married than idle. This is especially true if she is receiving suitors or is
   perceived by parents to be flirting with boys. As a father expressed it: “The boys
   come the moment a girl begins to develop breasts. Even if you tell her not to go out
   at night, you won’t stop her. When she begins to have time for boys and is not
   interested in school is a clear indication that she wants to be married. The only safe
   thing to do is to marry her out before she does so herself.” (Perlman et al., 2017b).
   Other qualitative research in Nepal, Ethiopia and India, for example, also indicate
   that parents may marry off their daughter because they fear her being sexually
   active outside of marriage; perceive her the daughter’s value to be greater doing
   housework than studying for a job that does not exist; or to avoid paying the higher
   dowry that often comes with marrying off their daughter when she is older (Nanda,
   2016; ICRW, 2017). In yet other settings, such as Zambia, Uganda and Kenya, for
   example, a lack of comprehensive sexuality education and access to youth-friendly
   sexual and reproductive health services contributes to early pregnancies that very
   often lead to early marriage (Petroni et al., forthcoming).

Box 2.4: Minimum Legal Age for Marriage

The Convention on the Rights of the Child emphasizes the need for full and informed
consent for marriage, and notes that children do not have the capability to provide such
full and informed consent. This is one of the reasons why the age of 18 is recommended
as the minimum age for marriage. However, while many countries have adopted
legislation on the minimum age at marriage, often adopting 18 years as the age
threshold, enforcement of the legislation often remains week.

Source: Calimoutou and Wodon (2017); see also Calimoutou et al. (2016).

37. While legal reform on the minimum age at marriage is one of the strategies
    that can be used to prevent child marriage, support for the legal minimum age
    at marriage is low in some communities. In small scale combined qualitative and
    quantitative work carried in three rural communities in Burkina Faso by Gemignani
    and Wodon (2017), respondents were asked about their views regarding the
    country’s Family Code. Although not enforced (especially in rural areas), the Family
    Code includes laws governing marriage, divorce, children, dowry, succession, and
    inheritance. Many aspects of the Code are seen as controversial. Almost all
    respondents disagree about prohibitions against bride price which they view as a
    religious requirement. One of the provisions of the Code is the requirement of
    consent for marriage. In addition, the minimum age at marriage is set at 17 years for
    women and 20 years for men. Again respondents often disagree with these laws in
    two of the three communities in Tenkodogo District and Djibo District, but not in the
    third. Further, in the majority of countries, customary or traditional law is permitted to
    supersedes national laws regarding marriage, so religious authorities, for example,
    are empowered to permit child marriages (Patton, et al., 2016).

38. There is often heterogeneity within countries on attitudes towards girls’
    education and marriage. A study by Wodon et al. (2016) on the relationship
    between child marriage and education in Uganda relies in part on focus groups and


                                           24
   key informants in 14 districts. In some communities, there is virtually equal support
   for the education of boys and girls. Support for girls’ education in those communities
   stems from the belief that “all children are equal so all deserve an equal right to
   education as vital to all children in the community for the sake of self-independence
   in the future life”. Education is seen as influencing and shaping character, which
   motivates parents to give equal attention to all children irrespective of their sex: In
   some communities, educating girls was also seen as a way to fortify them against
   the risks and uncertainties of today’s volatile and fragile marriage institution.
   Educated girls were considered more likely to be able to have an independent life if
   confronted with marriage problems. In another community, the education of girls was
   considered important for future generations, as community members explained that
   if you take girls to school, they will become better mothers for their own children. In
   other communities, however, support for girls’ education remains weaker than is the
   case for boys. In those communities, preference for investing in the education of
   boys is rooted in cultural frames considering sons as natural heirs. Parents often
   prefer educating boys because girls must inevitably get married, and the wealth they
   accumulate benefits in-laws. By comparison, boys remain, even after marriage,
   within the environment of their parents and help them through life. There is also a
   perception that girls are diverted from education by men at an early stage, so one
   would rather educate boys who will stay longer in school: “We are faced with long
   distances to primary schools. Girls on their way to school meet men who entice our
   daughters with money for sex. Later some get pregnant and drop out of school.”
   Another factor noted was the consequences of HIV-AIDS orphaning children and
   leaving them under the care of grandparents who are overwhelmed by the
   responsibility. As a result, some grandparents may exhort girls to “kula ogende
   ofumbirwe”, which means “grow up and get married quickly”. Overall, girls tend to be
   more vulnerable than boys in those communities. In Karamoja, the poorest area of
   the country, daughters may be seen as a source of wealth for parents. In the past,
   when there were plenty of cattle, bride wealth could reach 100 cows. Although this
   number has now been reduced considerably, girls are still a source of wealth, and
   their socialization at home is towards getting married as soon as possible. Puberty
   also makes it difficult for girls to continue to go to school, as does the division of
   labor in the home according to which girls tend to do most of the household chores.

39. Access to quality primary and secondary education is seen by many parents
    and community members as the most effective way to delay marriage. Quotes
    from the qualitative work conducted for this study in Niger illustrate this perception:
    “If a girl is getting a quality education her mind will be occupied with school and she
    won’t have time to spend with boys” (Perlman et al., 2017b). As a woman put it: “A
    girl does not reach the age of 20 without marrying, unless she is in school. But if one
    does not marry a girl before she is 20 years old while she is not in school, there is a
    problem. If she is not in school, she will marry at 14 years old” (ICRW, 2017). In
    some communities, parents know that education may lead to highly valued
    employment as a teacher or government employee, but in many other communities,
    such opportunities do not exist. Parents wishing to educate their daughters face an
    array of economic, social and institutional barriers, especially school costs (including
    both out-of-pocket and opportunity costs) and the poor quality of the education being
    provided. Without alternatives, early marriage is attractive to many girls and parents
    (Perlman et al. 2017b).




                                          25
40. Lack of employment opportunities for girls and structural weaknesses in
    education provision also contribute indirectly to early marriage. In some
    communities, girls have few career choices outside of marriage and child rearing. As
    a result, being a successful wife and mother may be the only life path to which they
    may be able to aspire. In other communities or countries, girls often have ambitions
    beyond being a good mother and wife, but a lack of meaningful social and economic
    alternatives makes it difficult for the girls and their families to envision viable
    alternatives to early marriage and childbearing. Structural weaknesses in the
    provision of education play an important role here. The fact that schools are of poor
    quality, sometimes far away, or costly for families in terms of both fees and lost
    hours of unpaid work for girls when they go to school may lead to de-prioritizing girls’
    education and may encourage parents to marry off their daughter, particularly if she
    is deemed to be of marriageable age and the suitor is acceptable. In Nepal, one
    woman described the condition of the school she attended before dropping out to
    get married as follows: “But there were not any facilities in the school of the village.
    There was no toilet. There was no desk and benches to sit and study. The students
    had to sit on the jute rags on the floor and study. The teachers were not good. They
    used to come as to pass the time and spend the day. They used to teach and go
    without even bothering students understood or not. They didn’t care if the student
    studies or not, they would make them pass anyways. They would make the students
    pass without teaching them well. (ICRW, 2017)

41. In many societies, polygamy tends to be associated with child marriage
    statistically speaking. Data from DHS surveys suggest that the share of women
    who marry early tends to be higher in polygamous as compared to monogamous
    households. There is also anecdotal qualitative evidence that polygamy is related to
    child marriage, at least when husbands take on an additional and younger wife.
    While additional research would be needed in order to establish the relationships
    after controlling for a range of other factors affecting child marriage, simple statistics
    suggest that there may indeed be a link. This is the case in several countries in table
    2.3, whether one considers women ages 18-22 or women ages 18-49.

Table 2.3: Child Marriage Rates among Monogamous and Polygamous Unions (%)
                         Women ages 18-22                    Women ages 18-49
                   Monogamous        Polygamous        Monogamous       Polygamous
                      union             union             union            union
 Burkina Faso         67.98             72.86             54.40            60.12
 DRC                  64.74             66.96             48.23            53.12
 Ethiopia             68.17             63.53             64.83            67.14
 Malawi               54.82             62.65             48.40            54.97
 Mali                 77.01             79.01             55.68            58.27
 Mozambique           67.94              72.5             49.91            50.57
 Nepal                 62.1             63.85             57.23            62.46
 Niger                85.93             89.67             78.35            83.35
 Nigeria              70.21              84.7             49.23            70.06
 ROC                  59.53              69.4             40.58            45.41
 Uganda               57.41             63.67             52.49            56.29
 Zambia               57.51             71.74              48.3            57.92
Source: Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017h). Data source: DHS.




                                           26
                   PROFILE OF CHILD MARRIAGE BY LEVEL OF WEALTH

42. The relationship between poverty and child marriage is clear in a multi-country
    perspective. Household welfare can be measured in DHS surveys through a wealth
    index. In table 2.4, households across a number of countries are categorized in five
    quintiles from poorest to richest. Both child marriage and early childbirth are more
    likely among poorer groups, as expected. The differences in prevalence between
    socio-economic groups are visualized in Figures 2.4 and 2.5 where countries have
    been ranked on the horizontal axis according to the prevalence of child marriage or
    early childbirth in the bottom (poorest) quintile of well-being, with this prevalence
    represented with the top curve in the figure in orange. The bottom curve represents
    the prevalence of child marriage or early childbirth in the top (richest) quintile.
    Clearly, the prevalence of child marriage is lower across countries among higher
    socio-economic groups, but with some differences in ratios between quintiles.

Table 2.4: Child Marriage and Early Childbirth by Wealth Quintile, Ages 18-22 (%)
                      Share of women with first marriage     Share of women with first child
                          before age 18 by age group           before age 18 by age group
                       Q1      Q2      Q3      Q4     Q5     Q1     Q2     Q3     Q4     Q5
Bangladesh            74.4    67.1    60.7    57.1 43.6     50.6 41.0 36.1 27.5 19.9
Burkina Faso          65.7    63.8    59.9    52.9 25.5      40    32.7 27.4 26.8 11.3
Chad                  69.7    68.2    76.8    68.6 61.9     44.1 48.1 49.5 46.4 36.7
Cote d’Ivoire         55.8    39.2    31.4    31.1 15.4     50.6 45.3 28.8 22.9 14.5
Dem. Rep. Congo       51.6    40.1    44.8    34.2 16.5     34.1 26.6 30.3        24    16.7
Dominican Republic    59.1    51.7    31.6    23.5    11    35.6 32.2 16.5 13.8 6.0
Egypt                 19.4    21.4    24.2    13.8    3.7    0.8   0.81 0.64 0.64         0
Ethiopia              52.5    50.9    42.8    32.2 19.5      28    28.6    20    16.7 9.1
Ghana                 28.2    21.7    16.2    15.2    7.3   20.7 24.4 14.4 14.6 5.5
Guinea                73.4    70.6    59.7    46.7 22.8      50    59.9    47    38.5 21.4
India                 63.4    54.6    43.8     30    13.5   31.1 26.7 18.9 12.1 3.6
Indonesia             34.4    21.1    16.1    11.4    3.6   15.6    7.7    5.9    3.9    1.6
Malawi                 57     56.9    53.8    43.5 22.9     35.8 36.4 36.2 32.3 20.3
Mali                  74.9    68.7    72.4    57.7 36.8     54.8 50.5 50.2 48.2 27.7
Mauritania            42.6    45.1    35.6    28.7 15.6     22.8 26.3 18.3        20     7.3
Mozambique            63.2    60.1    65.4    54.5 24.4     45.4 36.9 49.3        43    24.7
Nepal                 53.6    49.1    47.9     32    14.5   25.1 24.2 20.9 14.3 5.2
Niger                 85.2    85.8    86.3    85.1 49.2     54.5 54.5 52.8 48.1 30.9
Nigeria               80.5    63.4    36.3    25.3 10.4     54.1 40.1      26    15.6 7.4
Pakistan             35.74 27.63 17.03 11.43 7.31           12.8 10.6 7.4         3.3     2
Peru                  37.8    29.6    13.3     9.7    4.8   30.6 24.7 12.2        6.8    4.7
Rep. of Congo         46.7    44.6    37.8    27.2 19.8     45.4 39.8 36.0 27.3 16.2
Senegal               56.9    44.2    32.8     21    13.3   33.1 25.6 20.2 11.2 3.5
Uganda                54.4    49.9    40.5    29.9 19.9     41.6 36.6 31.3 21.8 18.9
Zambia                48.4    42.3    34.5    21.9    8.8   42.1 42.7 34.2 25.9 13.5
Source: Male and Wodon (2017a). Data source: DHS.




                                          27
            Countries ranked by increasing prevalence of child marriage in Q1
                 Source: Male and Wodon (2017a). Data source: DHS.
                    Note: Q5 = richest quintile, Q1 = poorest quintile.

43. An important implication of patterns by wealth status is that a substantial
    share of the benefits of ending child marriage and early childbirths would
    accrue to the poor. The costs associated with the impacts of child marriage and
    early childbirths on development outcomes are borne principally by the girls
    marrying early and their children, simply because child marriage are early
    childbirths are most prevalent among the poor. This also means that the benefits
    from ending child marriage and early childbirths would also accrue in large part to
    the poor. Ending child marriage and early childbirth are thereby pro-poor policies.




                                         28
                      GEOGRAPHIC PROFILE OF CHILD MARRIAGE

44. There are also differences in the prevalence of child marriage according to
    geographic areas which can be exploited when considering interventions to
    end child marriage. These differences can be measured finely using census
    data. While measurement of child marriage and early childbirths at the national or
    regional level is best conducted with DHS surveys, the surveys cannot be used
    due to their limited sample size to assess the extent of child marriage according to
    precise geographic locations, especially at the level of municipalities. This type of
    measurement can however be conducted using census data, acknowledging that
    measures of child marriage obtained with census data tend to be lower than with
    DHS surveys because what is available in the census is only the marital status of
    girls, not their first age at marriage. Still, differences in measures based on marital
    status by age 17 are likely to mirror differences in the prevalence of child marriage
    (as measured through the age at first marriage/union) by geographic areas. With
    census data, estimates can be obtained for rather small areas since the whole
    population is included, so that survey sample sizes are not an issue. For illustrative
    purposes, maps of the prevalence of child marriage as measured through marital
    status at age 17 are provided at the level of departments/provinces as well as
    municipalities/other entities in Figure 2.6 for Niger using data from the 2012
    census. Niger was chosen for this illustration because it is widely believed to have
    the highest prevalence of child marriage in the world. The maps suggest that even
    in high prevalence countries, there are typically substantial differences in child
    marriage rates between areas, as one might expect. As a result, this type of
    information can in principle be useful to target programs or interventions to
    geographic areas with high prevalence.

   Figure 2.6: Prevalence of Child Marriage by Age 17 in Niger, Census Data

                                  (1) Niger Departments




                                         29
                                  (2) Niger Smaller Entities




                 Source: Male and Wodon (2017b). Data source: Census.

45. It is also important to recognize that in many countries, the population is
    heterogeneous by ethnicity, demographic profile, caste, religion, socio-
    economic status and other characteristics. This can contribute to differences in
    child marriage rates and trends. Because this report focuses on the aggregate
    impacts and costs of child marriage at the national and global levels, we do not
    provide here any detailed analysis of the prevalence and drivers of child marriage
    by ethnicity, caste, religion, or other characteristics. Consideration of differences in
    culture and practices as well as context is however critical when designing policies
    and programs to end child marriage.




                                         30
                          CHAPTER 3
         IMPACTS ON FERTILITY AND POPULATION GROWTH

         Child marriage contributes to women both having children earlier and having
         more children over their lifetime than if they had married later. In turn, the effects
         of child marriage on fertility have implications for population growth, economic
         welfare, and state budgets, for example for education. This chapter documents
         the impact of child marriage and early childbirths on total fertility and population
         growth, as well as some of the economic costs associated with those effects.
         (For details on estimation methodologies and how results should be interpreted
         as order of magnitudes as opposed to precise estimates, please refer to Annex
         1.)

Nepal: “I was very small and I feared of my husband so we never discussed about the
number of children we wanted. When I told him that I don't want more children he did
not agree. He did not allow me to use any contraceptives. I had to give birth to many
children because we did not have mutual decision.” (ICRW, 2017).

Uganda: “Why is family planning being made a very important issue? Did God proclaim
it? Is this not a ploy to divert us from important issues in society like poverty that need
urgent attention?” “The government is trying to destroy our manhood by limiting our
ability to give birth.” (Tsimpo and Wodon, 2017).


                        IMPACT OF CHILD MARRIAGE ON TOTAL FERTILITY

    46. Child marriage contributes to higher total fertility as women marrying earlier
        tend to both have children earlier and more children over their lifetime than if
        they had married later. The factors leading to fertility are complex, as illustrated
        in Bongaarts’ model. The analysis provided in this section does not look at all
        these factors comprehensively, but it provides insights into the role that child
        marriage may play. Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017a) provide an analysis of the
        impact of child marriage on total fertility, which is defined here as the number of
        live births that women are (statistically) expected to have over their lifetime goes a
        bit further than work conducted in the field so far. The analysis not only estimates
        the marginal impact of child marriage on total fertility, but it also considers what
        total fertility would be if child marriage were to be eliminated. The analysis consists
        of detailed regressions as well as simulations based on the results from the
        regression analysis6. Because we model econometrically the number of children
        that women have towards the end of their reproductive life, we account implicitly

6 The term “total fertility” is defined in this study as the number of live births that a woman has
over her lifetime. This definition is needed for individual-level econometric work in order to
measure the marginal impact of child marriage on fertility. By contrast traditional “tot al fertility
rates” are population-level estimates. Our definition of “total fertility” is thus similar, but not exactly
the same as “total fertility rates” traditionally measured. The econometric analysis is conducted for
women ages 35-49 for sample size considerations ((this may underestimate total fertility
somewhat, as women may still have children after the age of 35). More details on the
methodology are available in Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017a).



                                                 31
     for desired fertility and substitution effects in the timing of birth when considering
     the implications of delaying marriage in the simulations. Table 3.1 provides the
     main results for 15 countries. The first three columns show the marginal impact of
     marrying before 18 on the number of children that women have over their lifetime.
     While effects have been computed for marrying at ages 17, 16, 15, 14, or 13 and
     under, in comparison to marrying at age 18 or later, the impacts are shown only for
     girls marrying at age 13 and age 17 in order to reduce the size of the table. The
     estimates represent percentage increases in lifetime live births due to early
     marriage at a particular age after controlling for a wide range of other individual
     and household characteristics that affect fertility.

 47. In all countries, the impact at the margin of child marriage on total fertility
     tends to be large. The average estimate across countries in table 3.1 of 26.4 for
     marrying at age 13 means that on average, after controlling for other factors
     affecting fertility, marrying at age 13 increases the number of children that women
     are expected to have over their lifetime by 26.4 percent in comparison to marrying
     at age 18 or later. If a girl marries at age 17, this increases average lifetime total
     fertility by 17.2 percent across the 15 countries in comparison to marrying at 18 or
     later. Typically, and as expected, estimates suggest larger impacts for girls
     marrying earlier (this can be seen by comparing the estimates for the impact of
     marrying at 13 versus 17 in table 3.1). The next column indicates whether the
     effects being observed are statistically significant, and if so, at what level. All
     effects are statistically significant and the observed marginal impacts are large.

Table 3.1: Marginal and National Impacts of Child Marriage on Total Fertility
                  Marginal impacts on total    National impacts on fertility rates for the
                   fertility when marrying          country of ending child marriage
                              early
                 Impact of     Impact   Stat. Predicted Predicted Absolute Reduction
                 marrying         of    Sign.   Total    w/o Child Difference      in Total
                 at 13 (%) marrying      (p)   Fertility Marriage                  Fertility
                                at 17                                                (%)
                                 (%)
Bangladesh          31.3        12.2   <0.01    3.92        3.22       0.70          18%
Burkina Faso        18.2        13.9   <0.01    6.34        5.79       0.55           9%
Dem. R. Congo       32.6        24.9   <0.01    6.14        5.51       0.63          10%
Egypt               36.6        17.1   <0.01    3.67        3.42       0.25           7%
Ethiopia            33.8        23.0   <0.01    6.33        5.36       0.97          15%
Malawi              12.2        11.3   <0.01    6.10        5.62       0.48           8%
Mali                19.5        26.1   <0.01    5.62        5.05       0.57          10%
Mozambique          25.3        14.5   <0.01    5.26        4.86       0.40           8%
Nepal               24.9        14.8   <0.01    4.00        3.55       0.45          11%
Niger               28.0        14.3   <0.01    7.40        6.30       1.10          15%
Nigeria             30.6        17.6   <0.01    5.98        5.26       0.72          12%
Pakistan            30.6        19.8   <0.01    5.29        4.76       0.53          10%
Rep. of Congo       30.1        16.1   <0.01    4.69        4.34       0.35           7%
Uganda              18.9        10.4   <0.01    6.87        6.31       0.56           8%
Zambia              23.6        21.3   <0.01    5.92        5.33       0.59          10%
Average             26.4        17.2      -     5.57        4.98       0.59          11%
Source: Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017a). Data source: DHS.




                                          32
             Source: Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017a). Data source: DHS.

48. If child marriage were eliminated, this would reduce total fertility on average
    by 0.59 live births across countries, the equivalent of a reduction of 11
    percent versus current values. Results from the regression analysis can be used
    to simulate the potential impact of ending child marriage on total fertility. The last
    four columns in table 3.1 provide results from simulations of total fertility at the
    national level that would result from ending child marriage. The predicted values
    for total fertility are the expected number of live births per woman under current
    conditions. The predicted values without (w/o) child marriage are the expected
    number of live births per woman if child marriage were to be eliminated. Note that
    both predictions are for all women on average, including those marrying before
    age 18 and those marrying later. The difference between the two columns
    captures the reduction in total fertility that would result from ending child marriage.
    These differences are large. Across the 15 countries, total fertility under current
    conditions is estimated – on the basis of the regression analysis – at 5.57 live
    births per woman. If child marriage were eliminated, this would be reduced to 4.98
    live births per woman. The reduction of 0.59 live births is equivalent to a reduction
    in total fertility of 11 percent from current conditions. In general, the reductions in
    total fertility from ending child marriage tend to be higher in countries with a higher
    prevalence of child marriage simply because when a higher share of women marry
    as children, the marginal impact of ending child marriage on total fertility affect
    more women. This suggests that ending child marriage would significantly speed
    up the transitions to lower fertility rates in many countries.

49. Child marriage has a large impact on fertility in part because contraceptive
    use remains low, but in turn modern contraceptive use may be affected by
    child marriage. If contraceptive use were higher in countries with a high
    prevalence of child marriage, the impact of marrying early on fertility might be
    lower, as women would be able to manage their fertility better. In addition, child



                                         33
      marriage itself may affect contraceptive use. To test whether this is the case,
      regression analysis is again used with DHS data. Results are provided in table 3.2.
      The table provides estimates of the impact at the margin of child marriage on
      modern contraceptive use by year at first marriage. Most coefficients are not
      statistically significant, but some coefficients are, and in most countries, at least
      one of the coefficients is statistically significant, typically with a negative sign as
      expected. Marrying early tends to reduce contraceptive use by a few percentage
      points in some of the countries for the age groups where coefficients are
      statistically significant. There are however cases where impacts are positive, as is
      observed for Burkina Faso, Nepal, and Pakistan, possibly because when women
      have reached their desired fertility (which may be earlier if they marry early), they
      may rely on contraception more.

Table 3.2: Marginal Impact of Child Marriage on the Use of Modern Contraception
                      Married at        Married       Married       Married   Married   Married
                        12/less           at 13        at 14         at 15     at 16     at 17
Bangladesh                 NS              NS          -0.03           NS        NS       NS
Burkina Faso              0.08             NS           0.03           NS       0.03     0.03
Dem. R. Congo            -0.04             NS            NS            NS        NS       NS
Dominican                  NS              NS            NS            NS        NS      0.07
Egypt                      NS             -0.07          NS            NS        NS       NS
Ethiopia                 -0.09             NS            NS          -0.07     -0.06      NS
Malawi                   -0.12             NS          -0.05           NS        NS       NS
Mali                       NS             -0.04          NS            NS        NS       NS
Mozambique               -0.03             NS            NS            NS        NS       NS
Nepal                     0.14             NS           0.05          0.06      0.04     0.05
Niger                    -0.08            -0.03        -0.03           NS        NS       NS
Nigeria                  -0.01             NS            NS            NS        NS       NS
Pakistan                   NS             0.09          0.06          0.04       NS       NS
Rep. Congo                 NS              NS            NS            NS      -0.06      NS
Uganda                     NS              NS            NS            NS        NS       NS
Zambia                     NS              NS          -0.07           NS        NS       NS
Source: Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017b). Data source: DHS.
Note: NS = Not statistically significant at the 10 percent level.

  50. Ending child marriage would not make a major difference in national modern
      contraceptive prevalence rates. While some impacts in table 3.2 are statistically
      significant, simulations in table 3.3 suggest that ending child marriage would not
      fundamentally change contraceptive use in most countries. In most countries,
      modern contraceptive use would increase nationally by less than two percentage
      points if child marriage were eliminated, and in some cases, there could be a
      decrease in contraceptive use. Overall, while ending child marriage would tend to
      yield higher or lower contraceptive use depending on the country, overall
      contraceptive use would remain fairly low in most countries, suggesting that
      additional steps to promote voluntary contraceptive use – and not just eliminating
      child marriage – would be needed to increase contraceptive use rates.




                                                34
Table 3.3: National Change in Contraceptive Use When Ending Child Marriage
                      Predicted    Simulated use    Absolute      Percentage
                    contraceptive     w/o child      change         change
                         use         marriage       vs. base      vs. base (%)
 Bangladesh                    55.85                56.23           0.38            0.68
 Burkina Faso                  15.63                14.40           1.23            7.87
 Dem. Rep. Congo                8.35                 8.46           0.11            1.32
 Dominican Rep.                72.00                71.47           0.53            0.74
 Egypt                         59.28                59.36           0.08            0.13
 Ethiopia                      29.23                31.69           2.46            8.42
 Malawi                        62.55                63.12           0.57            0.91
 Mali                          10.47                10.73           0.26            2.48
 Mozambique                    12.19                12.28           0.09            0.74
 Nepal                         44.19                41.60           2.59            5.86
 Niger                         14.21                15.50           1.29            9.08
 Nigeria                       10.44                10.53           0.09            0.86
 Pakistan                      27.01                26.21            0.8            2.96
 Rep. Congo                    22.06                22.63           0.57            2.58
 Uganda                        28.11                28.11           0.00            0.00
 Zambia                        48.22                48.59           0.37            0.77
Source: Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017b). Data source: DHS.
Note: NS = Not statistically significant at the 10 percent level.


      IMPACT OF CHILD MARRIAGE AND EARLY CHILDBIRTHS ON POPULATION GROWTH

51. Through its impact on total fertility, child marriage may contribute to higher
    population growth. In some contexts, high population growth may threaten long-
    term prosperity and exacerbate competition for access to scarce resources. High
    population growth may also weaken the ability of governments to provide basic
    services of quality to their population, among others in the areas of education,
    health, nutrition, and infrastructure. This section considers the extent to which child
    marriage as well as early childbirths contribute to high population growth.
    Comparisons with other countries are provided for additional perspective.

52. Simulation tools can be used to assess the reduction in population growth
    that would result from ending child marriage and early childbirths. Many
    factors affect the relationship between child marriage, early childbirths, and
    population growth. As already mentioned, if a country has a high prevalence of child
    marriage and early childbirths, the impact of ending child marriage and early
    childbirths on total fertility and population growth is likely to be larger than otherwise.
    But this impact may change over time as it depends, among other factors, on the
    structure of the population and age-specific fertility rates that may also change over
    time for other reasons. Even if the attention is focused on child marriage and early
    childbirths, the prevalence of both is likely to decline in the future, and therefore so
    should the part of population growth that is due to child marriage and early
    childbirths. Given that the purpose of this analysis is to assess how ending child
    marriage and early childbirths could affect population growth over time, business-as-
    usual counterfactual scenarios must be specified carefully. The simulations are
    based on a parametrization of demographic projection tools (DemProj and FamPlan)
    using data from the most recent DHS surveys as well as other data (for details, see
    Wodon and Yedan, 2017a). It should be noted that the simulations assume no


                                                35
   displacement over time in fertility which could take place due to desired fertility.
   Thereby the analysis may lead to a slight overestimation of impacts on population
   growth (the estimation procedure is different from that used for the fertility analysis).

53. Across countries, ending child marriage and early childbirths would reduce
    population growth substantially under current conditions. The simulation
    analysis is conducted for 18 countries for the purpose of international comparisons.
    Figure 3.2 provides the main results (note that the start date for the simulations is
    2014 due to data availability, so impacts are observed beginning in 2015). The
    effects depend on the country, ranging from fairly small impacts in the case of
    Pakistan to very large impacts in the case of Niger. Note that estimated rates of
    reduction in annual population growth rates are lower in 2030 than in 2015. The
    reason for the reduction over time of the impact on population growth in virtually all
    countries lies in assumptions based on recent DHS data on trends in other variables.
    As conditions in the counterfactual scenario are expected to improve, including in
    terms of the prevalence of child marriage and early pregnancy, the impact of ending
    child marriage and early childbirths is smaller in 2030 than 2015. A distinction can
    also be made (not shown on the figure) between ending all child marriages and early
    childbirths versus ending only child marriages, which would result in some early
    childbirths still taking place. Over time, the annual reductions in population growth
    are cumulative. This means that the reduction in the populations of many countries
    by the year 2030 from ending child marriage and early childbirths is far from
    negligible. In Niger, which is the country with the largest impacts, the population by
    2030 could be 5.4 percent smaller if child marriage and early childbirths had been
    eliminated beginning in 2014. This is a large effect with important implications in
    terms of both standards of living and the provision of public services. The same is
    observed for many other countries, even if the overall reduction in population growth
    is smaller than in the case of Niger.




                                          36
              Figure 3.2: Reduction in Population Growth Rate from Ending
                           Child Marriage and Early Childbirths

     Bangladesh                                                                           0.25
                                                        0.12
    Burkina Faso                                                 0.15
                                                   0.10
      DR Congo                                                                          0.23
                                                       0.11
          Egypt                          0.06
                                  0.04
        Ethiopia                                 0.10
                                  0.04
         Ghana                                            0.13
                          0.01
           India                            0.08
                                          0.07
      Indonesia                       0.06
                                  0.04
         Malawi                                                                  0.21
                                         0.07
           Mali                                                                                         0.30
                                                                     0.17
    Mozambique                                                                                                 0.32
                                                                               0.20
          Nepal                                  0.10
                             0.03
          Niger                                                                                                         0.39
                                                                                                 0.28
         Nigeria                                                               0.20
                                                       0.11
        Pakistan                  0.04
                           0.02
     Rep. Congo                                                                                     0.30
                                                                                        0.23
        Uganda                                                          0.17
                                     0.06
         Zambia                                                                         0.24
                                                0.09

                   0.00      0.05           0.10              0.15        0.20          0.25     0.30           0.35   0.40

                                                                2015      2030
                          Source: Wodon and Yedan (2017a). Data source: DHS.


                    WELFARE BENEFITS FROM REDUCED POPULATION GROWTH

54. The link between population growth and development is getting renewed
    attention among policy makers under the broader concept of the demographic
    dividend. At the World Bank, the 2015-2016 Global Monitoring Report was devoted
    to the demographic dividend (World Bank, 2015), and so was a major report
    completed for the Africa region (Canning et al., 2015). In January 2017, the Africa
    Union organized a key meeting in Addis Ababa on harnessing the demographic
    dividend for the realization of Sustainable Development Goals. These are just a few
    examples of the recognition of the importance of demography for development as
    well as growth. Countries in the earlier stages of the demographic transition are


                                                                37
    especially well placed to take advantage of the demographic dividend (see Box 3.1),
    though first must reduce fertility – which eliminating child marriage can play a major
    role in.

Box 3.1: The Demographic Dividend

While different definitions of the demographic dividend have been proposed in the
literature, the term is commonly associated with the improvements in standards of living
and accelerated economic growth that can result when a developing country achieves a
population structure that is favorable in terms of economic growth thanks to a reduction
in birth (and death) rates that is followed after a short period by rapid fertility decline. As
a result, the share of the population of working age individuals increases sharply for a
period of time, which tends to generate faster economic growth. In addition, with lower
dependency ratios, households are better able to support themselves and invest among
others in education, nutrition, and health (or human capital broadly conceived). These
investments in turn may lead younger generations to be better educated and more
productive in adulthood. This demographic and human capital transition may help
reduce poverty rates dramatically. Ending child marriage should help reduce population
growth and improve education in countries where fertility rates remain high, thereby
helping to usher in the demographic dividend.


55. Cross-country analyses demonstrate a one-to-one relationship between
    population growth and growth in GDP per capita. Growth in GDP per capita is
    mathematically the difference between GDP growth and population growth. This
    relationship holds not only as an accounting identity, but also when estimating the
    correlates of economic growth using cross-country panel data. For example, it has
    been demonstrated that demographic change has been an important factor
    contributing to the Asian miracle (Bloom and Williamson, 1998; Bloom and Finlay,
    2008). By contrast, demography has contributed to Africa lagging behind (Bloom
    and Sachs, 1998; Bloom et al., 2007), although there are now opportunities for this
    to change (Canning et al., 2015).

56. The relationship between economic and population growth can be used to
    assess benefits from a reduction in population growth from ending child
    marriage and early childbirths. Regression analysis suggests that controlling for
    other variables including population growth, child marriage does not have a direct
    impact on growth in GDP per capita (Nayihouba and Wodon, 2017a). However, child
    marriage does have an impact on growth in GDP per capita through its impact on
    population growth. Following Wodon (2017b), a simple way to measure the welfare
    benefits that could accrue from ending child marriage and early childbirths consists
    of comparing the level of GDP per capita that countries would achieve between now
    and 2030 with and without both child marriage and early childbirths. The comparison
    is based on estimates of the impact of child marriage and early childbirth on
    population growth presented above7. Under simplifying assumptions, the measure of

7 Assume for simplicity that GDP does not change between 2015 and 2030 if child marriage and
early childbirths are eliminated. Between 2015 and 2030 there is essentially no negative impact on
the labor force from ending child marriage and early childbirths in 2015 simply because none of
the children who would have been born in a business as usual scenario would have reached


                                             38
    the welfare benefits from ending child marriage and early childbirths is based on the
    transfer that would have to be provided to a population in order to reach the level of
    GDP per capita that could have been reached if child marriage and early childbirths
    had been eliminated. This transfer is the product of a country’s population times
    GDP per capita times the impact of child marriage on population growth8.

57. Globally (for 106 countries), the welfare benefits that would be reaped through
    lower population growth from ending child marriage reach $566 billion per
    year in 2030. The benefits are valued at $22 billion in 2015 and $566 billion in 2030
    (see table 3.4). The rapid increase in the benefits stems from the fact that the impact
    of child marriage and early childbirths on population growth is cumulative. That is,
    each year the gains become larger because the cumulative reduction in population
    growth keeps growing from one year to the next. In addition, as standards of living
    (GDP per capita) improve, the valuations also become larger. The combined effect
    is a 25-fold increase in the welfare benefits of ending child marriage between 2015
    and 2030. These are annual welfare benefits that would continue to increase in the
    future. It should be noted however that the estimates are tentative. They should not
    be considered as precise given that they depend on: (1) estimates of impacts that
    may have biases; (2) assumptions for costing that could be debated. Still, the
    estimates provide an order of magnitude of the potential costs of child marriage and
    early childbirths in terms of their impact on population growth. The benefit of ending
    all early childbirths are even larger at US $27.8 billion initially and $708 billion by
    2030. The difference with the benefits from ending child marriage stems from the
    fact that some women who have children before the age of 18 (early childbirth) are
    not married or married after having their first child, so that not all early childbirths
    can be attributed to child marriage. Importantly, most of those benefits would accrue
    to the poorer segments of the population since young girls in poverty are more likely
    to marry early than girls from better off socio-economic backgrounds. Cumulatively,
    for the period from 2014 to 2030, the welfare gains from ending child marriage could
    be more than US $4 trillion, and when adding early childbirth, could be above US $5
    trillion in PPP terms.




adulthood and would be working. After 2030, there would be a small negative impact on the labor
force from ending child marriage and early childbirths and this impact would progressively
increase over time, but it would remain fairly modest for many years. So the gains in GDP capita
that would arise simply from reducing population growth can be measured without worrying too
much in first approximation about changes in GDP. In fact, GDP may increase, for example
through better education for girls and higher future lifetime earnings and possibly investments. Yet
for simplicity these benefits are not included (they are discussed in chapter 6).
8Consider a country with 100 million people and GDP per capita of US $10,000 in purchasing
power parity in a given year. The size of the economy is one trillion dollars. If ending child
marriage and early childbirths leads to a reduction in the population for that year of three percent
versus a counterfactual business as usual scenario, then GDP per capita would have been three
percent higher if child marriage and early childbirths had been eliminated. The transfer needed to
keep the population as well off is three percent of one trillion dollars ($30 billion).



                                              39
Table 3.4: Welfare Cost of Child Marriage and Early Childbirths Due to Population
Growth (Order of Magnitudes at the Global Level for more than 100 Countries)
                     Cost of child marriage in billion US$   Cost of early childbirth in billion US$
        Year             (Purchasing Power Parity)               (Purchasing Power Parity)
        2015                          22.1                                    27.8
        2016                          44.8                                    56.3
        2017                          68.6                                    86.2
        2018                          93.8                                   117.9
        2019                         120.8                                   151.8
        2020                         149.5                                   187.8
        2021                         179.9                                   225.9
        2022                         211.9                                   266.1
        2023                         245.8                                   308.5
        2024                         281.7                                   353.4
        2025                         319.6                                   400.9
        2026                         360.4                                   451.9
        2027                         405.1                                   507.7
        2028                         454.0                                   568.5
        2029                         507.6                                   634.9
        2030                         566.3                                   707.5
        Total                       4,031.9                                 5,053.1
Source: Wodon (2017c).


           EDUCATION BUDGET SAVINGS FROM REDUCED POPULATION GROWTH

58. Another economic benefit from reduced population growth is the reduced
    pressure for state budgets to provide services to the population. The reduction
    in population growth from ending child marriage and early childbirths is most
    significant for young cohorts, with major implications for state budgets in areas such
    as education and health. As an illustration, consider the results of simulations for
    education. In the first few years after the elimination of child marriage and early
    childbirths, there is no impact on the size of new cohorts entering school. However,
    soon thereafter there is a reduction of the size of the cohorts that increases over
    time. This pattern is observed with a lag for secondary schools as well.

59. By reducing the size of cohorts, ending child marriage and early childbirth
    would provide significant savings for the education budget of many countries.
    In order to estimate those savings, a number of assumptions are needed. First,
    trends in enrollment and completion rates by grade must be assumed over time.
    Second, assumptions are needed about the efficiency of the education system, for
    example in terms of repetition rates, since efficiency affects costs of delivery for
    given outcomes. Third, assumptions are needed about recurrent unit costs of
    delivery at various levels of schooling, and how these may change over time with
    economic growth and improvements in standards of living. Again, this is rather
    complex since unit costs depend on a large number of parameters, including teacher
    salaries and pupil-teacher ratios by level of schooling. Fourth, assumptions are
    needed about likely needs for capital investments, including for the construction of
    schools and classrooms to accommodate a growing student population. Fifth, other
    factors may also play a role, such as changes in the market share of public schools
    at various education levels in comparison to private schools. These many
    assumptions call for using simulation models.


                                            40
60. A costing model prepared for the 2015 Education for All (EFA) Global
    Monitoring Report can be used for measuring potential savings from smaller
    cohorts of students. The model was commissioned by UNESCO in order to assess
    the cost of achieving universal school enrollment by 2030 at the preschool, primary,
    and secondary levels (Wils, 2015). The EFA costing model was developed to
    estimate total costs and external finance needs to reach full primary and secondary
    education in low- and lower-middle income countries. The model is parametrized for
    82 countries. It projects pupils, literacy, costs, and public education budgets by level,
    up to the upper secondary level. The projection horizon is to 2030, in line with the
    Sustainable Development Goals. Projections of pupils are based on parameters for
    their progressions through grades and cycles over time in order to reach universal
    enrollment and completion by 2030. Repetition, promotion, and transition rates are
    assumed to converge towards user-set target levels9.

61. In a set of 18 countries, simulations suggest that by 2030, cost savings could
    reach $17 billion annually versus the cost of achieving universal secondary
    education. Table 3.5 provides the estimates of budget savings with respect to the
    cost of achieving universal secondary education in 18 countries in three different
    years: 2018, 2024, and 2030. The analysis is for the benefits of ending child
    marriage and early childbirths. The table also provides the estimated share of the
    budget savings in the total education budget by 2030 from ending early childbirth
    and child marriage. By 2030, the budget savings range from only 0.3 percent of the
    baseline budget in Pakistan to 11.7 percent in Bangladesh. In absolute terms,
    budget savings increase substantially over time. Three main factors lead to these
    results. First, the impact of early childbirth and child marriage on population growth
    is small in terms of the reduction in the population of children in age of schooling in
    the first few years, but rises over time. Second, the counterfactual scenario includes
    rising budget expenditures meant to cover the cost of progressively achieving
    universal secondary education and thereby progressively reducing the share of
    children out of school. Finally, the unit costs for each child to be in school also
    increase alongside economic growth in the countries. These three factors are the
    main reasons why budgets savings in 2030 are much larger than in, say, 2024. For
    the 18 countries combined, the budget savings from ending early childbirths and
    child marriage that could be achieved in terms of the cost of reaching universal
    secondary education by that year amount to nearly $17 billion (constant dollars) in
    2030, which is a substantial amount. India accounts for more than half of those
    savings due to the sheer size of the country. Nigeria comes in second in the sample
    of countries considered.

9 Cost estimations are provided by considering unit costs based on the level of teacher salaries
and pupil-teacher ratios, with additional parameters for material costs as a share of recurrent
costs and investment costs for classrooms. Convergence assumptions lead countries to gradually
move towards an average class size and a level of teacher salaries corresponding to their level of
economic development. Details are available in Wils (2015). Three reasons led to the choice of
this model as counterfactual. The first is practicality: the UNESCO team has made available the
simulation tool used to estimate the cost of reaching universal education; using this tool simplifies
greatly the simulations. The second is comparability: the same approach is used for estimating
needs in all countries included in the UNESCO analysis, which brings some level of comparability
in results between countries. The third is replicability: the availability of the UNESCO simulation
tool make it easier for others to replicate the analysis or carry their own.



                                              41
62. It should be noted on the other hand that ending child marriage could entail a
    cost for households and governments assuming that some of the girls who
    delay marriage are also able to pursue their education further. If girls who do
    not marry as children pursue their education further, this would entail costs for both
    families (out-of-pocket and opportunity costs) and governments (given that many
    girls would attend public secondary schools). These additional costs would offset
    some of the benefits from the reduction in the size of future cohorts of students
    thanks to lower population growth.

Table 3.5: Potential Education Budget Savings from the Elimination of Early
Childbirths and Child Marriage, 18 Countries
                                     Budget Savings ($Million)           Share saved (%)
                                2018          2024           2030             2030
Bangladesh                        26           505           1,366           11.7%
Burkina Faso                      11            68             116            4.4%
Dem. R. Congo                     14           139             300            5.7%
Egypt                             16           211             479            2.3%
Ethiopia                          20           136             288            3.0%
Ghana                              8            61             118            1.6%
India                            905          4,936         10,020            6.4%
Malawi                             9            70             108            6.3%
Mali                               7           104             219            7.6%
Mozambique                        25           172             305            9.1%
Nepal                             11            50              72            4.1%
Niger                             16           158             327            9.2%
Nigeria                           78          1,464          2,382            5.4%
Pakistan                          26            22              77            0.3%
Rep. Congo                        21            17              39            1.5%
Uganda                            14           131             257            4.6%
Zambia                             7            98             200            5.8%
All 18 countries                1,213         8,342         16,671            5.4%
Source: Wodon (2017e).




                                         42
                        CHAPTER 4
         IMPACTS ON HEALTH, NUTRITION, AND VIOLENCE

       Child marriage and early childbirths can have dramatic health consequences for
       the girls who marry early. Child marriage may increase the risk of exposure to
       sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS. It may also be associated
       with lower psychological well-being. Deliveries at a young age lead to higher
       risks of complications during childbirth, such as obstructed or prolonged labor, as
       well as obstetric fistula, which may – among other factors - contribute to higher
       maternal morbidity and mortality rates. Early childbirths also have health
       complications for the children born of young mothers. While there are other
       health factors at play, the focus in this chapter is on three types of impacts: the
       impact of child marriage through early childbirth on the risk of maternal mortality;
       the impact of early childbirths on the risk of mortality and stunting for children
       born of young mothers; and the impact of child marriage on the risk of intimate
       partner violence, which can itself lead to health consequences for women and
       children. (For details on estimation methodologies and how results should be
       interpreted as order of magnitudes as opposed to precise estimates, please refer
       to Annex 1.)

Uganda: “My wife cannot control urine since her first delivery that resulted in the death
of our first baby… She started labor at 5.00 pm. She spent the whole night at a local
birth attendant’s home, who tried to assist but failed... We were very poor and had
nothing… We used engozi [stretcher carried by four men] to the nearest road. The baby
was lying with the head up and the legs coming first. As she pushed, the baby’s legs
kept kicking her urinary bladder. Finally, there came a vehicle carrying charcoal and we
hired it. We travelled about 40 km on top of the charcoal to Hoima hospital where she
was operated promptly but the baby had already died.” (Barageine et al., 2016).

Nepal: “At that time [referring to when she had her first child at 15 years], I had
problems in my uterus. My mother-in-law scolded me. She called my husband and
complained about me not doing any works. She told him that I didn’t do any works and
all I did was only sleep. She told him that I make excuses about having stomach pain.
She complained to my husband and my husband used to shout at me on phone. I cried
a lot at that time. I used to cry alone in my room. Nobody will take me for treatment. I
didn’t even have enough milk for my daughter [referring to the baby]. She was very thin
and cried a lot. I asked for money with my neighbors at that time.” (ICRW, 2017)


                   CHILD MARRIAGE, EARLY CHILDBIRTHS, AND HEALTH

63. Child marriage and early childbirths may be associated with higher health
    risks for girls having children early. Deliveries at a young age may lead to higher
    risks of complications such as obstructed or prolonged labor as well as fistula. This
    may contribute to higher maternal morbidity and mortality rates (Xu et al. 2003; Nove
    et al., 2014), although actual empirical tests of the impact of early childbirths on
    maternal mortality controlling for socio-economic and other characteristics are rare.
    Other potential health effects include risks of malnutrition, isolation, and depression



                                          43
   for young brides (Nour 2009; Le Strat et al. 2011), and possibly higher rates of
   suicidal ideation and attempts (Khanna et al., 2013; Gage, 2013). In addition, young
   brides may not be able to negotiate sexual and reproductive behaviors within their
   household. As a result, they have increased exposure to sexually transmitted
   infections (UNFPA 2013; Walker et al. 2013), and, as discussed, are less likely to
   use modern contraception, which in turn can lead to higher rates of unintended
   pregnancies, abortion, and insufficient birth spacing (Kaye et al. 2004; Raj 2010;
   UNFPA 2013).

64. Deliveries by young mothers also carry risks for their children. A review of
    some of these impacts is provided by Wodon (2016). Children born of young
    mothers tend to have higher risks of under-five malnutrition and mortality than
    children born of older mothers (e.g., Raj and Boehmer, 2013; Raj et al., 2014; Fall et
    al., 2015; Degarege et al., 2015). Part of the reason is that some young mothers
    may simply not yet be ready to give birth. When mothers are poorly nourished, this
    may put their children at higher risk of intrauterine growth restriction (Sawant and
    Venkat, 2013). These effects have implications for the children not only as they grow
    up, but also in adulthood. In the case of stunting for example, research suggests a
    loss in productivity of two percent or more for each percent loss in adult height
    (Caulfield et al. 2006, Strauss and Thomas 1998), with similar results observed for
    micronutrient deficiencies. Horton and Steckel (2013) estimate that undernutrition
    may lead to a loss of one-tenth of Gross Domestic Product in sub-Saharan Africa
    and Asia due to lost productivity.

65. By weakening conditions for early childhood development, child marriage and
    early childbirths may have additional negative impacts on young children.
    Early childhood is critical for a child’s development (Nelson, 2000; Shonkoff, et al.,
    2012). Poor conditions early in life affect brain development and capabilities, with
    lasting consequences in adulthood (Black et al., 2016). To the extent that child
    marriage affects intimate partner violence and mental health for young women, this
    may generate spillover effects for children. In harsh conditions, toxic stress
    responses on the part of children can have damaging effects on learning, behavior,
    and health later in life (Duvvury et al. 2013; UNICEF 2014). There is evidence that
    when children are exposed to intimate partner violence in utero, they tend on
    average to have worst health at birth and increased mortality rates (Aizer, 2011).
    Violence at home may also affect schooling (Anand et al. 2012) as well as increase
    the risk of future violence in adulthood (Kishor and Johnson 2004).


          POTENTIAL IMPACT OF EARLY CHILDBIRTHS ON MATERNAL MORTALITY

66. Estimating the impact of child marriage and early childbirths on maternal
    mortality ratios is difficult due to limitations in controlling for other factors.
    Datasets from Demographic and Health Surveys typically used to measure maternal
    mortality ratios do not provide data on the characteristics of mothers who died. This
    makes it difficult to isolate the impact of age at delivery versus confounding factors
    such as the socio-economic background of women giving births or their geographic
    location, including proximity to health centers. For example, a higher rate of maternal
    mortality among young mothers could be due to the fact that many of the mothers
    giving births at a young age tend to be poor and live proportionately more in areas


                                          44
   located further away from health facilities. Therefore, simple comparisons of
   maternal mortality rates by age group may not indicate that early childbirths, and
   thereby indirectly child marriage, are themselves some of the causes of potentially
   higher rates of maternal mortality among young mothers.

67. While across countries maternal mortality is higher among young mothers,
    this is not the case in all countries, and it may depend on the age considered.
    In a recent study, Nove et al. (2014) estimate maternal mortality ratios for women
    aged 15–19 years in a large sample of countries. They compare these ratios to the
    ratios observed for women in other five-year age groups. Their results are displayed
    in table 4.1 for the core set of countries considered in this study. Estimates are
    adjusted to take into account under-reporting of maternal deaths, and deaths during
    pregnancy from non-maternal causes. Across 144 countries and territories, Nove et
    al. (2014) find that a slightly increased risk of mortality in adolescents (260 per
    100,000) as compared to women aged 20–24 years (190 per 100,000), but the
    confidence intervals for both estimates overlap significantly. There is also a lot of
    heterogeneity between countries. The authors conclude that excess mortality risks
    for adolescent mothers are smaller than often believed, but still present. For several
    of the core countries considered in this study, estimates suggest a lower risk of
    maternal mortality among girls aged 15-19 years in comparison to women 20-24
    years old. However, if very young mothers (i.e., under 15 years of age) were
    considered, maternal mortality ratios would probably be higher for that age group.

Table 4.1: Maternal Mortality Ratios by Age Bracket
                 Surveys 15-19        20-24     25-29      30-34    35-39    40-44     45-49
Bangladesh       2007–10       93      180      270        680      860      660      2,300
Burkina Faso     2003–10      330      430      330        460      570      760      2,500
D. R. Congo      2002–06      350      370      720        790      450     3,400     3,500
Egypt            2000–09       18       27       40         65      120      180       360
Ethiopia         2003–10      760      610      610       1,200    2,300    2,400     4,500
Malawi           2003–10      240      260      710       1,200    3,200    4,300     5,700
Mali             1999–06      720      580      910        720     1,000    2,100     8,000
Mozambique       2004–11      520      560      910        880     1,200    1,800     2,300
Nepal            1999–06      390      230      190        850      780     2,400       0
Niger            1996–06      600      650      830        770     1,200    2,900     7,300
Nigeria          2001–08      780      720      770       1,300    1,900    2,400     1,900
Pakistan         2003–06      220      190      200        200      520      690       400
Rep. Congo       1998–05      550      580      800        740     1,700    2,300      510
Uganda           2004–11      400      330      640       1,100    1,800    3,200     5,300
Zambia           2000–07      150      300      630       1,300    1,600    1,600     4,000
Source: Nove et al. (2014). Data source: DHS and other data.

68. Considering desired fertility, ending child marriage and early childbirths may
    not necessarily reduce maternal mortality ratios substantially. The estimates
    presented in table 4.1 for the 15 core comparator countries included in this study do
    not suggest systematically higher levels of maternal mortality among mothers ages
    15-19 in comparison to mothers ages 20-24. If data were available for younger age
    groups, a larger difference could be observed between mothers younger than 18, or
    even 15, and mothers ages 18-22. Such data are however not readily available, and
    in some countries estimations could be complex due to small sample sizes. It is
    important to note also that basic statistical comparisons of maternal mortality ratios
    such as those in table 4.1 do not imply causality since they do not control for other


                                           45
   factors that affect maternal mortality. Levels of maternal mortality could be higher
   among young mothers due to (on average) less access to health care and lower
   socio-economic status among girls giving birth earlier. In addition, if early childbirths
   were delayed, while this would have many benefits as documented in this study, it
   would not necessarily reduce maternal mortality ratios, because it could lead some
   women to have more children later at ages where maternal mortality ratios are
   higher. Overall, while avoiding pregnancy at a young age is desirable, it does not
   necessarily follow that ending early childbirths would result in a decrease in maternal
   mortality ratios at the national level. Further simulation analysis would be needed to
   establish a stronger link between ending early childbirths and reducing maternal
   mortality ratios, noting that this study did not estimate the impacts of child marriage
   or early childbirths on maternal morbidity.


        IMPACT OF EARLY CHILDBIRTHS ON UNDER-FIVE MORTALITY AND STUNTING

69. The analysis in this section focuses on the impact of early childbirths on
    under-five mortality and stunting. It proceeds in two steps. The first step
    consists of estimating the marginal impacts of early childbirths on the risks of
    mortality and stunting, and the national rates of under-five mortality and stunting that
    would result from ending all early childbirths. This is done using the latest available
    Demographic and Health Survey. The second step consists of measuring economic
    benefits from improved survival and reduced stunting for young children.

Box 4.1: Stunting as the Preferred Indicator of Under-five Malnutrition

A child is underweight if s/he has a weight more than two standard deviations below the
reference median weight for the child’s age. A child is wasted if s/he has a weight to
height ratio more than two standard deviations below the median weight for height for
the reference population. A child is stunted if s/he has a height more than two standard
deviations below the median reference height for that age. If a child on any of these
measures is below three standard deviations of the norm, s/he is severely underweight,
wasted, or stunted. Among the three measures, stunting and wasting tend to be used
the most. Stunting often results from persistent insufficient nutrient intake and infections.
It may lead to delayed motor development and poor cognitive skills that can affect
school performance as well as productivity and earnings later in life. Wasting tends to
result more from acute food shortage or disease and may lead to death. For this study,
stunting is the appropriate measure, given its impact on earnings potential in adulthood.

70. At the margin, the impact of early childbirths on under-five mortality and
    stunting are large in many countries, but the impacts at the national level are
    much smaller. The analysis was carried by Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017c, 2017d).
    Controlling for a wide range of other factors, when a child is born of a mother
    younger than 18, the risk of under-five mortality increases on average by 3.5
    percentage points in the 15 countries, while the risk of under-five stunting increases
    by 6.3 percentage points. However, the impacts at the national level are smaller
    because relatively few children are born of mothers younger than 18 at the time of
    their birth (most children are born of older mothers). Nationally, the reduction in
    stunting that would result from ending all early childbirths is estimated on average at
    -0.39 percentage points. For under-five mortality, the reduction is estimated at -0.23


                                           46
   percentage points. Said differently, given prevailing rates of under-five mortality, for
   every 100 children who die before the age of five, only 3.4 can be said to die directly
   because of an early childbirth on average in the 15 countries. Similarly, for every 100
   stunted children, only 1.1 can be said to be stunted directly because of the impact of
   early childbirth. It is important to note that the reductions in the rates of under-five
   mortality and malnutrition are not driven by fewer births due to the elimination of
   early childbirths. They are due to higher health risks when children are born to young
   mothers.

Table 4.2: Increase in Under-five Mortality and Malnutrition Due to Early Childbirth
                         Marginal               Statistical          National National reduction
                        impact (%)           significance (p)      impact (%)    vs. baseline
                                                        Under-five mortality
Bangladesh                    0.1                    NS                  -             -
Burkina Faso                  6.0                  <0.01               0.30          3.4%
D. Rep. Congo                 3.9                  <0.01               0.24          3.4%
Egypt                         0.9                    NS                  -             -
Ethiopia                      3.8                  <0.05               0.20          3.0%
Malawi                        1.4                    NS                  -             -
Mali                          6.9                  <0.01               0.61          8.7%
Mozambique                    4.8                  <0.01               0.48          6.9%
Nepal                         2.0                    NS                  -             -
Niger                         3.0                  <0.05               0.22          2.7%
Nigeria                       4.8                  <0.01               0.34          4.0%
Pakistan                      4.6                    NS                  -             -
Rep. of Congo                 1.6                    NS                  -             -
Uganda                        4.7                  <0.05               0.27          4.1%
Zambia                        3.4                  <0.01               0.27          5.0%
Average                       3.5                     -                0.23          3.4%
                                                        Under-five stunting
Bangladesh                    5.2                  <0.05               0.75          1.8%
Burkina Faso                  1.6                    NS                  -             -
D. Rep. Congo                 7.2                  <0.05               0.32          0.7%
Egypt                         7.5                  <0.05               0.17          0.8%
Ethiopia                      5.5                    NS                  -             -
Malawi                       -4.4                    NS                  -             -
Mali                         10.3                  <0.01               0.74          1.9%
Mozambique                    7.8                  <0.01               0.57          1.3%
Nepal                         9.5                  <0.10               0.64          1.6%
Niger                         6.9                  <0.10               0.45          1.0%
Nigeria                       4.3                  <0.05               0.44          1.2%
Pakistan                     -1.0                    NS                  -             -
Rep. of Congo                 6.8                    NS                  -             -
Uganda                       22.0                  <0.01               1.03          3.1%
Zambia                        4.7                  <0.10               0.25          0.6%
Average                       6.3                     -                0.39          1.1%
Source: Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017c, 2017d). Data source: DHS.
Note: NS = Not statistically significant at the 10 percent level. The average for all countries
includes estimates that are not statistically significant.

71. Based on estimates of marginal and national impacts, estimates can be
    computed for the numbers of children avowing death or stunting when ending
    child marriage. Table 4.3 provides estimations of the number of children who could
    survive beyond age five and the number of children who could avoid stunting


                                            47
   globally if early childbirths were avoided, or alternatively if child marriage were to be
   ended. For the countries in table 4.2, estimates for those countries are used. For
   other countries, extrapolations based on the estimates for the 15 countries in table
   4.2 are used. Over the period from 2016 to 2030, some 2.1 million children could
   avoid dying by age five globally if child marriage were eliminated, with an additional
   400,000 surviving to age five if early childbirths alone were included The smaller
   estimate for ending child marriage as compared to the estimate when ending all
   early childbirths comes from the fact that not all early childbirths can be attributed to
   child marriage. In terms of under-five malnutrition, 3.6 million children could avoid
   stunting if all child marriages were eliminated, reaching 4.4 million if early childbirths
   were ended. The estimates in table 2 are for the 15-year period between 2016 and
   2030. For estimates on a yearly basis, the figures have to be divided by 16. This
   would mean that 155,000 children would be saved each year on average (the
   number of lives saved does not change much across years due to compensating
   effects at work, including the growth in the population under age five on the one
   hand and secular trends towards lower rates of child marriage and early childbirths
   on the other).

Table 4.3: Children Avoiding Death by Age Five or Stunting, 2016 to 2030
                           Children Not Dying (Million)      Children Not Stunted (Million)
 Ending early childbirth               2.5                                4.4
 Ending child marriage                 2.1                                3.6
Source: Wodon (2017d).

72. The second step in the analysis consists of valuing lives lost due to under-five
    mortality as well as earnings losses associated with stunting. For the children
    and their families, the cost of lives lost are not primarily economic, and the same is
    true for stunting. At the same time, when considering the economic rationale for
    ending child marriage, providing an economic valuation of the impact of child
    marriage on under-five mortality and stunting through early childbirths is useful.
    There is no unique way to conduct the analysis, but the assumptions are as follows:

      Cost of lives lost: One of several approaches used in the literature consists of
       valuing a child’s life in terms of GDP per capita, acknowledging that this implicitly
       values a life in a poorer country at a much lower value than in a richer country.
       For example, in a study on nutrition, Shekhar et al. (2016) value lives at the
       discounted stream of future GDP per capita in adult life. This approach is
       followed here, but with some modifications.
      Cost of stunting: Research suggests that stunted children are likely to have lower
       earnings in adulthood. In a study for Guatemala, per capita consumption in
       adulthood were reduced by 21 percent if they were stunted (Hoddinott, 2013).
       Estimates of losses in wages in other studies have been of a similar order of
       magnitude. Therefore, the benefits from avoiding stunting are based on
       expected future GDP per capita multiplied by the approximate share of wages in
       GDP and the share of wages lost due to stunting. This approach was used by
       Shekhar et al. (2016) and is used here with a few modifications in order to better
       account for individual countries’ likely growth path (see Wodon, 2017d).
      Discount rates: Discount rates are used to value future incomes. The choice of
       discount rate affects the valuations, and it is good practice to conduct
       estimations for multiple discount rates. Using a discount rate of five percent is
       common practice, so this is the discount rate used for results shown here, but


                                          48
     both lower and higher discount rates have been used in the background work.

73. The global benefits that could be reaped through a reduction in under-five
    mortality when ending child marriage are large. Table 4.4 provides results for
    the economic benefits that would result from a reduction in under-five mortality and
    stunting from ending all child marriages, as well as early childbirths. The estimates
    are tentative. They should not be considered as precise given they depend on (1)
    econometric estimates of impacts that have themselves standard errors and (2) a
    range of assumptions for costing that could be debated. Still, the estimates provide
    an order of magnitude of the potential costs of child marriage and early childbirths
    in terms of their impact on young children. With a discount rate of five percent, the
    economic benefits from reduced deaths among children are estimated at $46.2
    billion (in purchasing power parity) in 2016 and $90.2 billion in 2030 when all early
    childbirths are avoided. The benefits from ending child marriage are slightly
    smaller since for each country individually, while many early childbirths can be
    attributed to child marriage, this is not the case for all. The increase over time in
    benefits is mainly due to higher valuations for each life saved due to rising GDP
    per capita resulting from economic growth. Estimates do depend on the discount
    rate. A higher discount rate reduces benefits, while a lower discount rate increases
    them.

74. For the reduction in stunting, benefits are lower at about one-fifth of those
    obtained with the reduction in under-five mortality. For example, with a five
    percent discount rate, the benefits are valued at about $10 billion in 2016, rising to
    $19.1 billion in 2030. The reasons for lower benefits associated with the reduction
    in stunting in comparison to the reduction in mortality are simple. While the
    number of children avoiding stunting is almost twice the number of children
    surviving past age five, as shown in table 4.3, two more parameters (each of which
    is a share that is lower than one) are used for the valuation of the benefits from
    avoiding stunting, namely the share of wages in GDP and the share of wages lost
    in adulthood due to stunting. As a result, the valuation for each child of the benefits
    from avoiding stunting is only at about a tenth of the valuation of a life saved. All in
    all, the benefits from reduced stunting are therefore about five times lower than
    those related to the prevention of mortality among young children.




                                         49
Table 4.4: Global Annual Benefits from Reduced Under-five Mortality and
Stunting, 2016 and 2030
                                                2016                           2030
                                       Reduced Mortality ($ Billion, purchasing power parity)
Ending early childbirth
 Discount rate 3%                                 104.2                        204.8
 Discount rate 4%                                  68.6                        134.3
 Discount rate 5%                                  46.2                         90.2
 Discount rate 6%                                  31.9                         62.0
Ending child marriage
 Discount rate 3%                                94.1                          185.7
 Discount rate 4%                                61.9                          121.7
 Discount rate 5%                                41.6                           81.6
 Discount rate 6%                                28.7                           56.0
                                        Reduced Stunting ($ Billion, purchasing power parity)
Ending early childbirth
 Discount rate 3%                                 22.1                          43.8
 Discount rate 4%                                 14.5                          28.6
 Discount rate 5%                                  9.7                          19.1
 Discount rate 6%                                  6.7                          13.4
Ending child marriage
 Discount rate 3%                                 18.3                          35.8
 Discount rate 4%                                 12.0                          23.5
 Discount rate 5%                                  9.1                          15.8
 Discount rate 6%                                  5.6                          10.8
Source: Wodon (2017d).

                IMPACT OF CHILD MARRIAGE ON INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE

  75. Child marriage may be associated with higher risks of intimate partner
      violence (IPV). Child marriage can itself be considered as one of many forms of
      violence experienced by women and girls across their lifespans. This violence is
      related to the lack of voice and agency young girls face when their marriage is
      decided by others, as discussed in chapter 6. In this section however, the focus is
      on the impact of child marriage on the risk of IPV. Multiple studies have suggested
      that child marriage may increase risks of IPV (Clark et al. 2006; Carbone-Lopez,
      2006; Solotaroff and Pande, 2014; Le et al., 2014). In turn, the health implications
      of these impacts can be serious (Campbell 2002; Lamb and Peterson 2012; World
      Health Organization 2014), as can be their cost implications for women and
      households (Duvvury et al. 2004; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
      2003; Snow-Jones 2006; Morrison and Orlando 2004; Bott et al. 2005). In a recent
      paper, Kidman (2016) finds that after adjusting for socio-demographic
      characteristics, child marriage remains associated with higher risks of IPV in many
      but not all countries. The type of violence affected was also not the same between
      countries. It is also worth noting that as mentioned earlier, IPV witnessed by
      children may have intergenerational effects, leading to intergenerational impacts.
      Research also suggests that IPV reduction interventions among child brides may
      not be as effective as IPV interventions among women married at an older age.

  76. Analysis suggests that across countries, marrying early does have an impact
      on IPV, which in some cases is large, but not always so. In order to assess the
      potential reduction in IPV that could be achieved by ending child marriage,



                                          50
      Savadogo and Wodon (2017a) use DHS data for eight sub-Saharan countries. For
      Ethiopia and Niger, given that the module on violence was not included in the
      latest DHS, the analysis is based on the surveys implemented for this project
      (Steinhaus et al., 2017; John et al., 2017). The intensity of IPV is captured through
      an index taking values between zero (no violence at all) and 100 (worst cases of
      violence). While an alternative approach could have been used to consider
      different types of IPV separately, the results for the purpose of this report are not
      very different when doing so. The benefit of an overall index is that it provides a
      single summary measure of IPV as well as the impact of child marriage on that
      measure. For more detailed work on IPV, it is however recommended to also
      consider different types of IPV separately. Note also that we are measuring
      reported lifetime IPV, not actual IPV. DHS surveys are presumed to underreport
      IPV. On the other hand, since we measure lifetime IPV, a (probably small) part of
      the impact of child marriage may be related to the fact that child brides may have
      been married for longer. Table 4.4 provides estimates of the impact at the margin
      of child marriage on the IPV index after controlling for other variables also likely to
      affect IPV. The analysis is conducted for all married women in the sample, as well
      as for married women ages 18-24. In the majority of countries in the table, when
      marrying at 15 or earlier, the impacts are statistically significant This is less the
      case when marrying later. The magnitude of the effects is however not necessarily
      large given that the index takes on values between zero and 100. Still, some
      effects are clearly present.

Table 4.4: Impact of Child Marriage on Intimate Partner Violence, Women Ages
                              Married women ages 15-49             Married women ages 18-24
                                                                  Married
                              Married         Married    Married              Married    Married
                                                                  at 15 or
                           at 15 or less       at 16      at 17                at 16      at 17
                                                                    less
Burkina Faso                    0.77            NS          NS      1.78         NS         NS
Dem. Rep. of Congo               NS             NS          NS        -           -          -
Ethiopia                        2.39            NS          NS       NS          NS         NS
Malawi                          1.42            NS          NS       NS          NS         NS
Mali                            1.04            NS          NS       NS          NS         NS
Mozambique                       NS             NS          NS      2.14        0.70        NS
Niger                            NS             NS          NS       NS          NS         NS
Nigeria                         0.73           0.73        1.23      NS         0.89        NS
Uganda                          6.34           5.87         NS     12.13       10.16        NS
Zambia                          1.14            NS          NS      3.89         NS         NS
Pooled data set                 0.56            NS          NS      1.70        1.54       1.25
Source: Savadogo and Wodon (2017a); see Steinhaus et al. (2017) for Niger and John et al.
(2017) for Ethiopia. Data source: EICM for Ethiopia and DHS for other countries. Estimates for the
Democratic Republic of Congo not provided for married women ages 18 to 24 due to small
sample size to run the regression analysis for that bracket.
Note: NS = Not statistically significant at the 10 percent level.

  77. At the national level, while ending child marriage would help reduce IPV, the
      magnitude of the impacts depends on the country being considered. The
      next step in the analysis consists of estimating the difference in the IPV index that
      would result at the national level from ending child marriage. The results are
      provided in table 4.5. In some countries, such as Nigeria and Uganda (which is an
      outlier), the effect of ending child marriage on the base line value of the IPV index
      is sizable (note that baseline values are at the lower range of the interval because



                                             51
     few women are subjected to extreme forms of violence when the index takes
     values close to 100). In the other countries as well as in the pooled sample, the
     effects tend to be smaller. This suggests that while in some countries ending child
     marriage could make a major difference in reducing IPV, this is not necessarily the
     case in all. Note that in a few countries, the simulated effects at the national level
     are zero because the coefficients for the child marriage variables in the
     regressions for factors affecting IPV are not statistically significant. There may also
     be indirect effects through the impact of child marriage on girls’ educational
     attainment and the reduction in IPV often observed for women with a higher level
     of education.

Table 4.5: Simulated Changes in National IPV Indices from Ending Child Marriage
                                    Absolute change from base        Percentage change from
                                                                              base (%)
                                      All women         Women        All women        Women
                                     ages 15-49       ages 18-24    ages 15-49      ages 18-24
Burkina Faso                             -0.18           -0.20          -7.33          -10.26
Democratic Republic of Congo              0.00            0.00           0.00            0.00
Ethiopia                                 -0.92            0.00         -10.37            0.00
Malawi                                   -0.35           -0.37          -4.78           -5.58
Mali                                     -0.37           -0.46          -5.49           -6.89
Mozambique                                0.00            0.00           0.00            0.00
Niger                                     0.00            0.00           0.00            0.00
Nigeria                                  -0.46           -0.56         -12.57          -18.70
Uganda                                   -2.63           -2.47         -18.04          -20.84
Zambia                                   -0.23           -0.22          -2.81           -3.29
Pooled                                   -0.17           -0.18          -5.83           -3.36
Source: Savadogo and Wodon (2017a); see Steinhaus et al. (2017) for Niger and John et al.
(2017) for Ethiopia. Data source: EICM for Niger and Ethiopia and DHS for other countries.




                                           52
                        CHAPTER 5
         IMPACTS ON EDUCATION, LABOR, AND EARNINGS
        Child marriage and early childbirths may also have substantial impacts on the
        ability of adolescent girls to go to school. In some countries, there is evidence of
        almost a binary option of either going to school, or getting married early. This
        chapter uses two different approaches to assess the impact of child marriage on
        schooling and educational attainment for girls. In addition, the impact of
        additional years of education on the risk of child marriage is also estimated. For
        measures of earnings, the impact of child marriage on earnings and productivity
        in adulthood is simulated on the basis of wage regressions. Finally, issues
        related to household consumption and food security are also discussed. (For
        details on estimation methodologies and how results should be interpreted as
        order of magnitudes as opposed to precise estimates, please refer to Annex 1.)

Nepal – “I liked going to school with my friends and playing with them. I really liked
studying. If my parents had allowed me to study, I would have studied very sincerely. My
friends could continue their study and now they have become wiser and clever. If I had
studied I would have been working. But my parents held my marriage. I could not do
anything after marriage. I now have children to look after” (ICRW,2017).

Uganda – “We are faced with long distances to primary schools. Girls on their way to
school meet men with money who entice our daughters with money for sex. Later some
get pregnant and drop out of school. Also we have no vocational school that will train
our girls after P7 and S4, so we see it as a waste of resources to educate a girl” (Wodon
et al., 2016).


            CHILD MARRIAGE, EARLY CHILDBIRTHS, AND EDUCATION FOR GIRLS

78. Child marriage reduces education prospects for girls, and conversely better
    education and employment opportunities for girls may reduce the likelihood of
    marrying early. This is why Brown (2012) suggests looking at 'tipping-point' policies
    in education for ending child marriage, including programs to reduce the cost for
    girls to transition to secondary school. At the same time, relatively few studies have
    attempted to carefully measure the impact of child marriage on education. The main
    difficulty is that the decision by a girl (or her parents) to marry early and possibly
    drop out of school are often jointly determined. Child marriage may, for example,
    depend on a girl’s education prospects, whatever the mechanisms affecting those
    prospects are10. Put simply, the fact that for many girls, the options in some
    countries are to continue formal schooling or to marry, but not both, implies that

10Education prospects are influenced by traditional gender roles and expectations, particularly in
countries without mandatory education requirements. T hey may also be affected by a girl’s
academic skills and interests. For example, girls who may be weaker academically could face
smaller negative effects (for example in terms of future earnings) from not pursuing their
education and thereby may have lower incentives to continue to study as compared to girls who
are academically stronger. These girls may be more willing to marry early or their parents may be
more inclined to have them marry early. Girls less interested in pursuing their education for other
reasons may also marry earlier and might have dropped out of school in the absence of marriage.



                                              53
     causality between marriage and schooling goes both ways. There is also a risk (as
     with any estimation) of omitted variable bias. For example, poor education quality
     may lead to both dropout and child marriage. A lack of appropriate sanitation
     facilities for menstruating girls at school may impede their continuing education.
     Cultural practices may also play a role and not be observed in surveys. Secondary
     schools are often less accessible geographically to girls. Transportation to and from
     school may cost money that the girls or their families don’t have. It may also take
     them out of the perceived safety of their communities, as they transit through
     unfamiliar villages and towns, something parents may not approve of (Nanda et al.,
     2015). If such factors lead to both child marriage and lower educational attainment
     and are not controlled for (because data are not available in surveys), there is a risk
     of omitted variable bias. The impact of child marriage on attainment could be
     overestimated without proper controls, but what can be done depends on the data
     available in surveys11.

79. A first approach to assessing the impact of child marriage and early
    childbirths on educational attainment consists of looking at responses to
    questions on why girls dropped out of school. Two approaches have been used
    in the literature to try to assess the impact of child marriage on education. The first
    approach consists of relying on the reasons mentioned by parents in surveys for why
    their children have dropped out of school. The share of drop-outs that appear to be
    due to child marriage or early pregnancies can then be computed. Using data from
    the late 1990s for Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, and Togo, Lloyd
    and Mensch (2008) find that for girls aged 15 to 24, child marriage and early
    pregnancies directly account for between 5 percent and 33 percent of drop-outs,
    depending on the country. Using similar data for Nigeria for 2006, Nguyen and
    Wodon (2017a) find that child marriage (and to a lower extent pregnancies) account
    for 15 percent to 20 percent of drop-outs at the secondary level, which is broadly of
    the same order of magnitude. In addition, they show that if child marriage and early
    pregnancies could be eliminated, this could potentially reduce the gender gap in
    education by about half.

80. A second approach relies on regression techniques with instrumental
    variables to measure the impact at the margin of child marriage on girls’
    education. The objective of using instrumental variables is use variables that affect
    the decision to marry, but not education outcomes conditionally on the decision to
    marry in order to control for bi-directional causality (endogeneity).12 Field and
    Ambrus (2009) used variation in the timing of menarche (puberty) as the

11 In much of South Asia and parts of Africa, social norms around age at marriage and expected
gender roles of a girl as wife/mother are likely to have a more significant role in determining the
decision (most often by the parents, not the girl) to marry than invest in her education. But this
does not mean that in the absence of child marriage, educational attainment would automatically
increase – or as importantly, that higher educational attainment would have among others a large
effect on future earnings, because the same social norms that led to child marriage may also
constrain employment opportunities later in life, even in the absence of child marriage.
12 Some authors rely on matching techniques to estimate the impact of child marriage on
educational attainment (e.g., Sakellariou and Zheng 2014), but those techniques do not correct for
endogeneity and may be overestimating impacts. They also tend to treat all girls marrying early
similarly independently of the actual age at marriage.



                                              54
   instrumental variable for the age at first marriage, given that in many cultural and
   religious traditions, including in Bangladesh, girls often are not allowed to marry
   before reaching puberty. They found that each additional year of delay in the age of
   marriage increases schooling by 0.22 year and the likelihood by literacy of 5.6
   percentage points. Nguyen and Wodon (2017b) use the contemporaneous and past
   prevalence of child marriage in the area where a girl lives as instruments, and also
   find that in Africa each year of early marriage reduces the probability of literacy by
   5.6 percentage points, and the probability of secondary school completion by 6.5
   points, with the impact on the probability of having at least some secondary
   education being slightly larger.

81. Ideally, both approaches should be used for triangulation and robustness
    tests, but it is important to recognize that effects may vary within a country.
    For Uganda, Wodon et al. (2016) use both approaches and find that child marriage
    has a large impact on secondary educational attainment with both the statistical
    approach based on the perceptions of both parents (as well as principals), and the
    econometric approach on the correlates of attainment. At the same time, it must be
    recognized that national estimates may mask heterogeneity at the local level. This
    emerges from the analysis for three rural and majority Muslim villages in Burkina
    Faso by Gemignani and Wodon (2017). In one village the inability to afford school is
    the main issue for households not sending girls to secondary school. But in the other
    two villages, apart from the affordability issues, the interactions between gender
    roles, faith, and culture play a fundamental role in limiting girls’ education
    opportunities. There is a widespread perception in those two villages that adolescent
    girls should simply not go to public secondary schools. This heterogeneity also
    suggests that the desire to marry girls may lead to drop-outs in these two villages,
    while drop-out for economic reasons may in some cases lead to marriage at a young
    age in the first village.


       IMPACT OF CHILD MARRIAGE AND EARLY CHILDBIRTHS ON GIRLS’ EDUCATION

82. Reasons mentioned by parents (or sometimes principals) in surveys for why
    their children have dropped out of school suggest that child marriage is a
    major factor. The share of drop-outs that appear to be due to child marriage or
    early pregnancies can then be computed. Typically, these analyses, including
    country-level estimates for this study, suggest that 10 to 30 percent of the girls
    dropping out of school may do so because of an early marriage or a pregnancy,
    depending on the country. Table 5.1 provides a few illustrations of such measures in
    a subset of the core countries for which detailed work has been conducted for this
    study. While the definition of the variables differs slightly between countries, in part
    due to differences in survey questionnaires, child marriage and/or pregnancies (in
    the case of Uganda child marriage is not listed as a reason to drop out in the survey
    questionnaire, so pregnancies is used as a proxy) accounts for a substantial share
    of adolescent girls dropping out or not enrolled in school.




                                          55
Table 5.1: Child Marriage and Pregnancies as Reasons for Not Being in School or
Dropping Out
                                 Sample/Question                            Share (%)
Egypt, 2012        Reason for dropping out, secondary/TVET level       Child marriage: 28%
Mali, 2013/14      Reason for not being in school, girls ages 14-17    Child marriage: 7%
Nepal, 2011      Reason for dropping out of school, girls ages 12-17   Child marriage: 32%
Niger, 2015           Reason for dropping out, secondary level         Child marriage: 23%
Nigeria, 2011      Reason for not being in school, secondary level     Child marriage: 11%
Uganda, 2012       Reason for dropping out, upper secondary level       Pregnancy: 23%
Source: Multiple studies by the authors.

83. Subjective parental perceptions on the reasons to drop out of school may
    understate the role of child marriage. Indeed, survey questionnaires on the
    reasons why a girl may have dropped out of school often include response
    modalities such as parents not willing to let a daughter continue her studies (which
    may mask a desire to have the daughter married), or the child herself not being
    interested in further studies (which may mask a desire on the part of a girl to get
    married). As an example of complementary data on the reasons for girls to drop out
    that suggests a larger impact of child marriage and pregnancies in leading girls to
    drop out, a separate question was asked in Uganda surveys about the main reasons
    for dropping out to school principals through a Community Facility Questionnaire.
    Pregnancies and child marriage account together for two thirds of the main reasons
    to dropout at the secondary level (27.6 percent for child marriage, and 40.2 percent
    for pregnancies). As noted by Wodon et al. (2016), this is not strictly comparable to
    the estimate for Uganda based on parental responses provided in table 5.1, because
    in the community module, questions were asked to principals about the main
    reasons for dropping out for boys and girls overall, and not the reason for each child.
    This may inflate the role of pregnancies and child marriage in drop-outs since the
    main reason declared by a principal need not be the reason applying to all girls
    leaving a principal’s school. But it does confirm that child marriage and pregnancies
    are key factors for dropping out in Uganda as in many other countries.

84. Qualitative data confirm that multiple factors lead girls to drop out or never
    enroll. Cost, whether out-of-pocket or through the need to help at home (opportunity
    costs) remain serious obstacles to schooling in many countries. But in addition,
    marriage and pregnancies are also at play. In Uganda, the story of Susan in Wodon
    et al. (2016) illustrates the hardship that extreme poverty brings. Susan was 18
    years old at the time she was interviewed. Her mother died. With one sister and four
    brothers, she lives with her father. She started school at six years of age and
    dropped out last year at the age of 17. She was still in primary school. She dropped
    out because she became pregnant. She had dropped out before in 2008 when she
    was in the third year of primary to help her mother who was bed-ridden just before
    she died. She now works as a causal laborer in people’s gardens, earning about
    8,000 shillings a week, which is not much (US $2.25). Payment is usually in cash,
    but at times in kind (she is given sorghum or millet to bring back home). She uses
    her earnings to buy essential things for the home such as soap, salt, sugar, and
    food. The challenge she faces now is that she cannot work effectively since she is
    pregnant and sickly. Yet, she is still supposed to look after her siblings. In her
    assessment, gardening is much tougher than school, but she is emphatic that “I
    cannot go back to school any more. I just want to take care of my young siblings and
    see them through primary school, and if possible up to secondary school.”


                                             56
85. Typologies of adolescent girls according to their marriage and schooling
    status can be helpful to assess whether after a certain age, girls or their
    parents must essentially choose between marriage and schooling. The idea of
    such typologies was suggested for Niger by Perlman et al. (2017a). Typologies can
    help to outline the type of programs that could be helpful for adolescent girls to
    continue to learn, whether in school or out of school (see also annex 4). The
    typology from Perlman et al. (2017a) considers four target groups, and it can be
    applied to various data sets in slightly different ways depending on the age groups
    available. When using data from DHS surveys, it makes sense to define the groups
    as follows: (1) Girls ages 15-16 still in school and not married; (2) Girls ages 15-16
    out of school but not yet married; (3) Girls ages 17-19 still in school and not married;
    and (4) Married girls out of school. These four target groups are not exhaustive of
    the population of girls ages 15-19, but they stem from the fact that in many countries
    with a high prevalence of child marriage, relatively few girls not in school and older
    than 16 are not married, and even fewer girls of any age who have married are in
    school (in practice could benefit from programs targeted to the other groups). In
    most countries, the results suggest that once a girl is married, it is often difficult for
    her to remain in school as the share of married girls in school is typically very low.

86. Econometric analysis using instrumental variables also suggests that child
    marriage may have a negative effect on schooling, although more at the
    primary than secondary level. As mentioned earlier, a second and better approach
    to look at the impact of child marriage on educational attainment for girls relies on
    regression techniques. Estimates prepared for this study using this approach are
    provided in table 5.2 for the sub-Saharan Africa region, the Latin America and
    Caribbean Region, and the South Asia region (in each case, DHS data for multiple
    countries are pooled together for regional estimates). Consider the example of sub-
    Saharan Africa. The estimate of -0.078 for secondary enrollment in the table
    suggests that marrying at age 16 reduces the likelihood of completing secondary
    education by 7.8 percentage points. The earlier a girl marries, the larger the
    negative impact tends to be. Estimates in table 5.2 for the Latin American and
    Caribbean region and for South Asia are larger than for Africa in part because rates
    of enrollment and completion in secondary school are also higher. All estimates in
    this table are statistically significant. Estimates at the level of individual countries
    have also been obtained for this study, and in some cases are larger than the
    estimate for the region as a whole, especially for sub-Saharan African countries.
    Econometric estimates thus confirm the findings suggested by the reasons
    mentioned by parents as to why their daughters dropped out of school: child
    marriage plays a major role.

Table 5.2: Impact of Child Marriage on Secondary School Completion for Girls
                                        Latin America          Sub-Saharan
                                                                               South Asia
                                        and Caribbean             Africa
Married at 17                                 -0.045              -0.046         -0.049
Married at 16                                 -0.087              -0.078         -0.095
Married at 15                                 -0.124              -0.099         -0.137
Married at 14                                 -0.158              -0.112         -0.176
Married at 13                                 -0.187              -0.119         -0.210
Married at 12/earlier                         -0.213              -0.123         -0.240
Source: Nguyen and Wodon (2017b, 2017c, 2017d).
Note: NS = Not statistically significant at the 10 percent level.



                                             57
87. The fact that child marriage curtails a girl’s education can have a number of
    consequences, including for her children. One such consequence is related to
    lifetime earnings. But beyond the importance of schooling to acquire knowledge and
    improve lifetime earnings, it is also essential to develop social skills and networks,
    with girls marrying early potentially missing on those opportunities (UNICEF 2014). A
    better education for mothers is also essential for their children, with clear impacts on
    early childhood development (Denboba et al., 2014). As mentioned in chapter 4,
    child marriage affects under-five malnutrition and mortality by contributing to early
    childbirths. A mother’s educational attainment also has large impacts on child health
    (Smith and Haddad 2014). There are also intergenerational effects at work, with girls
    of mothers who married early possibly being less likely to complete secondary
    education themselves.

88. Importantly, estimates also suggest that increasing girls’ education is
    probably one of the best ways to avoid child marriage. A recent review of the
    literature by Kalamar et al. (2016) suggests that interventions to promote education,
    including cash transfers, school vouchers, free school uniforms, reductions in school
    fees, teacher training, and life skills curricula, are among the most likely to help. In
    some cases, the evidence is mixed, but in many cases such interventions are found
    to reduce child marriage, or at least increase the age at first marriage. This is also
    underscored under the tipping point approach suggested by Brown (2012).
    Estimates of the impact of education on child marriage using the same instrumental
    variables methodology as that used to measure the impact of child marriage on
    education suggest that keeping girls in school may indeed have a large beneficial
    effect (Wodon and Yedan, 2017c). Key results are provided in table 5.3. For
    example, the estimates of -0.041 and -0.060 for Bangladesh suggest that each year
    of additional secondary education reduces the risk of marrying before the age of 18
    by 4.1 percentage points and the risk of having a first child before the age of 18 by
    6.0 percentage points in that country. All estimates in the table but one are
    statistically significant, leaving little doubt that effects are indeed at work. The
    implication is that keeping girls in school longer can be an effective way to delay the
    age at which girls marry or have their first child.




                                          58
Table 5.3: Impact of Girls’ Education on Child Marriage and Early Childbearing
                                     Impact of an Additional Year   Impact of an Additional Year
                                      of Educational Attainment      of Educational Attainment
                                          (Beyond Primary) on           (Beyond Primary) on
                                              child marriage             early childbearing
Bangladesh                                        -0.041                       -0.060
Burkina Faso                                      -0.071                       -0.107
Democratic Rep. of Congo                          -0.046                       -0.031
Egypt                                             -0.054                       -0.024
Ethiopia                                          -0.054                       -0.060
Malawi                                            -0.037                         NS
Mali                                              -0.126                       -0.075
Mozambique                                        -0.070                       -0.030
Nepal                                             -0.039                       -0.032
Niger                                             -0.054                       -0.126
Nigeria                                           -0.031                       -0.036
Pakistan                                          -0.034                       -0.028
Republic of Congo                                 -0.082                       -0.089
Uganda                                            -0.072                       -0.070
Zambia                                            -0.108                       -0.046
Source: Wodon and Yedan (2017c).
Note: NS = Not statistically significant at the 10 percent level.

               IMPACT OF CHILD MARRIAGE ON LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION

89. The relationship between child marriage and labor force participation is
    complex. Child marriage leads to lower educational attainment and higher fertility.
    These are often cited factors affecting women’s labor force participation and the
    nature of their employment. Yet while in some countries a higher education is
    associated with a higher likelihood of working (in part due to higher opportunity costs
    of not working), in other countries this is not the case. Specifically, in middle income
    countries, secondary and post-secondary education is often associated with higher
    participation in the labor force (Cameron et al. 2001; Mammen and Paxson 2000).
    But in low income countries, where labor markets tend to be informal and many
    women must work simply for the household to survive, impacts may be less salient.
    In comparison to broader gender roles that affect labor force participation, child
    marriage itself may not have a large direct impact on whether women work or not
    and the type of job held, even if there may be indirect effects at work.

90. Indirect effects of child marriage on labor force participation may work
    through several channels, but they may not necessarily be large. Women who
    marry early may have lower agency, limiting their bargaining power in households,
    including and possibly with regards to the decision to enter labor force. Through its
    impact on educational attainment, child marriage may affect labor force participation
    by reducing the opportunity cost of not working. In addition, through higher fertility
    and thereby a higher domestic workload, child marriage may affect the number of
    hours worked by women, although not necessarily whether they work or not and the
    type of job held. Note that in some cases, the direct and indirect (through fertility and
    educational attainment) effects of marriage may work in opposite directions, thereby
    compensating each other. Overall, the impact of child marriage on labor force
    participation may be positive or negative, and small or large depending on the




                                             59
    country or community. Assessing the direction and magnitude of the impact must be
    done empirically.

91. Regression analysis with DHS data suggests in many cases that controlling
    for other factors, child marriage may not affect labor force participation much.
    Table 5.4 provides estimates of the marginal impact of child marriage on labor force
    participation controlling for other factors that could affect labor force participation. In
    most countries (Bangladesh is an exception), marrying as a child versus marrying
    later appears to increase the likelihood of labor force participation as an adult. The
    same is true when considering work with payments in cash. In other words, reducing
    child marriage could lead (in terms of direct effect) to a reduction instead of an
    increase in women’s labor force participation, including in terms of work with cash
    earnings. Child marriage also affects other variables, including the number of
    children women have and their education level. Indirect effects of child marriage on
    labor force participation through these variables may matter, especially in the case
    of educational attainment. In many countries, regression results suggest that a
    secondary education is associated with a higher likelihood of working in comparison
    to having no education at all, as well as a higher likelihood of being paid in cash.
    Therefore, through its effect on educational attainment, child marriage may reduce
    labor force participation. Given the multiple effects at work, the question is which
    type of effect matters most, and whether marrying early makes any difference.

Table 5.4: Impacts of Child Marriage on Labor Force Participation
                     Marginal impacts             Simulated total impacts of ending child marriage
                                                      Labor force                  Work with
                    Labor
                                 Work with            participation              cash earnings
                    force
                                     cash         Women
                   Partici-
                                  earnings       marrying           All       Women             All
                    pation
                                                   early         women    marrying early     women
Burkina Faso         NS             0.0442         -0.75          -0.32        -2.27          -0.98
Bangladesh        -0.0136          -0.0142          3.54           1.80        -1.43          -0.73
DRC                0.0454             NS           -1.16          -0.37         0.59           0.19
Egypt                NS               NS            1.10           0.24         1.55           0.34
Ethiopia             NS               NS            0.83           0.45         0.91           0.50
Malawi             0.0250           0.0262         -1.29          -0.21        -1.36          -0.22
Mali               0.0484           0.0401         -3.50          -1.93        -4.03          -2.22
Mozambique         0.0592             NS           -2.81          -1.09         0.27           0.11
Nepal              0.0391             NS           -1.84          -0.57         0.89           0.27
Niger                NS               NS            0.23           0.17         0.12           0.09
Nigeria            0.0504           0.0201         -3.08          -1.61         0.13           0.07
Pakistan           0.0284           0.0249         -1.85          -0.80        -1.31          -0.57
Rep. Congo         0.0238             NS           -1.46          -0.68         0.46           0.21
Uganda               NS               NS            1.23           0.20         2.96           0.49
Zambia               NS             0.0357          1.04           0.24        -2.92          -0.68
Source: Savadogo and Wodon (2017b). Data source: DHS.
Note: NS = Not statistically significant at the 10 percent level.

92. Simulations based on the regression results suggest that the combined direct
    and indirect impacts of child marriage on labor force participation and the type
    of job held are small. In order to simulate the overall effect of child marriage on the
    likelihood of labor force participation and the type of job held, three different effects
    are taken into account. First, child marriage may have direct effects on the likelihood



                                              60
   of work, as shown in table 5.4. Second, child marriage may have indirect effects on
   labor force participation through its effect on women’s fertility. Third, child marriage
   may affect labor force participation through its impact on educational attainment.
   Table 5.4 provides estimates of the overall effects for the women who married early,
   as well as for women as a whole (these effects are smaller given that only some
   women married early, and for those who did not, no effects are simulated). The
   overall effects tend to be small. In most countries, ending child marriage would result
   in only a small increase or decrease in labor force participation, with similarly limited
   impacts on estimates of the likelihood of working with positive earnings. Note that
   increases in labor force participation across countries are from different bases since
   in some countries labor force participation by women is high while in others it is low.


              IMPACT OF CHILD MARRIAGE ON EARNINGS AND PRODUCTIVITY

93. By reducing educational attainment for girls, child marriage curtails their
    earnings. Savadogo and Wodon (2017c) estimate the potential gains in expected
    earnings and productivity that could result from ending child marriage through two
    channels: lower fertility, and higher educational attainment. The approach consists of
    running wage regressions, and simulating earnings with lower fertility and higher
    education using a parametrization taking into account the impact of child marriage
    on both fertility (and thereby household structure) and educational attainment. Table
    5.5 provides the main results from the estimations. In all countries, the gains in
    earnings from ending child marriage are positive, as expected. When considering
    only the women who marry early, the gains in earnings range from 1.44 percent to
    15.60 percent of baseline yearly earning spending on the country. Most of the gains
    come from a better education level for some of women who marry earlyif they are
    assumed to marry later, as opposed to the impact of child marriage on fertility. When
    considering all women – those who did not marry early as well as those who did, the
    impact as a share of women’s total earnings is smaller since only some of the
    women marry early and thereby have some likelihood of gains. The gains in
    earnings or expected productivity for women as a whole range from 0.49 percent to
    4.58 percent of base earnings depending on the country. Finally, when including
    men as well (whose earnings are not affected), the gains in the population’s
    earnings range from 0.17 percent to 1.68 percent of the wage bill. The monetary
    valuation of those impacts is large. Ending child marriage could generate, depending
    on the country, from $19 million in the Republic of Congo to $7.6 billion in Nigeria in
    additional earnings and productivity in 2015 (in purchasing power parity). These
    gains would increase over time as the economy and population grow. As discussed
    in background work, the valuation of the benefits is based on a share of national
    consumption, which leads to a slightly higher estimate than would b the case with a
    share of labor earnings. At the same time, since no multiplier effects are considered
    as would be the case with a general equilibrium model, this seems to be a
    reasonable middle point (Savadogo and Wodon, 2017c).

94. As mentioned in chapter 3, ending child marriage would entail costs for
    households and governments due to higher educational attainment for girls,
    but these costs would be small in comparison to expected benefits. For
    households, both out-of-pocket and opportunity costs would need to be absorbed if
    girls are able to pursue their education further. For governments, budget allocations



                                          61
   would need to be provided in order to be able to absorb a higher number of girls in
   public secondary schools. At the same time, the magnitude of these costs would
   typically be small in comparison to the expected benefits from better educational
   attainment for girls, including through higher expected labor earnings and a range of
   other positive outcomes in adulthood.

Table 5.5: Gains in Earnings/Productivity from Ending Child Marriage (%)
                                          All women                         Cost (US$
                      Women who        (married early or    All women     million in 2015)
                      married early           not)           and men
Bangladesh               11.85                4.58              1.23          4769.8
Burkina Faso              7.45                3.66              1.13           178.5
DRC                       2.66                0.99              0.44           168.9
Egypt                     9.20                1.50              0.38          2892.9
Ethiopia                  9.29                4.39              1.50          1581.4
Malawi                   10.10                3.03              1.61           167.4
Mali                      9.73                4.40              1.00           174.8
Mozambique               15.60                4.02              1.68           374.9
Nepal                    12.70                4.30              1.41           710.6
Niger                     4.23                3.03              1.61           188.4
Nigeria                   7.97                3.31              0.98          7607.7
Pakistan                 13.28                3.21              0.88          6299.9
Republic of Congo         4.48                0.52              0.17            19.1
Uganda                   14.48                3.28              1.03           513.9
Zambia                    1.44                0.49              0.24            68.2
Source: Savadogo and Wodon (2017c). Data source: I2D2.

95. The estimations assume no direct impact of child marriage on earnings
    controlling for education and other variables, an assumption that is validated
    by other datasets. The estimations reported in table 5.5 are based on the World
    Bank’s I2D2 database which does not include variables measuring early childbirths
    and child marriage. Therefore, the simulations assume implicitly no direct impact of
    child marriage on earnings controlling for education and other variables included in
    the wage regressions. Said differently, the impacts on earnings documented in table
    5.5 result from the impact of child marriage on educational attainment for girls, and
    to a lower extent on the impact of child marriage on fertility and household size as
    well as the number of children in the household. This is a limit of the analysis, but
    other datasets tend to support this assumption. For example, analysis is carried for
    Niger and Nepal using existing large scale nationally representative living standards
    measurement surveys that have information on child marriage (in is the case of
    Nepal, see Wodon and Yedan, 2017d) and early childbirths (as in the case of Niger,
    see Nayihouba and Wodon, 2017b). The analysis suggests that in most cases,
    controlling for other variables including education, the fact that a woman married as
    a child or had a child early does not have a statistically significant impact on her
    earnings, considering both hourly and monthly or yearly earnings. Data are not
    available for most countries to conduct the same test, but the evidence available for
    other countries suggests that the negative impact of child marriage on earnings for
    women comes mainly from its impact on educational attainment for girls.




                                          62
                  IMPACT OF CHILD MARRIAGE ON HOUSEHOLD WELFARE

96. In most cases child marriage also does not seem to have a direct impact on
    household welfare measures after controlling for education and fertility, but
    indirect impacts are likely. Again, while national surveys for many countries do not
    have information on child marriage and early childbirths, data from existing living
    standards measurement surveys for Niger and Nepal suggest that by and large,
    after controlling for other factors, child marriage or early childbirths do not directly
    affect household total consumption as well as food consumption very much (see
    Wodon and Yedan, 2017d for Nepal, and Nayihouba and Wodon, 2017b for Niger).
    The same is often observed for other measures of well-being such as perceptions of
    food security, perceptions of poverty, and asset level. There are however indirect
    effects of child marriage at work through fertility (a higher number of children in the
    household is associated with higher levels of poverty) and through girls’ education
    (when mothers are less educated, household welfare is often reduced at the
    margin). These effects are probably due in large part to the negative impact of child
    marriage on earnings and productivity, as documented in the previous section.

97. A lack of education for girls due in part to child marriage may however have
    other negative effects on productivity and investments. If young brides are seen
    by their husbands as unable to make financial decisions for the household, this may
    reduce their ability to do so (World Bank 2012; Haddad et al. 1997). Lack of
    earnings may also have a negative effect on social capital and networks, further
    reducing earnings potential (Duflo 2011). In turn, lack of earnings for women in the
    household may reduce household investments in human capital, for example in
    terms of investing in education and health care for children (Hoddinott and Haddad
    1995; Bussolo et al. 2011, Backiny-Yeta and Wodon 2010). Lack of resources for
    women may also reduce agricultural productivity (World Bank and ONE 2014).


             INTERGENERATIONAL IMPACT OF CHILD MARRIAGE ON EDUCATION

98. Through the educational attainment of mothers, child marriage has a negative
    impact on the educational attainment of the children of women married as
    children. Apart from curtailing girls’ education, child marriage may also affect the
    education of their children. Both direct and indirect effects could be at work.
    Controlling for other factors, child marriage could have a direct negative effect on the
    education of the children of mothers who marry early, although data are not
    available to test this hypothesis in many countries. When observed in other countries
    such as Niger and Nepal using large living standards measurement with information
    on child marriage or early childbirths, these effects are not always statistically
    significant, and they tend to be limited. However, indirectly, by curtailing the
    education of girls, child marriage does affect the education of the children of girls
    marrying early. This is because a mother’s educational attainment is one of the
    factors that affect her children’s educational attainment (the same could probably be
    said for learning).




                                          63
                               CHAPTER 6
                         SELECTED OTHER IMPACTS

       Apart from the impacts discussed in previous chapters, child marriage may have
       a wide range of other impacts on the girls marrying early, their children, and their
       communities. This chapters considers among others the impacts of child
       marriage on women’s decision-making ability, land ownership, knowledge of
       HIV/AIDS, and birth registrations. (For details on estimation methodologies and
       how results should be interpreted as order of magnitudes as opposed to precise
       estimates, please refer to Annex 1.)

Niger: “We never properly discussed [family planning]. It’s my husband who used to say
that he wants twenty children. In response, I told him that he wants to kill me: even
goats can’t have that number of kids. In the end, God decided otherwise very early and I
did not have any more children. The spacing between my two children is large: four
years. Despite everything, I wanted to have more [children]” (ICRW, 2017).

Nigeria: “I felt a sharp pain in my lower abdomen and noticed that my skirt was stained
with blood…I rushed to my mother. She smiled and held my hand and explained
menstruation. When my father came home that night, he called me and asked if I had a
suitor. I told him no. After some days my mother told me that I was to be married. I knew
that there would be merriment and that I would be bought clothes, shoes, a bed, and a
chest of drawers. I was happy about this but sad that I would be leaving my family to live
at my future husband’s home. I wanted to stay in school. But I could not disobey my
father.” (Perlman et al., 2017b).


               IMPACT OF CHILD MARRIAGE ON WOMEN’S DECISION-MAKING

99. Decision-making starts with the question of whether girls have a say in the
    decision to marry and whom to marry. Child marriage results in part from the
    unequal power relationships between men and women and harmful social norms
    that emphasize and maintain an inferior, less valued place for women and girls in
    society. Child marriage not only impacts women’s voice, agency and decision
    making in the household after they are married, but it is also an expression of the
    lack of these characteristics for women in these societies. In terms of the process
    and decisions leading to child marriage, in some cases, girls are forced to marry
    early by their family parents or close relatives. In other cases, they may be
    consenting to a marriage, even though international law raises concern about the
    ability of adolescent girls to consent to a lifelong contract like marriage. Examples of
    girls forced to marry early abound in qualitative studies, as evidenced by some of the
    quotes provided at the start of this chapter. Apart from the timing of marriage, in
    some cases, girls have a say in whom to marry. In others, they may not. Even when
    they are happy with the choice of groom, they may not have much choice in the
    matter.

100. Child marriage may be associated with losses in agency and decision-
   making for women later in life. As noted among others by Parsons et al. (2015),



                                          64
   child brides are often vulnerable—they are young, often poorly educated, and from
   disadvantaged socio-economic backgrounds. When they marry early, they may fall
   even more under the control of their husband and in-laws than would be the case if
   they had married later. This may limit their aspirations, as well as agency (Klugman
   et al., 2014), possibly limiting their decision-making ability, including in regard to
   access to health care during pregnancy and delivery. According to Kabeer (2008), a
   woman’s capacity for choice depends on agency, access to resources, and past
   achievements. Child marriage clearly has an impact on resources, for example by
   contributing to girls’ premature school drop-out and future limitations on learning.
   Child marriage also affects past achievements (as well as capabilities), as is the
   case when a lower level of education reduces the types of employment that women
   have access to. Finally, child marriage may also affect agency if it reduces girls and
   women’s decision-making ability in the household. However, the magnitude of these
   effects is not necessarily clear.

101. Econometric analysis suggests that child marriage has a direct negative
   impact on decision-making ability in only a minority of countries. However,
   child marriage may also have an indirect impact through lower educational
   attainment. Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017e) analyze the correlates of an index of
   agency or decision-making for women constructed using data from DHS surveys.
   The index is created through principal component analysis. The variables included in
   the index are of four types. First, women currently married are asked in the surveys
   about who makes decisions in the household in four areas: health care, household
   purchases, visits to friends and relatives, and the use of the husband’s earnings. For
   each question, women may typically respond according to four modalities: they
   alone make decisions, they make decisions with the husband/partner, the husband
   makes decisions alone, or another person makes the decisions (or the husband has
   no earnings for the question pertaining to use of earnings). Second, women are also
   asked if they can refuse to have sex with their husband and if they can request their
   husband to use a condom when having sex. In addition, women respond to four
   different circumstances assessing if a husband is justified in beating their wife in
   those instances: if the wife goes out without telling her husband, if she neglects her
   children, if she argues with her husband, or if she refuses to have sex with him.
   Finally, women are asked whether getting their husband’s permission to get medical
   help for themselves is a major problem or not. The index takes a value between zero
   and 100 after normalization. While an alternative approach could have been used to
   consider different types of decision-making separately, the results for the purpose of
   this report are not very different when doing so. The benefit of an overall index is
   that it provides a single summary measure of decision-making ability as well as the
   impact of child marriage on that measure. For more detailed work on decision-
   making, it is however recommended to also consider different types of decision-
   making separately. Table 6.1 provides the main results in terms of the marginal
   effects of child marriage as well as education on the index. The interpretation of the
   coefficients is in terms of gains/losses in the indices. The marginal impact of child
   marriage is statistically significant for only about a third of the countries. By contrast,
   effects through education tend to be larger as well as statistically significant in most
   countries. Therefore, in some cases directly, and in most cases indirectly (through
   its impact on educational attainment), child marriage may have a negative impact on
   decision-making ability. However, the impact that could be attributed to child
   marriage through education is likely to be limited, because only a subset of women



                                           65
     marrying early would have continued their schooling substantially. Note finally also
     that the marginal impacts of child marriage across countries fo not change very
     much when considering young women (and thereby focusing on the first few years
     after marriage) or all women in the survey samples.

Table 6.1: Impact of Child Marriage and Education on Decision-Making Ability
                            Child                             Education (vs. none)
                         marriage               Primary           Secondary        Post-secondary
Bangladesh                   NS                    NS                2.971              5.725
Burkina Faso               -1.551                 2.495              8.727              15.48
DRC                          NS                   1.918              4.345              15.37
Egypt                        NS                   1.370              7.800              11.61
Ethiopia                     NS                   5.664              11.88              21.61
Malawi                       NS                    NS                2.443              3.310
Mali                       -2.226                  NS                6.819              15.58
Mozambique                   NS                   1.595              4.068              4.160
Nepal                        NS                    NS                0.362              0.333
Niger                        NS                    NS                3.785              20.44
Nigeria                    -1.128                 1.500              3.007              6.388
Pakistan                    2.041                 4.827              8.028              11.19
Rep. of Congo                NS                   4.861              9.097              14.26
Uganda                       NS                    NS                4.186              13.73
Zambia                     -1.222                  NS                5.622              11.37
Source: Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017e). Data source: DHS.
Note: NS = Not statistically significant at the 10 percent level.


                     IMPACT OF CHILD MARRIAGE ON LAND OWNERSHIP

102. Child marriage could affect productivity through land ownership for
   women. In most countries, child marriage is associated with higher land
   ownership. Limited work has been conducted on the relationship between child
   marriage and land ownership, so it is not clear whether such a relationship would be
   expected. DHS surveys provide data not on the amount of land owned by women,
   but whether they own land by themselves, jointly with their husband or partner, or
   under both types of ownership. Regression analysis is used to measure the potential
   impact of child marriage at the margin on land ownership controlling for other factors
   that may affect ownership. Different regressions are used for the various categories
   of ownership: alone, jointly, both, and all types of ownership combined. Table 6.3
   provides the results. The interpretation of the coefficients is in terms of percentage
   point gains in the likelihood of ownership. For Burkina Faso for example, the
   coefficient of 0.0185 suggests that marrying early actually increases the likelihood of
   land ownership alone by about two percentage points for women in comparison to
   marrying later. A similar effect is observed for joint ownership, but not for women
   who have both types of ownership. In most countries, when the effects are
   statistically significant, they tend to be positive (the exception is Mali). While further
   research is needed to better understand the effects at work, there does not seem to
   be a negative effect of child marriage on land ownership. There are also limits to the
   analysis of land ownership that can be conducted, especially with DHS data13.


13The positive impact of marrying early on land ownership may seem surprising since land
ownership is often associated with agency for women, and child marriage is often associated with


                                             66
Table 6.3: Impact of Child Marriage on Land Ownership by Category of Ownership
                                Ownership              Joint        Both types of       All types
                                     alone          ownership        ownership         combined
Burkina Faso                        0.0218              NS             0.0043            0.0349
DRC                                 0.0100              NS               NS                NS
Egypt                                 NS                NS               NS                NS
Ethiopia                            0.0240              NS               NS              0.0427
Mali                               -0.0121              NS               NS                NS
Mozambique                          0.0111              NS               NS              0.0320
Nepal                               0.0145              NS               NS              0.0157
Niger                               0.0185            0.0180             NS              0.0439
Nigeria                             0.0097              NS               NS              0.0144
Pakistan                              NS              0.0049             NS                NS
Rep. Congo                          0.0121            0.0150             NS              0.0310
Uganda                              0.0258              NS               NS                NS
Zambia                                NS                NS               NS              0.0305
Source: Savadogo and Wodon (2017d). Data source: DHS.
Note: NS = Not statistically significant at the 10 percent level.


            IMPACT OF CHILD MARRIAGE ON WOMEN’S KNOWLEDGE OF HIV/AIDS

103. Child marriage may also have a direct or indirect impact on other forms of
   knowledge than the knowledge acquired mostly through school. An example is
   that of knowledge related to HIV/AIDS. Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017f) analyze the
   correlates of an index of women’s knowledge about HIV/AIDS. The index is created
   through principal component analysis using a range of questions available in DHS
   surveys such as responses from women on whether they agree or disagree with
   statements regarding HIV/AIDS preventive measures, transmission modes and
   symptoms. Specifically, the index accounts for responses to questions related to: the
   risk of getting HIV can be reduced by abstaining from sexual intercourse; the risk of
   getting HIV can be reduced by always using a condom when having sexual
   intercourse; the risk of getting HIV can be reduced by restricting sexual intercourse
   to one faithful partner; HIV can be transmitted by mosquito bites; HIV can be
   transmitted by sharing food with an infected person; a healthy-looking person can
   have HIV; HIV can be transmitted by witchcraft or supernatural means; HIV infected
   persons can live longer with drugs; HIV can be transmitted during pregnancy; HIV
   can be transmitted during delivery; HIV can be transmitted through breastfeeding;
   HIV can be transmitted by sharing sharp materials; HIV can be transmitted through
   unsafe blood transfusion; HIV can be transmitted by using unsterilized needle or
   syringe; and HIV can be transmitted by touching an infected person. The values of
   the index are normalized to take a value between zero and 100.



a loss in agency. Various factors could be at work. It could be that marrying early brings benefits
for women in terms of bride price paid at the time of marriage which may contribute to higher land
ownership. It may be that girls who marry early live in settings that are more traditional, leading to
more women working the land, and possibly owning the land, than if there were engaged in other
types of occupation. These and other facts may not be controlled for sufficiently in the regression,
but what the results suggest is that marrying early may not lead to a loss in land ownership, at
least when land ownership is measured as a yes/no variable.



                                                67
104. In most countries, child marriage does not appear to have a direct impact
   on knowledge of HIV/AIDS, but it may have an indirect impact through
   educational attainment. Table 6.4 provides the main results of the regression
   analysis. The coefficient estimates suggest that the marginal direct impact of child
   marriage is statistically significant for only about a third of the countries. But as
   mentioned in the previous chapter, and as was the case for decision-making ability,
   child marriage has an impact on educational attainment, and educational attainment
   in turn has an impact on knowledge of HIV/AIDS. Therefore, indirectly (through its
   impact on educational attainment), child marriage does appear to have a negative
   impact on knowledge related to HIV/AIDS, with the impacts increasing as
   educational attainment increases. However, because only some of the girls who
   marry early would under current conditions complete a higher level of schooling, the
   indirect impact that could be attributed to child marriage through education may be
   relatively small in some countries, but possibly larger in others.

Table 6.4: Impact of Child Marriage and Education on Knowledge of HIV/AIDS
                            Child                             Education (vs. none)
                         marriage               Primary           Secondary        Post-secondary
Bangladesh                   NS                   14.50              32.59              37.76
Burkina Faso                 NS                     NS                4.06               6.32
DRC                          NS                     NS                7.32               8.52
Egypt                       -5.45                   NS               26.99              44.86
Ethiopia                     NS                    6.67               7.29               5.29
Malawi                       NS                    2.38               4.11               4.09
Mali                         NS                     NS               11.00               6.17
Mozambique                  -2.55                  3.17               4.32               5.46
Nepal                        NS                   14.95              23.89              26.83
Niger                        NS                    8.00              12.14              19.94
Nigeria                      NS                    5.51               7.06               9.27
Pakistan                    2.70                  10.24              29.86              46.52
Rep. of Congo               -2.65                  8.58              12.79              17.39
Uganda                       NS                     NS                4.91               4.17
Zambia                       NS                    5.02               6.85               9.13
Source: Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017f). Data source: DHS.
Note: NS = Not statistically significant at the 10 percent level.


                   IMPACT ON CHILD MARRIAGE ON BIRTH REGISTRATIONS

105. Legislation related to the minimum age at marriage could potentially
   provide disincentives for registering birth, but this does not appear to be the
   case. When mothers have children below the minimum legal age for marriage,
   legislation aimed at delaying the age at marriage could potentially lead to lower birth
   registration rates if women are fearful that having a child at a young age suggests
   that marriage took place before the minimum legal age. Whether such disincentives
   are at work depends on the context of each country, and whether the legal minimum
   age for marriage is actually enforced, which is rarely the case in many counties. Still,
   it is useful to use household survey to test whether such effects may be at work. As
   shown in table 6.5, the impact of child marriage on birth registration is not
   statistically significant in the set of countries for which Demographic and Health
   Surveys have information on birth registrations and/or certificates.



                                             68
Table 6.4: Impact of Child Marriage on Birth Registrations
                                          Share of children under-five with            Impact of child
                                             registration or certificate (%)              marriage
Burkina Faso                                               76.9                              NS
Democratic Republic of Congo                               24.6                              NS
Egypt                                                      99.4                               -
Mozambique                                                 47.9                              NS
Nepal                                                      42.3                              NS
Niger                                                      63.9                              NS
Nigeria                                                    29.8                              NS
Republic of Congo                                          90.8                              NS
Uganda                                                     29.9                              NS
Zambia                                                     11.3                              NS
Source: Onagoruwa and Wodon (2017g). Data source: DHS.
Note: In Egypt, virtually all children are registered, so that the regression analysis does not apply.




                                               69
                                    CHAPTER 7
                                   CONCLUSION

       To provide new evidence and inspire greater commitments towards ending child
       marriage, this study has estimated the impacts of the practice and its economic
       costs. The study looked at five domains of impacts: (i) fertility and population
       growth; (ii) health, nutrition, and violence; (iii) educational attainment; (iv) labor
       force participation, earnings, and productivity; and (v) decision-making and other
       areas. The results of the analysis indicate that child marriage has a wide range
       of negative impacts on girls, their children, families, communities, and national
       societies and, through a variety of costs, on economies at large.

106. In many domains, the negative impacts of child marriage and early
   childbirths are large. Table 7.1 summarizes the main findings from the study. The
   largest impacts of child marriage are related to fertility and population growth,
   education and earnings, and the health of the children born of young mothers. As
   noted in Wodon (2017a), these impacts are all closely related in terms of their timing
   in the life of adolescent girls. Particularly when use of modern contraception is low,
   child marriage leads to early childbirths, which increases health risks for mothers
   and the children born of young mothers. The timing of child marriages and early
   childbirths conflicts with the ability of girls to continue their education, which
   depresses earnings in adulthood. All those effects are at work at the time of
   marriage or soon after. By contrast, impacts in other domains – from violence to
   labour force participation decision-making, are observed throughout a woman’s life
   and depend on many other factors than whether girls marry early. For example,
   intimate partner violence and a lack of decision-making ability are the result, at least
   in part, of widespread gender inequality. Child marriage contributes to perpetuating
   gender inequality, but delaying marriage by a few years may not be sufficient on its
   own to fundamentally change gender roles and social norms. This is probably why in
   those areas, while ending child marriage may help, impacts tend to be smaller and in
   some cases are not statistically significant.

107. Even when the direct impacts of child marriage and early childbirths are
   not statistically significant, they may still be detrimental through their indirect
   impact on girls’ education. In table 7.1, a number of direct impacts of child
   marriage and early childbirths are not found to be statistically significant for some or
   even all countries. For example, after controlling for other variables including a
   woman’s education level, child marriage is often not associated directly with a loss in
   decision-making ability, a reduction in knowledge of HIV/AIDS, or a lower likelihood
   of birth registration for children. At the same time, in all of those areas, higher
   educational attainment for women tends to have a beneficial impact. Therefore,
   through its negative impact on girl’s educational attainment, child marriage is likely to
   have a negative effect indirectly in those areas as well.




                                          70
Table 7.1: Impacts of Child Marriage (CM) and Early Childbirths (ECBs)
Fertility and Population Growth
Ending CM could reduce the total fertility rate by 11% across 15 countries
Ending CM could reduce the share of girls having a child before age 18 by three-fourths
Ending CM could increase national use of modern contraceptives slightly in some countries
Ending CM and ECBs would reduce population growth substantially
Health, Nutrition, and Violence
Ending ECBs would help save the life of three of every 100 children dying by age five
Ending ECBs would help avoid stunting for one of every 100 stunted children under five
CM is associated directly with higher risks of intimate partner violence for women
The impact of ending CM on maternal mortality and morbidity is not fully clear
Educational Attainment
CM is cited as a primary reason for dropping out of secondary school for girls
CM reduces substantially the likelihood of secondary school enrolment and completion
Each year of secondary school education reduces the risk of CM by 4 to 6 percentage points
Work, Earnings, and Welfare
Through education, CM reduces women’s earnings in adulthood by 9%
Ending CM could increase national earnings by 1.0%
CM affects consumption and food adequacy through household sizes and educational attainment
Decision-making and Other Impacts
CM is directly associated with a loss in decision-making ability in a third of countries
CM is associated with higher land ownership for women
CM reduces women’s knowledge of HIV/AIDS through its impact on educational attainment
CM is not directly associated with a reduction in the rate of birth registrations for young children
Sources: See the references provided in this study.

108. The global economic costs associated with the impacts of child marriage
   and early childbirths are very large. Tentative estimates of the global costs
   associated with the impacts of child marriage, or equivalently estimates of the
   benefits from ending child marriage (and in some cases early childbirths) are
   provided in table 7.2. These are annual estimates of costs or benefits from ending
   child marriage as of 2015, depending on the estimate. The estimates should not be
   considered as precise given that they depend on (1) econometric estimates of
   impacts that have themselves standard errors and (2) a range of assumptions for
   costing that could be debated. Still, they provide an order of magnitude of the
   potential costs of child marriage. By far, the largest economic cost of child marriage
   is the welfare loss associated with population growth. By reducing the annual rate of
   population growth, ending child marriage and associated childbirths could lead to
   welfare benefits globally of $566 billion (in purchasing power parity terms) by the
   year 2030. Substantial additional economic benefits would result from reductions in
   under-five mortality and stunting rates, valued at close to $100 billion in 2030 with a
   five percent discount rate.

Table 7.2: Order of Magnitude of the Benefits from Ending Child Marriage –
Selected Global Estimates
                                                             Annual Benefit        Annual Benefit
                                                                in 2015               in 2030
Welfare benefit from reduced population growth                 $22 billion          $566 billion
Benefit from reduced under-five mortality                      $42 billion           $82 billion
Benefit from reduced under-five stunting                       $9 billion            $16 billion
Sources: See the references provided in this study.




                                               71
109. In addition to global cost estimates related to changes in population
   growth and child health that would result from ending child marriage, the
   study provides some cost estimates for other impacts for a subset of
   countries. These estimates are calculated for budget savings to government
   education budgets that would result from slower population growth and from
   increased earnings gains for women, if child marriage were ended. As with the
   global estimates discussed above, these figures should be considered tentative
   given that they are based on statistical estimations which have standard errors as
   well as costing assumptions.

      Budget savings from lower fertility and population growth: Budget savings can be
       reaped from lower population growth. For the provision of public education,
       savings could reach up to $17 billion in current US dollars by 2030 in a set of 18
       countries for which estimates were computed if universal secondary education
       were achieved by then. While this is an upper bound estimate of potential
       savings for these countries, the estimates globally would be significantly larger
       since only 18 countries are included. When considering the elimination only of
       child marriage (as opposed to child marriages and early childbirths), the
       estimates would be a bit smaller.

      Education and earnings: The costs related to earnings losses for women married
       as children are high. These costs are related for the most part to the fact that
       child marriage curtails the educational attainment of some of the girls who marry
       early, and higher educational attainment leads to higher lifetime earnings. The
       gains in earnings and productivity that would have been observed if women had
       not married early for a core set of 15 countries are estimated at $26 billion in
       2015. These gains would increase over time due to population growth and higher
       standards of living and wages in most countries.

110. By demonstrating the economic impacts of child marriage, this study
   provides further evidence to support ending child marriage. Child marriage is
   widely considered a violation of girls’ human rights. It curtails the opportunities
   provided to girls and their children. The evidence of the negative impacts of the
   practice on a wide range of outcomes is clear, and this study demonstrates that the
   practice has large economic costs as well. Some countries have supported efforts to
   end child marriage in recent years. Interventions being developed, tested, and
   implemented in those countries have the potential to make a difference. Even as
   these experiences will generate evidence that can be used for adaptation and scale
   up, it is clear that countries would benefit from increased support for such
   interventions and broader policies to end child marriage.




                                         72
                                 ANNEX 1
                           METHODOLOGICAL NOTE

111. The results provided in this study rely on a number of methodological
   assumptions that have limits. The methodology used for the estimations, as well
   as the links between the various components of the analysis are explained in Wodon
   (2017a). The aim of this study is to estimate the impacts of child marriage on a wide
   range of development outcomes and the economic costs associated with some of
   these impacts. Caveats are needed in terms of both what “impact” means in this
   study, and how the economic costs associated with impacts are computed.

112. The term “impact” is used loosely and for simplicity, but one must be
   careful about not necessarily inferring causality. Estimates of impacts in this
   study are typically obtained through careful regression analysis aiming to isolate the
   potential impact of child marriage or early childbirths on various outcomes controlling
   for other factors affecting those outcomes. In the literature, this approach is known
   as “association studies”. What is measured is a statistical association between child
   marriage or early childbirths and outcomes. This is not necessarily an impact as
   could be observed with a randomized control trial. Since child marriage cannot be
   randomized, the study must rely on regression analysis to estimate likely impacts,
   but there are always risks of bias in the measures of likely impacts.

113. The estimation of the economic impacts of child marriage considers both
   direct and indirect effects. Estimates of impacts are based on regression analysis.
   By direct effect, we simply mean the coefficient estimate for the child marriage
   variable as an explanatory variable in a regression setting (in some cases, such as
   under-five mortality and malnutrition, the direct effect refers to the coefficient
   estimate for an early childbirth, namely a birth to a mother younger than 18 at the
   time of the birth of the child). By indirect effect, we mean the coefficient estimate of
   another explanatory variable in the regression analysis that could itself be affected
   by child marriage or early childbearing. A good example is that of the educational
   attainment of a woman or mother. To illustrate, child marriage may not be
   considered as having a direct effect on knowledge of HIV/AIDS if the coefficient for
   the child marriage variable in that regression is not statistically significant. But child
   marriage may still have an indirect effect on knowledge of HIV/AIDS given that (1)
   child marriage tends to reduce on average the educational attainment of child brides,
   and (2) educational attainment tends to be associated in regression analysis with
   better knowledge about HIV/AIDS. In the case of education, given endogeneity
   between educational attainment and child marriage (as discussed below), the
   distinction between direct and indirect effects is not fool proof, but it is still useful to
   discuss pathways through which child marriage may have impacts.

114. The estimation of several impacts and costs is undertaken in a sequential
   manner. As mentioned in the introduction, this study looks at five domains of
   impacts of child marriage: (i) fertility and population growth; (ii) health, nutrition, and
   violence; (iii) educational attainment; (iv) labor force participation, earnings, and
   productivity; and (v) decision-making and other areas. For some of these impacts,
   the economic costs associated with the impacts are estimated. The conceptual
   framework for the study was provided in Figure 1 in the introduction. In practice, a


                                            73
   large number of estimations are needed for the analysis. The most important
   estimations are displayed in Figure A1.1. In that Figure, the five domains of impacts
   are highlighted in different colors, while the main cost estimates are listed at the
   bottom of the figure. In a number of cases, multiple estimations are needed in order
   to obtain cost estimates. For example, in order to measure the impact of child
   marriage on earnings for women, we must first estimate the impact of child marriage
   on total fertility, since the number of children that women have may affect their labor
   force participation, Next, we must estimate the impact of child marriage on
   educational attainment for child brides, since educational attainment affect the level
   of earnings that women are expected to have. More details on the estimations are
   provided in Wodon (2017a).

     Figure A1.1: Principal Estimations for the Measures of Impacts and Costs




                                    Source: Wodon (2017a).

115. Two main types of bias could be at work in the regression analysis. The
   first risk is that of omitted variable bias. The first type of bias is related to the risk
   of omitted variables that have an impact on the dependent variables. Omitted
   variables lead coefficient estimates to be biased. Typically, for the estimation of the
   relationship between child marriage or early childbirths and various outcomes, one
   would expect omitted variables to lead to an overestimation of the impact of child
   marriage or early childbirths on these outcomes, which would in turn lead to
   overestimating costs. This is because child marriage or early childbirths variables
   may capture broader gender effects at work. To the extent feasible, the use of



                                           74
   variables estimated at the level of communities in the specification of the regressions
   mitigates the risk of omitted variable bias, but not perfectly.

116. The second risk is that of endogeneity, especially for the relationship
   between child marriage and educational attainment for girls. Endogeneity is at
   work when two variables influence each other. For example, child marriage depends
   on a girls’ education prospects, but in turn her education prospects depend on
   whether she marries as a child or not. Said differently, the decision to marry or go to
   school are jointly determined. As is the case for omitted variables, endogeneity may
   lead to bias (most likely an overestimation) in estimated impacts and costs. In order
   to deal with the issue of endogeneity, instrumental variables can be used, but such
   variables are not always easy to find. The econometric analysis of the relationship
   between education and child marriage in this study relies on instrumental variables.
   Still, despite care in the specification of the regressions, it could still be that the
   impact of child marriage on education outcomes are overestimated.

117. While the two types of bias in the regression analysis may lead to
   overestimating impacts and costs, the fact that the discussion focuses mostly
   on direct impacts may lead to underestimation of impacts and costs. For most
   impacts, the analysis focuses only on the direct impact of child marriage on
   outcomes controlling for other independent variables included in the regression
   analysis. This implies that indirect impacts of child marriage, including through the
   education of girls, are in most cases not factored in the assessment of impacts (the
   exception is the analysis of wages that incorporates indirect impacts). Possibly, the
   risk of overestimating direct impacts in the regression analysis due to omitted
   variables bias and in some cases endogeneity is compensated by the fact that for
   most estimations, potential indirect impacts and associated costs are not factored in.

118. Based on measures of likely impacts, costs associated with some of the
   likely impacts are computed. These costs are based on a number of assumptions
   that could be debated, so they only represent an order of magnitude of potential
   costs, as opposed to precise estimations. For example, some estimations factor in
   discount rates. These discount rates are somewhat arbitrary, and as shown in the
   case of the monetary valuation of the impacts of child marriage on under-five
   mortality and stunting, changing the discount rate can have a large impact on the
   cost estimates. Other assumptions, including in terms of expected growth rates in
   GDP per capita and trends in population growth, could also be debated.

119. Keeping these caveats in mind, the study provides orders of magnitude of
   impacts and associated costs, as opposed to precise estimations. While the
   study makes a strong case that child marriage and early childbirths have a wide
   range of negative impacts, the estimates of impacts and costs are approximate only.




                                         75
                                   ANNEX 2
                                DATA SOURCES

120. The primary data sources for much of the analysis in this study are
   Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). The DHS surveys have four important
   advantages for the analysis of the impact of child marriage on various outcomes:
    The surveys are available for many countries. This makes it feasible to assess
      the impact of child marriage on knowledge or more precisely decision-making
      ability in different contexts.
    The surveys have been vetted extensively over many years in terms of
      questionnaire design and data collection, thus ensuring high quality data.
    Because estimations are conducted for many countries with comparable data,
      the statistical risk across countries of mistaken conclusions about the impact of
      child marriage is significantly reduced in comparison to conclusions that would
      be based on analysis for a few countries only.
    The surveys are publicly available, so other researchers can conduct similar
      analyses not only for the countries included in this brief but also for many other
      countries; this can provide additional validation of the main results.

121. In addition to DHS surveys, the study relies on a few other data sources.
   Table A2.1 provides the data sources used for the various parts of the analysis,
   focusing on the quantitative estimations. Beyond DHS surveys, the study also relies
   on (1) the World Bank’s I2D2 database for wage regressions; (2) census data for
   geographic maps of child marriage; and (3) other country-specific data sources,
   including surveys implemented in Niger and Ethiopia for this study. Beyond these
   data sets, both ICRW and the World Bank undertook qualitative research for this
   study in selected countries using in-depth interviews, focus groups, and
   ethnographic methods.

122. In a few cases, analytical results are based on the use of simulation tools
   parametrized with survey data. DemProj and FamPlan (parametrized using DHS
   data) are used for simulating future population growth in the absence of child
   marriage and early childbirths. Separately, for the estimation of education budget
   savings from the reduction in population growth, a UNESCO model providing
   estimates of the cost of achieving universal secondary education is used.




                                        76
Table A2.1: Data Sources Used for the Quantitative Analysis by Chapter/Section
Topic                                                                      Primary Data Sources
Chapter II – Child marriage and Early Childbirths
Extent of Child Marriage and Early Childbirths                                      DHS
Share of Early Childbirths Likely Due to Child Marriage                             DHS
Factors Leading to Child Marriage and Early Childbirths                             DHS
Profile of Child Marriage by Level of Wealth                                        DHS
Geographic Profile of Child Marriage                                               Census
Chapter III – Impacts on fertility and Population Growth
Impact of Child Marriage on Total Fertility                                         DHS
Impact of Child Marriage and Early Childbirths on Population Growth           DemProj/FamPlan
Welfare Benefits from Reduced Population Growth                                     DHS
Education Budget Savings from Reduced Population Growth                        UNESCO Model
Chapter IV – Impacts on Health, Nutrition and Violence
Child Marriage, Early Childbirths, and Health                                        NA
Impact of Early Childbirths on Maternal Health                                      DHS
Impact of Early Childbirths on Under-five Mortality and Stunting                    DHS
Impact of Child Marriage on Intimate Partner Violence                               DHS
Chapter V – Impacts on Education, Labor, and Earnings
Child Marriage, Early Childbirths, and Education for Girls                           NA
Impact of Child Marriage and Early Childbirths on Girls’ Education              DHS & others
Impact of Child Marriage on Labor Force Participation                               DHS
Impact of Child Marriage on Earnings and Productivity                               I2D2
Intergenerational Impact of Child Marriage on Education                              NA
Chapter VI – Selected Other Impacts
Impact of Child Marriage on Women’s Decision Making                                 DHS
Impact of Child Marriage on Land Ownership                                          DHS
Impact of Child Marriage on Women’s Knowledge of HIV/AIDS                           DHS
Impact of Child Marriage on Birth Registrations                                     DHS
Source: Wodon (2017a).
Note: NA indicates that the section of the report does not rely on empirical data extensively




                                             77
                          ANNEX 3
          CORE SET OF COUNTRIES FOR THE ESTIMATIONS
123. This study provides estimates for 15 core countries for comparison
   purposes and to draw inferences at the global level. For comparison purposes,
   when assessing the impact of child marriage on multiple outcomes in various
   settings, it is useful to estimate impacts for multiple countries since these impacts
   are not necessarily the same in different countries. Estimates for multiple countries
   are also needed in practice in order to be able to infer potential impacts at the global
   level through extrapolation.

124. The core countries chosen for the estimations represent a wide variety of
   settings, including in terms of the prevalence of child marriage. Table A3.1 lists
   the 15 core countries included in the analysis. The sample includes three South
   Asian countries (Bangladesh, Nepal, and Pakistan), one country from the Middle
   East (Egypt), six countries from West and Central Africa (Burkina Faso, Democratic
   Republic of Congo, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Republic of Congo), and five countries from
   East and Southern Africa (Ethiopia, Malawi, Mozambique, Uganda, and Zambia).
   For all countries, the main surveys used for estimations (Demographic and Health
   Surveys) were implemented in 2010 or later and the results are based on the latest
   DHS survey available at the time of the analysis. Priority was given to countries with
   a relatively high prevalence of child marriage and early childbirths, but some of the
   countries such as Egypt have a much lower prevalence. In addition, demand at the
   World Bank for the analysis to be conducted in particular countries as part of on-
   going policy dialogue was also taken into account in the choice of the core countries
   for the estimations. Overall, while the countries are not a representative sample of
   the world as a whole, they represent quite diverse settings in regions of the world
   where the prevalence of early childbirth is high (sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia).

Table 3: List of Countries and DHS Data for the Main Estimations
Country           DHS         Country             DHS         Country            DHS
               survey year                     survey year                    survey year
Bangladesh        2011        Malawi              2010        Nigeria            2013
Burkina Faso      2010        Mali               2012-13      Pakistan          2012-13
DR Congo         2013-14      Mozambique          2011        Rep. Congo        2011-12
Egypt             2014        Nepal               2011        Uganda             2011
Ethiopia          2011        Niger               2012        Zambia            2013-14
Source: Wodon (2017a).




                                          78
                            ANNEX 4
                STRATEGIES TO END CHILD MARRIAGE

125. While this report focuses on the economic and human costs of child
   marriage, and not how to implement strategies to do so, pointers on how to
   end the practice can be provided from the literature. As noted in Perlman et al.
   (2017a), a useful starting point for thinking of potential interventions to end child
   marriage is to summarize findings from reviews of the literature on successful
   interventions. Malhotra et al. (2013) identified more than 150 programs and
   assessed the strategies used by 23 of these to change child marriage-related
   attitudes, behaviors and practices. The study, which included 15 programs in Asia,
   four in East Africa, three in North Africa/Middle East, and one in West Africa,
   identified five types of strategies utilized to prevent or delay early marriage: (1)
   Empowering girls with information, skills, and support networks; (2) Educating and
   mobilizing parents and community members; (3) Enhancing the accessibility and
   quality of formal schooling for girls; (4) Offering economic support and incentives for
   girls and their families; and (5) Fostering an enabling legal and policy framework.
   Examples of programs related to each of these five areas are provided in table A4.1
   (a few programs have been added on top of the programs identified by Malhotra et
   al., 2013). Not all of these interventions are necessarily applicable or should be
   considered as priorities in all countries, but the list is a good start to consider
   options.

   (1) Empowering girls. Many of the interventions reviewed by Malhotra et al. (2013)
       aimed to empower girls with information, skills and support networks. The idea is
       to help girls know themselves, their context, and their options by providing them
       with valuable information and training in a “safe space” environment while also
       reducing their isolation. The interventions mentioned in table 7.1 could be – and
       have been - considered in many countries, including life skills training, vocational
       and livelihoods skills training, mentored learning spaces to facilitate the
       acquisition of core academic skills, and safe spaces that allow girls to connect
       and socialize outside the home.

   (2) Engaging parents and communities. Programs aiming to empower girls are
       typically implemented together with efforts to engage parents and communities
       so that an “enabling environment” is created and the stigma associated with
       delaying marriage is reduced. The interventions in this group aim to change
       social norms and reduce the pressure to marry early. Engaging parents and
       communities is also important to mitigate any potential unintended negative
       consequences of girls’ participation in the programs. A number of programs have
       found that such activities are useful when introducing a new program for girls. At
       the same time however, such type of community engagement alone rarely has
       impact. Rather it is the concrete and tangible benefits of the girls programming
       that facilitates change.

   (3) Improving the quality of formal schooling and education opportunities for girls.
       This is a challenge in many countries where many girls drop out of secondary
       school in part because of concerns about quality. Unless schools improve,
       become affordable, and provide credible alternatives to early marriage for the


                                         79
        girls most at risk, hoping that schooling will work as a mechanism to reduce early
        marriage may not work as well as expected. It is therefore important to improve
        the quality of education systems.

     (4) Providing incentives and economic support. The issue of the opportunity costs
         and out-of-pocket costs associated with schooling are major issues for girls not
         to pursue their education. Education in public schools is in principle free until
         junior secondary, but costs remain for households. Various incentives such as
         conditional cash transfers could help in making sure that girls do pursue their
         secondary education. Economic support through microfinance and other
         programs fostering employment also holds promise, and may have benefits in
         other areas such as sexual and reproductive health behaviors14.

     (5) Enacting laws and policies. Finally, in some countries enacting laws to prevent
         marriage before the age of 18 should be part of the enabling environment to
         eliminate the practice. In many countries such laws already exist, but they may
         not have the desired effect if not accompanied by mechanisms to enforce or
         accompany laws with appropriate complementary interventions. This means that
         multi-strategy approaches that combine laws with raising awareness among
         national decision-makers and local leaders of the importance to eliminate early
         marriage are more likely to be successful.

126. A more recent review of interventions with high quality evidence for their
   impacts on child marriage suggests that interventions related to education
   should be priorities. This review was conducted by Kalamar et al. (2016). It
   confirms that interventions to promote education, including cash transfers, school
   vouchers, free school uniforms, reductions in school fees, teacher training, and life
   skills curricula, are most likely to help. In some cases, the evidence is mixed, but in
   most cases interventions are found to reduce child marriage, or at least increase the
   age at first marriage. This is also underscored under the tipping point approach
   suggested by Brown (2012). Further studies, including those conducted by ICRW
   (Petroni et al, forthcoming), suggest the critical importance of providing
   comprehensive sexuality education and youth-friendly sexual and reproductive
   health services in ensuring that adolescents understand their sexuality and have



14 In addition to dealing with the out-of-pocket and opportunity costs of education, programs aimed
at increasing the earning potential of young women may affect their demand for reproductive
services in three ways. First, the ability to make an economic contribution expands the role of
women beyond that of sex and reproduction, which can increase their own desire to marry, or limit
or space their childbearing. The transformation of girls from economic liabilities into assets in the
eyes of their societies and families can alleviate external pressures on girls that shape their
demand for reproductive control. Second, the loss in earnings associated with childrearing
represents an opportunity cost to having another child which may increase young women’s desire
to limit or space births and also increase their desire to exercise reproductive control. And third, a
women’s increased earnings may improve her bargaining power within the household and allow
her to effectively exercise reproductive control by negotiating delays in sexual debut or marriage,
and negotiating the terms of sex including the use of contraceptives. Creating income-generating
opportunities for women can therefore contribute to female empowerment beyond the economic
realm by widening personal choice and control over marriage and sexual reproductive health
outcomes.



                                               80
    access to the information and services they need to avoid early pregnancies that
    often – in many settings – contribute to child marriage.

Table A4.1: Potential Strategies to Prevent Child Marriage
Strategy                Types of Programs
Empowering girls        - Life skills training
                        - Vocational and livelihoods skills training
                        - Information, education, comm. campaigns
                        - Mentored learning spaces to facilitate acquisition of core academic skills
                        - Safe spaces that allow girls to connect and socialize outside the home
Engaging parents        - One-on-one meetings with parents, community and religious leaders to
and communities         gain support
                        - Group/community education on consequences of/alternatives to early
                        marriage
                        - Parental/adult committees/forums on life skills and SRH curricula
                        - Information, education, comm. campaigns
                        - Public announcements/pledges by leaders
Improving formal        - Preparing, training and supporting girls for enrolment/re-enrolment in
schooling and           school
education               - Raising the quality of instruction in formal school to improve learning
opportunities for girls - Improving curriculum/training teachers on life skills, SRH, gender
                        sensitivity
                        - Building schools, improving facilities and hiring female teachers
                        - Providing remedial education including through after-school programs
Providing incentives    - Incentives (cash, scholarships, fee subsidies, uniforms, supplies) to
and economic            remain in school
support                 - Microfinance and related training to support income generation by
                        adolescent girls
Enacting laws           - Legal minimum age of marriage at 18
and policies            - Advocacy for new policies and enforcement of existing laws/policies.
                        - Raising awareness about the negative consequences of early marriage
Source: Perlman et al. (2017a), adapted from Malhotra et al. (2013).

127. In practice, it is necessary to adapt interventions to the particular context
   that prevails in any country. A simple typology provided by Perlman et al. (2017a)
   originally for Niger outlines the type of programs that could be helpful for adolescent
   girls – both married and not married - in this country, but it could potentially be
   considered for other settings. The typology considers four target groups whose
   needs differ in some respects: (1) Girls ages 10-15 still in school and not married;
   (2) Girls ages 10-16 out of school but not yet married; (3) Girls ages 16-19 still in
   school and not married; and (4) Married girls out of school. A menu of potential
   interventions is suggested in table A4.2 is to tailor specific programs to the needs of
   these key groups of adolescent girls.

    (1) The first two groups of girls are still in school. Most parents regard formal
        education as an acceptable alternative to early marriage. But the cost of
        schooling (out of pocket and opportunity costs) is high for households in poverty.
        In addition, low quality of education in rural schools does not encourage parents
        to invest in their daughters’ education. In order to improve school quality, a focus
        on literacy and numeracy skills acquisition should be a priority for girls ages 10-
        15. In addition, cash transfers or other programs to help offset the cost of
        schooling are needed. Finally, girls in that group also need life skills training.
        Similarly, for girls in school ages 16-19, schooling must provide value. This can


                                              81
       be achieved by focusing more on preparing girls for the formal labor market
       positions such as those held by teachers and nurses. This would help not only
       those girls, but adolescent girls more generally by providing role models to show
       to communities that women can get such jobs if well educated. Several
       interventions for girls ages 10-15 also apply to this group.

   (2) For girls out of school, the interventions listed in table A4.2 differ depending on
       whether they are married or not. For girls not yet married, the key is again to
       provide a viable alternative to marriage. Programs should focus on building
       financial literacy, microenterprise skills, enhancing access to savings and
       expanding economic opportunities. Life skills should also be emphasized through
       ‘safe space clubs’ together with financial incentives to attend. These programs
       should look almost like schooling to achieve some of the protective status
       against early marriage provided by formal education. This could be done by
       providing uniforms resembling those worn by schoolgirls, and ensuring that the
       clubs meet at least three times a week for several hours. Finally, for girls already
       married, programs could also offer financial literacy, microenterprise skills, and
       access to savings groups, as well as life skills, including a focus on knowledge
       about reproductive health, but in a culturally sensitive way to promote birth
       spacing and the use of contraception.

Table A4.2: Interventions for Adolescent Girls by Target Groups - Some Examples
Target Group     Objective                       Interventions
                                         In School
Ages 10-15      Remaining in school              Economic incentives to remain in school
                Learning in school               Basic literacy and numeracy curriculum
                Acquiring life skills            Life skills programs through safe spaces
Ages 16-19      Remaining in school              Economic incentives to remain in school
                Learning in school               Skills for formal employment curriculum
                Acquiring life skills            Life skills programs through safe spaces
                                        Out of School
Not married     Providing incentives             Economic incentives to enroll in training
10-16           Providing training               Broad livelihood/entrepreneurship training
                Providing financing              Access to a savings group
                Ensuring literacy/numeracy       Remedial education for literacy/numeracy
                Acquiring life skills            Life skills programs through safe spaces
Married         Providing training               Training for home-based enterprises
All ages        Providing financing              Access to a savings group
                Ensuring literacy/numeracy       Remedial education for literacy/numeracy
                Acquiring life skills            Life skills programs through safe spaces
                Mentoring younger girls          Married girls serving as cascading mentors.
Source: Perlman et al. (2017a).




                                           82
                                 REFERENCES

Aizer, A. 2011, Poverty, Violence and Health: The Impact of Domestic Violence during
    Pregnancy on Newborn Health, Journal of Human Resources, 46(3): 518–538.
Akpan, E. O. 2003. Early Marriage in Eastern Nigeria and the Health Consequences of
   Vesico-Vaginal Fistulae (VVF) among Young Mothers. Gender and Development
   11(2): 70-76.
Amin, S., and A. Bajracharya. 2011. Costs of Marriage—Marriage Transactions in the
   Developing World. New York: Population Council.
Asadullah, M. N., A. Alim, F. Khatoon, and N. Chaudhury. 2016, Maternal Early
   Marriage and Cognitive Skills Development: An Intergenerational Analysis, WIDER
   Conference on Human Development and Growth, Helsinki.
Backiny-Yetna, P., and Q. Wodon. 2010. Gender Labor Income Shares and Human
   Capital Investment in the Republic of Congo. In Gender Disparities in Africa’s Labor
   Markets, edited by J. S. Arbache, A. Kolev, and E. Filipiak. Washington, DC: World
   Bank.
Baird, S., E. Chirwa, C. McIntosh and B. Ozler. 2010. The Short-Term Impacts of a
    Schooling Conditional Cash Transfer Program on the Sexual Behavior of Young
    Women, Health Economics 19: 55–68.
Baird, S., C. McIntosh, and B. Ozler. 2011. Cash or Condition: Evidence from a
    Randomized Cash Transfer Program, Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 1709-
    53.
Black, M. M., S. P. Walker, L. C. H. Fernald, C. T. Andersen, A. M. DiGirolamo, C. Lu,
    D. C. McCoy, G. Fink, Y. R. Shawar, J. Shiffman, A. E. Devercelli, Q. T. Wodon, E.
    Vargas-Baron, and S. Grantham-McGregor. 2016, Early Childhood Development
    Coming of Age: Science through the Life Course, The Lancet, forthcoming.
Bloom, D. E. and J. G. Williamson. 1998. Demographic transitions and economic
    miracles in emerging Asia, World Bank Economic Review 12(3): 419-55
Bloom D.E., and J. E. Finlay. 2008. Demographic Change and Economic Growth in
    Asia, PGDA Working Paper No. 41, September 2008.
Bloom, D. E., and J. E. Sachs. 1998. Geography, Demography, and Economic Growth
    in Africa, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 207-95.
Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, G. Fink, and J. E. Finlay. 2007. Realizing the Demographic
    Dividend: Is Africa any different?, Program on the Global Demography of Aging
    Working Paper No. 23, Boston, MA: Harvard University.
Bott, S., A. R. Morrison, and M. Ellsberg. 2005. Preventing and Responding to Gender-
     Based Violence in Middle and Low-Income Countries: A Global Review and
     Analysis. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Brown, G. 2012. Out of Wedlock, Into School: Combating Early Marriage through
    Education. London: The Office of Gordon and Sarah Brown.




                                        83
Bussolo, M., I. Fofana, J. C. Parra, and Q. Wodon. 2011, Exports and Labor Income by
   Gender: A Social Accounting Matrix Analysis for Senegal, in M. Bussolo and R. E.
   De Hoyos, editors, Gender Aspects of the Trade and Poverty Nexus: A Macro-Micro
   Approach, World Bank and Palgrave Macmillan, Washington, DC.
Calimoutou, E., Y.Liu, and B.Mbu. 2016. Compendium of International and National
    Legal Frameworks on Child Marriage. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Calimoutou, E. and Q. Wodon. 2017. Legal and Institutional Aspects of Child Marriage,
    Education Global Practice, Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Campbell, J. C. 2002. Health Consequences of Intimate Partner Violence. The Lancet
   359(9314): 1331-6.
Canning, D., S. Raja, and A. S. Yazbeck. 2015. Africa’s Demographic Transition
   Dividend or Disaster?, Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Carbone-Lopez, K., C. Kruttschnitt, and R. Macmillan. 2006. Patterns of Intimate Partner
    Violence and their Associations with Physical Health, Psychological Distress, and
    Substance Use. Public Health Rep 121(4): 382.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2003. Costs of Intimate Partner Violence
   against Women in the United States. Atlanta: CDC.
Chen, X. K., Wen, S. W., Fleming, N., Demissie, K., Rhoads, G. G. and Walker, M.
   2007. Teenage pregnancy and adverse birth outcomes: a large population based
   retrospective cohort study. International Journal of Epidemiology, 36(2): 368-373.
Chibber, K. S., and S. Krishnan. 2011. Confronting Intimate Partner Violence, A Global
    Health Care Priority. Mt Sinai Journal of Medicine 78(3): 449-57.
Clark, S. 2004. Early Marriage and HIV Risks in Sub-Saharan Africa. Studies in Family
    Planning 35(3): 149-160.
Clark, S., J. Bruce, and A. Dude. 2006. Protecting Young Women from HIV/AIDS: The
    Case against Child and Adolescent Marriage. International Family Planning
    Perspectives 32(2): 79-88
Degarege, D., A. Degarege, and A. Animut. 2015. Undernutrition and associated risk
   factors among school age children in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, BMC Public Health,
   15: 375.
Denboba, A., R. K. Sayre, Q. Wodon, L. Elder, L. Rawlings, and J. Lombardi. 2014.
   Stepping up Early Childhood Development: Investing in Young Children with High
   Returns, Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Dixon-Mueller, R. 2008. How Young Is Too Young? Comparative Perspectives on
    Adolescent Sexual, Marital, and Reproductive Transitions. Studies in Family
    Planning 39(4): 247-62.
Duflo, E. 2011. Women's Empowerment and Economic Development. Cambridge:
    National Bureau of Economic Research.
Duvvury, N., A. Callan, P. Carney, and S. Raghavendra. 2013. Intimate Partner
   Violence: Economic Costs and Implications for Growth and Development.
   Washington, DC: World Bank.



                                        84
Duvvury, N., C. Grown, and J. Redner. 2004. Costs of Intimate Partner Violence at the
   Household and Community Levels: An Operational Framework for Developing
   Countries. Washington, DC: International Center for Research on Women.
Duvvury, N., H. M. Nguyen, and P. Carney. 2012. Estimating the Cost of Domestic
   Violence against Women in Viet Nam. New York: UN Women.
Edmeades, J., R. Hayes, and G. Gaynair. 2014. Improving the Lives of Married,
   Adolescent Girls in Amhara, Ethiopia. Washington, DC: International Center for
   Research on Women.
Edmeades, J., et al. 2017. Child Marriage and Decision-making in Niger and Ethiopia.
   Washington, DC: International Center for Research on Women. [Tentative title].
Elborgh-Woytek, K., M. Newiak, K. Kochhar et al. 2013. Women, Work, and the
    Economy: Macroeconomic Gains from Gender Equity. Washington, DC:
    International Monetary Fund.
Erulkar, A. S., and E. Muthengi. 2007. Evaluation of Berhane Hewan: A Pilot Progam To
    Promote Education and Delay Marriage in Rural Ethiopia. New York: UNFPA.
Erulkar, A. S., and E. Muthengi. 2009. Evaluation of Berhane Hewan: A Program to
    Delay Early Marriage in Rural Ethiopia. International Perspective on Sexual
    Reproductive Health 35(1): 6-14.
Fall, C.H., H. S. Sachdev, C. Osmond, M. C. Restrepo-Mendez, C. Victora, R. Martorell,
     A. D. Stein, S. Sinha, S., N. Tandon, L. Adair, and I. Bas. 2015, Association
     between maternal age at childbirth and child and adult outcomes in the offspring: a
     prospective study in five low-income and middle-income countries, The Lancet
     Global Health 3(7): 366-77.
Family Care International, International Center for Research on Women, and
   KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration. 2014. A Price Too High to
   Bear: The Costs of Maternal Mortality to Families and Communities, New York;
   Nairobi; Washington, DC: Family Care International, KEMRI/CDC Research and
   Public Health Collaboration; International Center for Research on Women.
Field, E. and A. Ambrus. 2008. Early Marriage, Age of Menarche, and Female Schooling
     Attainment in Bangladesh. Journal of Political Economy 116(5): 881-930.
Filippi, V., R. Ganaba, R. F. Baggaley, T. Marshall, K. T. Storeng, I. Sombi, et al. 2007.
     Health of Women after Severe Obstetric Complications in Burkina Faso: A
     Longitudinal Study. The Lancet 370(9595): 1329-37.
Gemignani, R., C. Tsimpo, and Q. Wodon. 2014. Making Quality Care Affordable for the
   Poor: Faith-inspired Health Facilities in Burkina Faso, Review of Faith &
   International Affairs, 12(1): 30-44.
Gemignani, R., M. Sojo, and Q. Wodon. 2014. What Drives the Choice of Faith-inspired
   Schools by Households? Qualitative Evidence from Two African Countries, Review
   of Faith & International Affairs, 12(2): 66-76.
Gemignani, R., and Q. Wodon. 2015. Child Marriage and Faith Affiliation in sub-
   Saharan Africa: Stylized Facts and Heterogeneity. Review of Faith & International
   Affairs, 13(3): 41-47.




                                         85
Gemignani, R., and Q. Wodon. 2017. Socio-Economic and Religious Factors Leading to
   Child Marriage in Burkina Faso. Education Global Practice, Washington, DC: The
   World Bank.
Gielen, A. C., K. A. McDonnell, and P. J. O'Campo. 2002. Intimate Partner Violence,
    HIV Status, and Sexual Risk Reduction. AIDS Behavior 6(2): 107-16.
Godha D., D. R. Hotchkiss, and A. J. Gage. 2013, Association between child marriage
   and reproductive health outcomes and service utilization: A multi-country study from
   South Asia, Journal of Adolescent Health 52(5): 552-8.
Haddad, L., J. Hoddinott, and H. Alderman. 1997. Intrahousehold Resource Allocation in
   Developing Countries: Models, Methods, and Policy. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
   University Press.
Hallward-Driemeier, M., and T. Hasan. 2013. Empowering Women: Legal Rights and
    Opportunities in Africa. Africa Development Forum. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Hoddinott, J., H. Alderman, J.R. Behrman, L Haddad and S. Horton. 2013. The
   economic rationale for investing in stunting reduction, Maternal and Child Nutrition 9
   (Suppl. 2): 69-82.
Hoddinott, J., J. R. Behrman, J. A. Maluccio, P. Melgar, A. R. Quisumbing, M. Ramirez-
   Zea, A. D. Stein, K. M. Yount, and R. Martorell. 2013. Adult Consequences of
   Growth Failure in Early Childhood, American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 98(5):
   1170-8.
Hoddinott, J. and L. Haddad. 1995. Does Female Income Share Influence Household
   Expenditures? Evidence from Cote d'Ivoire. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
   Statistics 57(1): 77-96.
Horton S., and R. Steckel. 2013. Global economic losses attributable to malnutrition
    1900-2000 and projections to 2050, in B. Lomborg, editor, The Economics of
    Human Challenges, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Human Rights Watch. 2016. Our Time to Sing and Play: Child Marriage in Nepal, New
   York: Human Rights Watch.
ICRW. 2017. Child Marriage in Ethiopia, Nepal, Niger: Insights from Qualitative Data.
   Washington, DC: International Center for Research on Women. [Tentative title].
ICRW, UNFPA, AusAID, and AFPPD. 2013. Child Marriage in Southern Asia: Policy
   Options for Action, New Delhi, India: International Center for Research on Women.
International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity. 2016. The
     Learning Generation: Investing in Education for a Changing World, New York:
     International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity.
International Food Policy Research Institute. 2003. Household Decisions, Gender, and
     Development: A Synthesis of Recent Research. Washington, DC: International
     Food Policy Research Institute.
Islam, M. K. 2006. The Costs of Maternal-Newborn Illness and Mortality. Geneva: World
    Health Organization.
Jain, S., and K. Kurz. 2007. New Insights on Preventing Child Marriage: A Global
    Analysis of Factors and Programs. Washington, DC: ICRW.


                                         86
John, N., et al. 2017. Child Marriage and Contraception in Niger and Ethiopia.
    Washington, DC: International Center for Research on Women. [Tentative title].
Kalamar, A. M., S. Lee-Rife, and M. J. Hindin. 2016. Interventions to Prevent Child
    Marriage among Young People in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: A Systematic
    Review of the Published and Gray Literature, Journal of Adolescent Health 59: S16-
    S21.
Kamal, S. M. 2012. Decline in child marriage and changes in its effect on reproductive
   outcomes in Bangladesh, Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition, 30(3): 317-30.
Kamal S. M., and C. H. Hassan. 2013. Child marriage and its association with adverse
   reproductive outcomes for women in Bangladesh, Asia-Pacific Journal of Public
   Health 27(2).
Kes, A., and M. Steinhaus. 2017. Child Marriage and Food Security in Niger and
    Ethiopia. Washington, DC: International Center for Research on Women. [Tentative
    title].
Khanna, T., R. Verma, and E. Weiss. 2013. Child Marriage in South Asia: Realities,
   Responses and the Way Forward. Bangkok: UNFPA Asia Pacific Regional Office.
Kidman, R. 2016. Child marriage and intimate partner violence: a comparative study of
    34 countries. International Journal of Epidemiology, doi: 10.1093/ije/dyw225.
Kishor, S., and K. Johnson. 2004. Profiling Domestic Violence: A Multi-Country Study,
    Calverton: ORC Macro.
Klugman, J., L. Hanmer, S. Twigg, T. Hasan, and J. McCleary-Sills. 2014. Voice and
    Agency: Empowering Women and Girls for Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC:
    The World Bank.
Koblinsky, M., M. E. Chowdhury, A. Moran, and C. Ronsmans. 2012. Maternal Morbidity
    and Disability and their Consequences: Neglected Agenda in Maternal Health.
    Journal of Health, Population, and Nutrition 30(2): 124.
Lamb, S., and Z. D. Peterson. 2012. Adolescent Girls' Sexual Empowerment: Two
   Feminists Explore the Concept. Sex Roles (11-12): 703-712.
Le, M. T. H., T. D. Tran, H. T. Nguyen, and J. Fisher. 2014. Early Marriage and Intimate
    Partner Violence among Adolescents and Young Adults in Viet Nam, Journal of
    Interpersonal Violence, 29(5): 889-910.
Le Strat, Y., C. Dubertret, B. Le Foll. 2011. Child Marriage in the United States and Its
    Association With Mental Health in Women. Pediatrics 128(3): 524-30.
Lloyd, C. B., and B. S. Mensch. 2008. Marriage and Childbirth as Factors in Dropping
    Out from School: An Analysis of DHS Data from sub-Saharan Africa. Population
    Studies 62(1): 1-13.
Male, C., and Q. Wodon. 2017a. Child marriage and Early Childbirth: Trend and Profile
    for 25 Countries. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Male, C., and Q. Wodon. 2017b. Geographic Profile of Child Marriage in Niger Based on
    Census Data. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World Bank.




                                         87
Malhotra, A., A. Warner, A. McGonagle, S. Lee-Rife. 2011. Solutions to End Child
    Marriage What the Evidence Shows. Washington, DC: International Center for
    Research on Women.
Mammen, K., and C. Paxson. 2000. Women's work and economic development. Journal
   of Economic Perspectives 14(4): 141-64.
Morrison, A., and M.B. Orlando. 2004. The Costs and Impacts of Gender-based
    Violence in Developing Countries: Methodological Considerations and New
    Evidence. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Murithi, L., D. Santillán, P. Dhillon, M. Sebany, K. Farley, T. Ndhlema, N. Chintu, A.
    Jackson. 2016. Understanding Couple Communication and Family Planning in
    Zambia. Washington, DC: International Center for Research on Women and PSI.
Nanda, P., P. Das, N. Datta, S. Lamba, E. 2015. Making Change with Cash? Evaluation
   of a Conditional Cash Transfer Program to Improve the Status of Girls in Northern
   India, Research Brief, Washington, DC: International Center for Research on
   Women.
Nasrullah, M., R. Zakar, M. Z. Zakar, and A. Krämer. 2014. Girl-child marriage and its
    association with morbidity and mortality of children under 5 years of age in a
    nationally-representative sample of Pakistan, The Journal of Pediatrics 164(3): 639-
    46.
National Research Council, National Institute of Medicine. 2005. Growing Up Global:
    The Changing Transitions to Adulthood in Developing Countries. Washington, DC:
    The National Academies Press.
Nayihouba, A., and Q. Wodon. 2017a. A Note on Child Marriage and Economic Growth.
      Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Nayihouba, A., and Q. Wodon. 2017b. Impact of Early Childbirths on Earnings and
      Household Consumption in Niger. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC:
      The World Bank.
Nayihouba, A., and Q. Wodon. 2017c. Early Childbirths and Perceptions of Well-being
      among Youths in Niger. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World
      Bank.
Nelson, C. A. 2000. The neurobiological bases of early intervention, in J. P. Shonkoff
    and S.J. Meisels, editors, Handbook of early childhood intervention, second edition,
    Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Nguyen, M. C., and Q. Wodon. 2012. Measuring Child Marriage. Economics Bulletin,
   32(1): 398-411.
Nguyen, M. C., and Q. Wodon. 2015. Global and Regional Trends in Child Marriage.
      Review of Faith and International Affairs, 13(3): 6-11.
Nguyen, M. C., and Q. Wodon. 2017a. Early Marriage, Pregnancies, and the Gender
   Gap in Educational attainment: An Analysis Based on the Reasons for Dropping out
   of School in Nigeria. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Nguyen, M. C., and Q. Wodon. 2017b. Impact of Child Marriage on Literacy and
   Educational attainment in sub-Saharan Africa. Education Global Practice.
   Washington, DC: The World Bank.


                                        88
Nguyen, M. C., and Q. Wodon. 2017c. Impact of Child Marriage on Education in Latin
   America and the Caribbean. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The
   World Bank.
Nguyen, M. C., and Q. Wodon. 2017d. Impact of Child Marriage on Education in South-
   Asia. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Nour, N. W. 2006. Health Consequences of Early marriage in Africa. Emerging
   Infectious Diseases 12(11): 1644-9.
Nove, A., Z. Matthews, S. Neal, and A. V. Camacho. 2014. Maternal mortality in
   adolescents compared with women of other ages: evidence from 144 countries, The
   Lancet Global Health 2(3): 155-64.
Onagoruwa. A. O. and Q. Wodon. 2017a. Impact of Child Marriage on Total Fertility
   across Multiple Countries. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World
   Bank.
Onagoruwa. A. O. and Q. Wodon. 2017b. Impact of Child Marriage on Modern
   Contraceptive Use across Multiple Countries. Education Global Practice.
   Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Onagoruwa. A. O. and Q. Wodon. 2017c. Impact of Early childbirth on Under-five
   Mortality across Multiple Countries. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC:
   The World Bank.
Onagoruwa. A. O. and Q. Wodon. 2017d. Impact of Early childbirth on Under-five
   Malnutrition across Multiple Countries. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC:
   The World Bank.
Onagoruwa. A. O. and Q. Wodon. 2017e. Impact of Child Marriage on Women’s
   Decision-Making Ability across Multiple Countries. Education Global Practice.
   Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Onagoruwa. A. O. and Q. Wodon. 2017f. Impact of Child Marriage on Women’s
   Knowledge of HIV/AIDS across Multiple Countries. Education Global Practice.
   Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Onagoruwa. A. O. and Q. Wodon. 2017g. Impact of Child Marriage on the Registration
   of Children at Birth across Multiple Countries. Education Global Practice.
   Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Onagoruwa. A. O. and Q. Wodon. 2017h. A note on Polygamy and Child Marriage
   across Multiple Countries. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World
   Bank.
Palermo, T. and A. Peterman. 2009. Are female orphans at risk for early marriage,
    sexual debut and teen pregnancy? Evidence from sub-Saharan Africa, Studies in
    Family Planning 40(2): 101-112.
Parsons, J., J. Edmeades, A. Kes, S. Petroni, M. Sexton, and Q. Wodon. 2015.
    Economic Impacts of Child Marriage: A Review of the Literature, Review of Faith
    and International Affairs, 13(3): 12-22.
Perlman, D., F. Adamu, and Q. Wodon, editors. 2017a. Vulnerability of Adolescent Girls
    in Niger: Insights from Quantitative and Qualitative Research. Education Global
    Practice. Washington, DC: The World Bank.


                                        89
Perlman, D., F. Adamu, and Q. Wodon, 2017b. Understanding and Ending Child
    Marriage: Insights from Hausa Communities in Niger and Nigeria. Education Global
    Practice. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Petroni, S., M. Steinhaus, N. Stevanovic Fenn, A. Gregowski, K. Stoebenau.
    Forthcoming. New Findings on Child Marriage in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Synthesis
    of Research Conducted by the International Center for Research on Women,
    Annals of Global Health.
Prettitore, P. 2015. Family Law Reform, Gender Equality, and Underage Marriage: A
    View from Morocco and Jordan, Review of Faith and International Affairs, 13(3): 32-
    40.
Raj, A. 2010. When the Mother is a Child: The Impact of Child Marriage on the Health
    and Human Rights of Girls. Archives of Disease in Childhood 95(11): 931-5.
Raj, A., N. Saggurti D. Balaiah, and J. G. Silverman. 2009. Prevalence of child marriage
     and its effect on fertility and fertility-control outcomes of young women in India: A
     cross-sectional, observational study, The Lancet 373(9678): 1883-9.
Raj, A., and U. Boehmer. 2013. Girl child marriage and its association with national
    rates of HIV, maternal health, and infant mortality across 97 countries, Violence
    against women 19(4): 536-51.
Raj, A., L. McDougal, and M. L. Rusch. 2014. Effects of young maternal age and short
     interpregnancy interval on infant mortality in South Asia, International journal of
     Gynaecology and Obstetrics 124(1): 86-7.
Rivers, D., and Q. H. Vuong. 1988. Limited Information Estimators and Exogeneity
    Tests for Simultaneous Probit Models, Journal of Econometrics 39: 347-366.
Sakellariou, C., and F. Zheng. 2014. Early marriage and education outcomes of
   Indonesian women. Unpublished mimeo. School of Humanities and Social
   Sciences, Nanyang Technological University.
Santhya, K.G., N. Haberland, and A.J. Singh. 2006. 'She Knew Only When the Garland
    was Put Around her Neck': Findings from an Exploratory Study on Early Marriage in
    Rajasthan. New Delhi: Population Council.
Santhya, K.G. 2011. Early marriage and sexual and reproductive health vulnerabilities of
    young women: a synthesis of recent evidence from developing countries, Current
    Opinion in Obstetrics and Gynecology 23(5): 334-9.
Santhya, K., U. Ram, R. Acharya, S. J. Jejeebhoy, et al. 2010. Associations between
    early marriage and young women’s marital and reproductive health outcomes:
    Evidence from India. International Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health
    36(3): 132-9.
Savadogo, A. and Q. Wodon. 2017a. Impact of Child Marriage on Intimate Partner
   Violence across Multiple Countries. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC:
   The World Bank.
Savadogo. A. and Q. Wodon. 2017b. Impact of Child Marriage on Women’s Labor
   Force Participation across Multiple Countries. Education Global Practice.
   Washington, DC: The World Bank.




                                         90
Savadogo. A. and Q. Wodon. 2017c. Impact of Child Marriage on Women’s Earnings
   across Multiple Countries. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World
   Bank.
Savadogo, A. and Q. Wodon. 2017d. Impact of Child Marriage on Land Ownership
   across Multiple Countries. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World
   Bank.
Sawant, L. D. and Venkat, S. 2013. Comparative Analysis of Normal versus Fetal
   Growth Restriction in Pregnancy: The Significance of Maternal Body Mass Index,
   Nutritional Status, Anemia, and Ultrasonography Screening. International Journal of
   Reproductive Medicine Article ID 671954, 6 pages.
Shekar, M., Kakietek, J., Dayton Eberwein, J., and Walters, D. 2016. An Investment
   Framework for Nutrition: Reaching the Global Targets for Stunting, Anemia,
   Breastfeeding, and Wasting, Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Sinha, N., and J. Yoong. 2009. Long-Term Financial Incentives and Investment in
    Daughters: Evidence from Conditional Cash Transfers in North India. Policy
    Research Working Paper No. 4860. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Shonkoff, J., L. Richter, J. van der Gaag, and Z. Bhutta. 2012. An integrated scientific
   framework for child survival and early childhood development, Pediatrics 129(2):
   460-72.
Smith, L., and L. Haddad. 2015. Reducing Child Undernutrition: Past Drivers and
    Priorities for the Post-MDG Era. World Development 68: 180-204.
Snow-Jones, A., J. Dienemann, J. Schollenberger, J. Kub, P. O'Campo, A. Carlson
   Gielen et al. 2006. Long-term Costs of Intimate Partner Violence in a Sample of
   Female HMO Enrollees. Women's Health Issues 16(5): 252-61.
Solotaroff, J.L., and R.P. Pande. 2014. Violence against Women and Girls: Lessons
    from South Asia. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Steinhaus, M., et al. 2017. Child Marriage and Intimate Partner Violence in Niger and
    Ethiopia. Washington, DC: International Center for Research on Women. [Tentative
    title].
Storeng, K.T., R.F. Baggaley, R. Ganaba, F. Ouattara, M.S. Akoum, and V. Filippi.
    2008. Paying the Price: The Cost and Consequences of Emergency Obstetric Care
    in Burkina Faso. Social Science & Medicine 66(3): 545-57.
Strauss, J. and D. Thomas. 1998. Heath, Nutrition and Economic Development, Journal
    of Economic Literature 36(1): 766-817.
Tsimpo, C., and Q. Wodon. 2017. Coverage of Essential Early Childhood Development
    Interventions in Uganda. Education Global Practice, Washington, DC: The World
    Bank.
UNFPA. 2012. Marrying Too Young: End Child Marriage. New York: UNFPA.
UNICEF. 2001. Early Marriage: Child Spouses. Innocenti Digest No. 7. Florence:
   Innocenti Research Center.
UNICEF. 2005. Early Marriage: A Harmful Traditional Practice, A Statistical Exploration.
   New York: UNICEF.


                                        91
UNICEF. 2014. Ending Child Marriage: Progress and Prospects. New York: UNICEF.
Vogelstein R. 2013. Ending Child Marriage: How Elevating the Status of Girls Advances
   U.S. Foreign Policy Objectives. New York: Council on Foreign Relations.
Walker, J.-A. 2015. Engaging Islamic Opinion Leaders on Child Marriage: Preliminary
   Results from Pilot Projects in Nigeria, Review of Faith and International Affairs,
   13(3): 48-58.
Walker, J. A., S. Mukisa, Y. Hashim, and H. Ismail. 2013. Mapping Early Marriage in
   West Africa. New York: Ford Foundation.
Warner, A., K. Stoebenau, and A.M. Glinski. 2014. More Power to Her: How
   Empowering Girls Can Help End Child Marriage. Washington, DC: International
   Center for Research on Women.
WHO. 2014a. Health for the World's Adolescents, a Second Chance in the Second
  Decade. Geneva: WHO.
WHO. 2014b. Understanding and Addressing Violence against Women: Health
  Consequences. Geneva: WHO.
Wils, A. 2015. Reaching education targets in low and lower-middle income countries:
    Costs and finance gaps to 2030, background paper prepared for the UNESCO
    Education for All Global Monitoring Report, Paris: UNESCO.
Wodon, Q., 2015a. Child Marriage, Family Law, and Religion: Introduction to the Fall
   2015 Issue. Review of Faith & International Affairs, 13(3): 1-5.
Wodon, Q. 2015b. Islamic Law, Women’s Rights, and State Law: The Cases of Female
   Genital Cutting and Child Marriage, Review of Faith and International Affairs, 13(3):
   81-91.
Wodon, Q. 2015c. The Economics of Faith-based Service Delivery: Education and
   Health in sub-Saharan Africa, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Wodon, Q. 2016. Early Childhood Development in the Context of the Family: The Case
     of Child Marriage. Journal of Human Development and Capabilities, 17(4): 590-
     98.
Wodon, Q. 2017a. Estimating the Economic Impacts and Costs of Child Marriage
     Globally: Methodology and Estimates. Education Global Practice. Washington,
     DC: The World Bank.
Wodon, Q. 2017b. A Note on Child Marriage, Early Childbirths, and Maternal Mortality.
     Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Wodon, Q. 2017c. Global Welfare Cost of Child Marriage Due to Population Growth.
     Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Wodon, Q. 2017d. Global Cost of Under-five Mortality and Malnutrition Due to Child
     Marriage. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Wodon, Q. 2017e. Education Budget Savings from Lower Population Growth When
     Ending Child Marriage and Early Childbirths: Estimates for Multiple Countries.
     Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World Bank.




                                        92
Wodon, Q. 2017f. Impact of Child Marriage on Educational Attainment: Summary
     Evidence from Various Approaches. Education Global Practice. Washington,
     DC: The World Bank.
Wodon, Q., S. Petroni, C. Male, A. Onagoruwa, A. Savadogo, J. Edmeades, A. Kes,
   and N. John. 2015. Economic Impacts of Child Marriage: Preliminary findings from
   analyses of existing data, Economic Impacts of Child Marriage Research Brief,
   Washington, DC: ICRW and World Bank.
Wodon, Q., C. Male, and A. Onagoruwa. 2017. A Simple Approach to Measuring the
     Share of Early Childbirths Likely Due to Child Marriage in Developing Countries.
     Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Wodon, Q., M. C. Nguyen, and C. Tsimpo. 2016. Child Marriage, Education, and
     Agency in Uganda, Feminist Economist, 22(1): 54-79.
Wodon, Q., and A. Yedan. 2017a. Impact of Child Marriage and Early Childbirths on
     Population Growth. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World
     Bank.
Wodon, Q., and A. Yedan. 2017b. Intergenerational Effects of Child Marriage on the
     Education of Children. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World
     Bank.
Wodon, Q., and A. Yedan. 2017c. Impact of Educational Attainment on Child Marriage
     and Early Childbirths: Estimates for 15 Countries. Education Global Practice.
     Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Wodon, Q., and A. Yedan. 2017d. Impact of Child Marriage on Earnings and Household
     Consumption in Nepal. Education Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World
     Bank.
World Bank. 2012. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and
   Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2015, Global Monitoring Report 2015/16: Development Goals in an Era of
   Demographic Change, Washington, DC: The World Bank.
World Bank. 2016, Women, Business, and the Law, Washington, DC: The World Bank.
World Bank and ONE. 2014. Leveling the Field: Improving Opportunities for Women
   Farmers in Africa. Washington, DC: The World Bank; ONE.
World Health Organization (WHO), UNODC, and UNDP. 2014. Global Status Report on
   Violence Prevention, Geneva: World health Organization.
Xu, K., D.B. Evans, K. Kawabata, R. Zeramdini, J. Klavus, and C.J. Murray. 2003.
    Household Catastrophic Health Expenditure: A Multicountry Analysis. The Lancet
    362(9378): 111-7.
Ye, F., H. Wang, D. Huntington, H. Zhou, Y. Li, F. You et al. 2012. The Immediate
    Economic Impact of Maternal Deaths on Rural Chinese Households. PLoS One
    7(6): e38467.




                                       93
