               OnTrack:
    Review of pilot implementations

                Annex 1. Detailed findings per assessment area
1. Quality and relevance of design ............................................................................................ 2
2. Contribution to development results .................................................................................... 9
3. Process efficiency ................................................................................................................ 19
4. Monitoring of behavioral changes ...................................................................................... 22
5. Sustainability of OnTrack ..................................................................................................... 23
6. Replication of OnTrack ........................................................................................................ 24
This annex presents findings from the data collected for the indicators identified
in each assessment area.


1. Quality and relevance of design
Indicator 1.1: Relevance to broad WB goals

Figure 1 WB staff survey: perceptions on OT alignment with WB goals




In interviews and the survey of WB staff there is consensus that OnTrack’s
objectives are broadly aligned with WB goals, particularly with President Kim’s
drive to obtain beneficiary feedback for all WB projects where there is an
identifiable beneficiary. Senior management in interviews expressed
reservations about the relevance of OnTrack across the heterogeneous range of
Bank projects and contexts for which citizen feedback is now being sought.


Senior managers anticipated two main challenges:

       Overselling the potential of                    “There is not much consensus or clarity
                                                        about what it is and how to do it. The
        programs like OnTrack
                                                        evangelists oversell and the audience
                                                        under-listen [...] people may equate CE
       The costs associated with CE                    with development goals and that’s not
        initiatives. At this stage of                   true.”
        development, there is a large
                                                        “Currently OnTrack is perceived as time
        upfront cost to establishing an                 consuming, cumbersome and expensive
        OnTrack platform. There is no low               while it should be the other way round:
        cost “toe in the water” option.                 light and flexible.”




                                                                                                  2
Indicator 1.2: Criteria for selecting the pilot countries and projects

The internal documents provided by the OnTrack team include few and mostly
indirect references to the reasons or criteria used in the selection of pilot
countries and projects.

Interviews with WB staff, both in Washington, D.C. and in the country offices,
point to the following:

       The general perception is that the selection of the countries was mainly
        opportunistic, building on current relationships with the country teams,
        especially in the case of Bolivia. In Zambia, the choice was linked to the
        opportunity of funds being available through the E-ISR project. One
        member of the OnTrack team indicated that there was “a conscious choice
        to target very poor countries with lack of voice and failures in
        governance”.

       For the choice of projects, in the absence of real demand, the team
        expressed a preference to identify and work with projects with a strong
        community engagement component.

An FAQ document prepared for OnTrack indicates that suitable projects for the
implementation of such a mechanism would be projects in remote or extensive
areas, where the government has a program for improving the monitoring of
quality of service, and where government and implementing agencies are keen to
strengthen accountability mechanisms. It goes on to say that “sectors that are
best suited for citizen feedback are Health and Education, Agriculture and Rural
Development, Urban Development, Infrastructure, Water, and Community
Driven Development” (OnTrack, FAQ, p.3). The selection of the OnTrack pilots is
consistent with the conditions described in the document.

Indicator 1.3: Mobile phone/Internet penetration in pilot sites

In all pilot countries, OnTrack referred to existing data regarding mobile phone
penetration and Internet use.

Table 1 Mobile phone and Internet penetration

                        Mobile cellular               Internet Users
               2013     subscriptions
     Bolivia            98%                           39.5%
     Nepal              71%                           13.3%
Source: World Development Indicators

While mobile phone penetration is high in all pilot locations, there was
insufficient prior inquiry about the pattern of use of mobile phones by project
beneficiaries. In Nepal, for example, research would have found that OnTrack’s
SMS texting system for reporting by beneficiaries was ill suited to a population
with low literacy levels and lack of familiarity with Roman script. This issue is



                                                                                    3
being addressed - after a long delay - by building a voice integration system to
allow beneficiaries to call a toll-free number and leave a recorded message.

The OnTrack team was aware that use of the Internet is low in the pilot areas.
Accordingly, limited use of the online features of the system was expected.

In focus groups discussions we conducted with project beneficiaries in Bolivia
and Nepal, we were able to confirm the broad use of mobile phones, especially
among younger people, who were also more likely to know how to send text
messages. We found that while many men have personal mobile phones,
women, with the exception of some younger women, usually do not. Rather, they
have access to a mobile phone in their household.

Beneficiaries who said they used the Internet regularly were exceptions. For
example, a cooperative of coffee farmers in Bolivia claimed they use the Internet
regularly to check for coffee trading prices. In Nepal, some beneficiaries
expressed a hypothetical interest in the possibility of sharing experiences with
other community organizations beyond their Village Development Committee
(VDC).

Partner organizations in Nepal and agricultural extension workers in Bolivia,
who carry out the awareness raising activities for OnTrack, said there was
potential value in the online aspect of the feedback system. They believe that
exposure to the system will eventually lead to more engagement. During the
orientation sessions they seemed excited by the idea of sharing their success
stories and photos on the OnTrack website. Our review of the platform, however,
shows that this excitement did not translate into concrete action by beneficiaries
during the pilots.

Findings from the PAR 1 beneficiaries survey in Bolivia

The face-to-face survey carried with PAR 1 project beneficiaries in the rural
areas of Santa Cruz, broadly confirmed the findings from our qualitative
research. It provided a lot of nuance regarding the patterns of use of mobile
phones and Internet by the target population.




                                                                                    4
Figure 2 PAR survey: access to technology devices




In our survey, only 7% of respondents mentioned not having access to a cellular
phone. However, only 39% have access to computers and 28% to a smartphone.
Access to computers (67%) and smartphones (48%) is significantly higher
amongst respondents that have received some kind of higher education
(representing 21% of the beneficiary population).

Figure 3 PAR survey: Weekly use of SMS




Although there is a high penetration of mobile phones among the beneficiary
population, 50% do not use SMS texting (with 22% stating they don’t know how


                                                                                  5
to). Use of SMS is directly related to the beneficiaries’ educational level. Some
63% of those who have not completed secondary education do not use SMS
texting. They represent 65% of the beneficiary population.
Figure 4 PAR survey: frequency of Internet use




In line with data from World Development Indicators, the majority (60%) of PAR
1 beneficiaries report not using the Internet. This percentage goes up to 84% for
those beneficiaries who have not completed secondary education.

People who use the Internet do so mainly for reading the news (61%) and for
communication through email (45%). Some 44% mention using it for obtaining
information on market prices for their crops or cattle, while 34% mention that
they have used the Internet to obtain information about PAR.

Indicator 1.4: Sensitivity to process and culture

In interviews, staff from both the World Bank staff and PIUs said there was a
strong will on the part of the OnTrack team to adapt the program to the local
context and culture.

However, as they described it, the process       “We did not consult first and
happened the other way round with the            then design, but first
team proposing a standardized approach           designed and then asked if it
and then looking for ways to customize and       would apply to the context”.
adapt it.                                              OnTrack team member

The issue of adaptation to local context and culture is related to two elements:

       The platform was created by a web developer in the USA. When the issue
        came up (in all projects), extensive engagement between the PIUs,
        OnTrack and the platform developers took place about customizing




                                                                                    6
       aspects of the platform. Our interlocutors suggest this was time-
       consuming and did not always lead to a prompt and satisfactory solution.

      The feedback system itself did not initially take into account cultural
       specificities such as language (particularly the use of local dialects in
       Kapilvastu, Nepal), the preference of communities for oral
       communications (both in Bolivia and Nepal), or existing mechanisms for
       dealing with grievances in the community. This was notably the case in
       the urban project in La Paz, Bolivia, where people are accustomed to
       make demands in person to local leaders.

Indicator 1.5: Openness and inclusiveness of the platform

Here we have examined the perceptions of the different constituents regarding
the openness of the feedback mechanism in terms of access and ‘ease of use’.

During focus group discussions in Bolivia, beneficiaries said that the SMS
functionality of the system is useful. It allows their reports to be delivered
quickly and at low cost – and they no longer need to take time off and bear the
costs of going personally to the PAR offices to report issues regarding their
projects.

‘Ease of use’:
    In Bolivia, focus group participants indicated that the SMS system was
       fairly easy to use, although they indicated that older farmers did not know
       how to text. This was confirmed by the PAR beneficiaries survey results
       as discussed under indicator 1.3 above.
    In Nepal, texting is more difficult amongst beneficiaries because, in
       addition to not knowing how to use the texting function, they find it hard
       to write in Roman script
    An added complication for users is the need to indicate the project site
       when sending in a report, using a code for the Alliance (Bolivia-PAR) or
       the VDC (Nepal-PAF) to which they belong.
    In both countries, beneficiaries as well as frontline workers indicated that
       the online function is a challenge for most people, as they are not
       accustomed to using computers or the Internet.
    Furthermore, in our inquiries we discovered that the platform itself is
       considered slow. Specifically, the maps often took several minutes to load
       completely, even in countries with good Internet connectivity. The lack of
       a ‘search’ function also hindered its use.

Inclusiveness:
The limitations of the evaluation (see Annex 2) precluded an assessment of how
the actual users of the mechanism in pilot activities relates to the entire project
beneficiary community or to specific subsets of the beneficiary population who
are of particular interest to the Bank (e.g., the poor, women, disabled, minority
groups…). The project monitoring data, including website usage, are insufficient
to complete this analysis and we were unable to obtain the necessary
demographic data of OnTrack users after the fact.


                                                                                      7
Focus group participants both in Nepal and Bolivia, as well as people we
interviewed, suggest that the system is more suited to young people than to the
older generation who did not know how to text or use the Internet.

Through the survey of PAR 1 beneficiaries in Bolivia we found, as previously
discussed, a direct connection between the use of SMS and Internet with the
educational attainments of beneficiaries, indicating a high level of exclusion of
beneficiaries with lower educational levels. Furthermore, when asked about the
likelihood of using a mechanism such as OnTrack, a significantly higher portion
of respondents over 40 years old and those who have not completed secondary
education say that they would never use such a mechanism. The gender of the
respondents, however, did not seem to be an influencing factor here.

During focus group discussions with PAR beneficiaries in Bolivia, participants
indicated a preference for the representative/chief of the alliance to send in
reports on behalf of all members. This would seem to show a lack of alignment
between OnTrack, which is meant to enable easy, open and spontaneous
feedback, with the prevailing pre-Internet forms of civic engagement. This may
be explained by the fact that only two representatives from each alliance
participated in the orientation session.

Indicator 1.6: Directness of feedback process

Our interviews in PAR and PAF indicated a consistent appreciation that OnTrack
does overcome intermediary gatekeeper problems. OnTrack is a system that in
theory permits beneficiaries, both individually and collectively, to send in
reports directly to the PIU without passing through the local intermediaries.

For example, partner organizations in Nepal noted that being able to report
directly to PAF without passing through the intermediaries (the “social
mobilizers”) provides a useful additional way to hold social mobilizers to
account. Similarly, the regional coordinators for PAR in Santa Cruz, Bolivia,
indicated that thanks to OnTrack they can hear directly from the alliances
without the intermediation of the extension workers. The national coordinators
for PAR, meanwhile, indicated that they could get direct feedback without the
intermediation of the regional coordinators.

PIUs tend to find OnTrack particularly relevant to projects with beneficiaries in
remote areas. The reason given is that the affected communities would
otherwise be even more excluded. Given lack of supporting evidence that this is
the case -- compounded by the near absence of actual feedback captured through
OnTrack pilots -- this assertion has to be considered more prospective than
actual.

Lastly, from conversations with both beneficiaries and frontline workers, it
seems that in practice OnTrack does not enable feedback from individuals. As
noted in the discussion of the inclusiveness of the system, it seems that reports
made through the system are negotiated at the community/rural alliance level


                                                                                    8
before being sent in. In other words, the system is in fact ‘controlled’ by the
chiefs/representatives of the community organizations.

Indicator 1.7: Adaptation of OnTrack to ‘in country’ conditions

A number of points relating to adaptation to in-country conditions are covered
above, including issues relating to mobile phone/internet penetration in
different country and cultural contexts (indicators 1.3 & 1.4).

Regarding in-country conditions, a recurrent issue raised by people we
interviewed relates to the openness of implementing organizations to
beneficiary feedback. While beyond OnTrack’s remit, this speaks to the need for
an analysis of the readiness of the World Bank’s partners to take on board
feedback (a ‘readiness calculus’). It also underlines the importance of presenting
the full range of elements required for citizen feedback to generate improved
development outcomes, including data analysis, sense-making, further inquiry to
understand the full import of feedback messages and, most important, course
corrections by service implementers. These course corrections must then be
communicated to service recipients so that their subsequent feedback is directly
responsive to the course corrections.

In the 3 main pilot projects (Bolivia and Nepal), OnTrack took advantage of a
favorable political climate for establishing citizen feedback mechanisms.

In the PBCV project, the municipality of La Paz already has various open
communications channels with citizens (“la brigada cazabaches” and the mayor’s
radio show). The central government of Bolivia, on which the PAR project
depends, prides itself on promoting citizen participation. Similarly, in the case of
Nepal, the PAF project is the direct responsibility of the office of the Prime
Minister, which also demonstrates, according to interviewees at the country
office, openness towards such approaches. In Zambia, however, this condition
does not seem to be met and is cited by interviewees as one of the main reasons
for lack of progress.

A specific issue of lack of adaptation to in-country conditions was raised in
Bolivia where national legislation does not allow the websites of public entities
to be hosted abroad. The OnTrack platform is currently hosted in the US.


2. Contribution to development results
Indicator 2.1: Level of awareness by project beneficiaries

For all three projects where the OnTrack pilot was implemented, communication
plans were developed but have not been fully implemented. Some material
(brochures and posters) was distributed at all sites and there were various
mentions in the press, particularly in relation to the launch of the platform. In
Bolivia, a high level launch took place in Cochabamba with the participation of



                                                                                    9
President Kim and the Chief Secretary of the Nepalese government participated
in the launch there.

The main awareness-raising activities carried out at the pilot sites involved a
single orientation session. The evidence suggests that this level of preparatory
effort is insufficient to establish OnTrack as an effective citizen feedback
mechanism.

For PAR in Bolivia, all 142 rural alliances in the Santa Cruz area took part in one
orientation session. In this session 2 people per alliance were invited to
participate (generally, the head of the alliance and one member). For PBCV in La
Paz, 2 sessions took place in 2 different neighborhoods with children and adults.
In Nepal, orientation sessions took part with 30 community organizations. 5
representatives per community organization participated in the session.

In all cases, facilitators gave an overview of the system and its objectives.
Participants were told how to send reports using the SMS system and they sent
test messages during the sessions. Regarding the online aspects, extension
workers and social mobilizers report that on only a few occasions were they able
to test the system ‘live’ when computers with an Internet connection were
available. In Bolivia, the local Internet café was used on some occasions, while
both in Bolivia and Nepal a community centre was occasionally used for that
purpose. However, in most instances no computers with an Internet connection
were available during the orientation sessions. Explanations were limited to
showing participants brochures and describing the system orally.

Information from orientation session participants was not passed on, as had
been anticipated, to other beneficiaries. In focus group discussions, those that
did not participate in training/orientation had not heard about it. In Nepal, some
beneficiaries who had participated in orientation did not recall specific details
about the session they attended.

In a focus group meeting in Nepal, two women had an OnTrack brochure in their
hands but could not read it because the brochure is only available in Nepalese,
while they speak a Hindi dialect. Most women had not heard about OnTrack in
the communities we visited in Nepal.




                                                                                   10
Figure 5 PAR survey: Awareness of existence of a reporting mechanism




A similar picture is shown by the results of the survey of PAR beneficiaries in
Santa Cruz. 69% of respondents affirm that they know of ways for reporting
issues or sharing opinions and suggestions regarding the project. When asked to
identify those ways, the majority point to in-person interactions with PAR
representatives.

Figure 6 PAR survey: Awareness of existing reporting mechanisms




                                                                             11
Only a handful of beneficiaries (14%) in the area where OnTrack was piloted are
aware of the existence of a digital engagement mechanism. Some 16% say they
know that an SMS reporting mechanism is available and 9% that an online
feedback platform exists. These percentages might be even smaller in reality if
we take into account that 32% of respondents chose the option “call a free
phone” which has not actually been made available to PAR beneficiaries in this
area.

Those who reported awareness of an SMS and/or online feedback mechanism
were asked to say how they had heard about it. Some 48% (29 respondents) said
that they had heard of OnTrack from a person who works with the project, 36%
(22 respondents) that they participated in an OnTrack training, and 36% (22
respondents) through a friend, relative, neighbor or colleague.


Indicator 2.2: Beneficiary usage rate

The recorded usage rates of OnTrack are low. There have been only 250 tickets
(registered reports) since the launch of the PAR platform in April 2013. Of this
number, the majority were tests sent during training sessions by participants or
trainers. Only 4 tickets seem to respond to real reports sent spontaneously by
project beneficiaries outside the training sessions. In PAR, the explanation for
the low use of the platform by all types of stakeholders was that OnTrack was
implemented at the end of PAR 1 and PAR 2 is only just getting underway. There
was a general sense that the system would have been used more if it had been
implemented at the beginning of the project. The current plan is for the OnTrack
system to be implemented as part of PAR 2 with the expectation that this will
lead to an exponential increase in its use by beneficiaries.

Since the launch of the PBCV platform, 58 tickets were received, all seemingly
sent by users during training sessions.1

Since its launch in October 2013, some 32 tickets were received on the Nepalese
platform. Almost all these were received during the orientation sessions.

With the lack of a search function and an easily navigable back-end for the
platform, it is difficult to know the exact number of photos, stories and
suggestions contributed by beneficiaries to the online platform. However, by
browsing the three platforms, it appears that there has been little use of these
functions – and this was mainly during the training and orientation sessions.




1
  For the Bolivian platforms, Keystone was given access to the back end and could verify this
information directly in Spanish. For the Nepalese platform, Keystone could not verify the information
in Nepalese language and we rely here on information reported by OnTrack staff and the PIU.


                                                                                                   12
Table 2 Number of platform visitors

Visitors of OnTrack platforms                        Bolivia            Nepal
                                                     (PAR and           PAF
                                                     PBVC)2
March 2013 (launch of PBVC                           209                N/A
platform)
April 2013 (launch of PAR platform)       748                           N/A
May 2013                                  322                           N/A
June 2013                                 771                           N/A
July 2013 (official visit of President    1,028                         N/A
Kim in Bolivia)
August 2013                               647                           N/A
September 2013                            536                           N/A
October 2013 (launch of PAF               626                           259
platform)
November 2013                             528                           48
December 2013                             368                           48
Average visitors per month                578                           118
Total visitors from launch to end         5783                          355
2013
Source: Monthly website analytics reports

Table 3 provides data on website analytics through the end of 2013 and indicates
minimal traffic on the 3 platforms. In Bolivia there is a spike in traffic around the
time that World Bank President Jim Kim participated in an event for the launch
of OnTrack in Cochabamba in 2013 and in Nepal around the time of the launch
with the participation of the Chief Secretary.

The survey of PAR beneficiaries in Santa Cruz, Bolivia offers some important
insights on the likelihood of use of ICT enabled feedback mechanisms such as
OnTrack and the motivations for the use of such mechanisms.




2
 The data for the two Bolivian projects cannot be disaggregated because, while they have distinct
user interfaces, the back end is shared.


                                                                                                    13
Figure 7 PAR survey: Likelihood of reporting via mobile phone




Although 66% of beneficiaries express the view that they would be either likely
or very likely to use their mobile phones to report problems with a project, if this
option was available to them, only 11% report having actually done so in relation
to PAR (see figure 8).

When asking this question, we tested whether the promise of anonymity
influenced peoples’ readiness to use a reporting mechanism via mobile phone.
Our experiment showed that for the beneficiary population in general,
anonymity is not a primary consideration. However, it does seem to influence the
likelihood of using such a reporting mechanism in the case of women and those
who have not completed secondary education.




                                                                                 14
Figure 8 PAR survey: Types of participation




Beneficiaries clearly favor offline and traditional participation modes. They show
themselves however very open to digital engagement with only 22% and 24%
respectively saying they would never use an SMS or online feedback mechanism.
This proportion is significantly higher among beneficiaries who have not
completed primary education (42% and 43% respectively).


Figure 9 PAR survey: Preferred ways for reporting




                                                                               15
Asked about what would be their preferred way to submit problem reports, the
in-person option is significantly more popular amongst beneficiaries with a
lower education level (76% of those who have not completed secondary
education choose this option vs. 61% of those who have secondary or higher
education). In the same way, online and SMS options are more popular with
those beneficiaries that have secondary or higher education.

Figure 10 PAR survey: Beneficiaries' self-efficacy




While expressing openness towards using different channels of participation,
including digital ones, the perception of self-efficacy by PAR beneficiaries is quite
low. They tend to believe that they have little understanding of political issues
and limited capacity to influence governmental actions. These perceptions link to
their motivations for using a digital engagement mechanism. It is striking that
among the reasons they mention that would potentially motivate them to use
such a mechanism, very few people say they believe that engaging in the process
will lead to actual improvements in the project.




                                                                                  16
Figure 11 PAR survey: Motivations for Digital Engagement




Indicator 2.3: Responsiveness to feedback

Since limited beneficiary feedback was received, it is hard to assess the level of
responsiveness of the PIUs to the feedback they did get.

It is important to note that the current OnTrack system sends an automatic reply
to those submitting a report with a ticket number that can be used by the
beneficiary for follow-up. Beneficiaries are informed whether the status of their
ticket is open or closed, but there is no reporting back to the beneficiary about
proposed actions to address the concerns they raise – nor is this contemplated in
the current set up. However, it is contemplated in the customization requests
presented to the platform developers and is included in the ToR for a local
vendor to develop the platform for the PAR project in Bolivia.

During focus group discussions in Nepal, at least 2 instances came to our
attention of reports submitted via SMS by beneficiaries that received no
response. The members of the PIU present in the discussion said technical issues
accounted for the lack of response.

When asked about their expectations about what should happen once they send
a report, beneficiaries repeatedly stated that they expect to receive a response
indicating how it will be addressed and a timeframe for resolution.




                                                                                     17
Figure 12 World Bank staff survey: perceptions of responsiveness to feedback




Figure 12 shows the perceptions of surveyed World Bank staff on a scale of 0-10
on the following 3 statements:

       The use of SMS and internet technology by OnTrack enables providers of
        public services to respond to user feedback in a practical and timely way
       OnTrack’s design ensures that users who provide feedback on public
        services always receive a response
       In my experience, providers of public services involved with OnTrack always
        respond to feedback received by users through OnTrack

While World Bank staff involved in the OnTrack pilots tend to see ICT’s potential
in enabling a timely response to feedback provided, they are skeptical about
whether OnTrack’s design ensures a response. Those that express an opinion
tend not to have much confidence in the PIUs’ responsiveness to feedback.

Indicator 2.4: Timeliness of response to feedback
Due to the low levels of use, it has not been possible to assess the timeliness of
response. In the World Bank staff survey, respondents were asked to indicate
whether they knew of at least one example where a public service provider has
given a timely response to feedback provided by a user through OnTrack. Some 4
respondents said “yes” but were unable to provide a concrete example.

Indicator 2.5: Fix rate
Here too, due to the low levels of use of the feedback system, it is not possible to
meaningfully assess this indicator.

Only a single instance of a ‘fix’ reported by beneficiaries came to our attention
through staff surveys and interviews. This positive example was in the PAR
project where a beneficiary reported that forage for livestock was not arriving on
time and the project team took action to resolve the issue.




                                                                                   18
3. Process efficiency
Indicator 3.1: OnTrack quality of advice and support

The PIUs were consistently appreciative of the responsiveness of the OnTrack
team and the support received. Continuous support was provided by the
OnTrack team, including a series of training sessions for PIU staff. An example of
this responsiveness was the decision to restructure the OnTrack model to build
and host the technology locally rather than in the US.

By contrast, the CMUs/TTLs are less satisfied. The main complaint is that there
have been too many surprises as the project unfolded with respect to hidden
costs, unexpected length of OnTrack implementation process (for example, to
customize for the local realities), and requirements for specialized staff to
maintain the system. These are some of the main reasons that led to the decision
to build the platforms locally in future.

These findings apply to all 3 pilots.

Indicator 3.2: PIU quality of service

Under this indicator we intended to examine the quality of service provided by
the PIUs in relation to the implementation of the OnTrack feedback system.
However, due to the limited use of the platform in all the pilot sites, it is hard to
assess this aspect.

In previous sections we provided observations on two key aspects regarding this
indicator: responsiveness to the feedback provided by users (Indicator 2.3) and
the quality of outreach and awareness raising activities regarding OnTrack
(indicator 2.1).

Indicator 3.3: PIU/public service providers’ capacity

When asked about what kind of capacity elements are necessary for the PIUs to
effectively implement and manage the feedback system, both the PIUs and World
Bank staff in all pilot sites focus on the technological issues. They mention that
in-house technical capacity - i.e. a member of staff dedicated to handling the IT
aspects - is needed to run and maintain the online platform and SMS system.
Only PBCV in Bolivia said it has sufficient in-house capacity. In both PAR and
PAF, where the decision was taken to localize the platform, intensive support is
required by the OnTrack team to help the PIU draft the ToR and select the
appropriate local vendors.

Another capacity element brought forward in interviews is the need for
specialist communications staff to focus specifically on outreach and awareness
raising. During our visits we were able to confirm that all 3 pilot projects have in
place a communications officer that can lead on this aspect.




                                                                                    19
One neglected issue is strengthening institutional capacity so that PIUs are able
to analyze and integrate the feedback into their activities. There are no clear
workflows at any of the project sites about how to deal with feedback. An
analogy was drawn by a World Bank staff member regarding the PIU in the peri-
urban sanitation project in Zambia. It has a customer relations person already in
place — unrelated to OnTrack – but there is no mechanism to respond to
customer complaints.

Both PIUs and World Bank staff raise a hypothetical concern about the PIUs not
having sufficient capacity to deal with large flows of feedback. As indicated, this
is not the case at present but they anticipate it will happen if the system is
completed or expanded.

Indicator 3.4: New needs identified by the implementation of the program

Figure 13 World Bank staff survey: perceptions on OT effectiveness for identifying new needs




There seems to a belief among some World Bank staff that OnTrack can enable
the identification of new needs by the beneficiaries of a project. While in theory
this could be the case, we were unable to find any instances where such
identification has taken place. This may be due to the limited use of the system
by project beneficiaries.




                                                                                               20
Indicator 3.5: Human, material and financial resources invested by
different constituents

Table 3 OnTrack costs in USD July 1, 2012- Feb 28, 2014

OnTrack costs July 1, 2011 - Feb 26, 2014
                     OnTrack team                                     Travel                         Platfor
                                                                                          All        m         Oth    FY
Fiscal   WB       Short term        OnTrack      Boli   Nep    Zam      Gha        Oth    travel     Develop   er     total
Year     staff    consultants       team total   via    al     bia      na         er     total      ment

          66,1                                   3,34   12,4                       11,0                               123,1
FY12       70            14,287         80,457      6    49       -            -    78     26,874     15,250   536      17

          167,                                   29,3   39,6   20,5     25,2       1,30                        1,46   465,0
FY13      309           157,340        324,649    07     13     34       10           8   115,972     22,968      2     50

          121,                                   3,09   1,95            (736       1,74                        95,8   506,4
FY14      129           229,080        350,209      4      8      -        )          5      6,061    54,297    74      42

 Total    354,                                   35,7   54,0   20,5     24,4       14,1                        97,8   1,094,
s         609           400,706        755,315     47     20     34       74         32   148,907     92,515     72      609


The core OnTrack team comprised the TTL, the Technical Lead, and one
Engagement Lead for each of the countries where OnTrack was piloted. A
dedicated consultant provided communications and general support. Occasional
support was also provided by temporary consultants. For the period for which
we were provided with detailed financial information (July 1, 2011 - Feb 28,
2014), the total costs related to the OnTrack team were USD 755,315. During this
period, approximately 26 international trips were undertaken. The total costs
associated to travel were USD 148,907. The cost for the development and
maintenance of the OnTrack platform was USD 92,515. The total cost for the
program is USD 1,094,609.

While not a measure against which a pilot should be assessed, it is interesting to
note that the cost ratio per ticket generated by the system has been USD 3,219
and per website visitor USD 178.

In the World Bank staff survey, only 2 out of 17 staff surveyed considered that
the level of human and financial resources invested in OnTrack to be
proportionate to results. In interviews with different levels of staff, the cost of
maintenance of the platform (USD 60,000/year/project) came up repeatedly as a
point of contention. No answers were forthcoming.

We are unable to provide an estimate of the different resources invested by the
PIUs, as this information was not available or forthcoming. In interviews, PIUs
diplomatically indicated that they felt that the level of financial and human
resources deployed was proportionate to the results obtained. They did
volunteer, however, that the cost for the maintenance of the platform was too
expensive and that this, along with the need to adapt to local specificities, was
the reason for which they took the decision to develop and host the platform
locally. An estimate provided for the local development of the platform for PAR
in Bolivia was USD 40,000 (including management of the platform) and for PAF
in Nepal USD 10,000. These costs reflect only the development of the platform.


                                                                                                                         21
Costs related to management, communications and engagement have not been
calculated.


4. Monitoring of behavioral changes
Indicator 4.1: Existence and implementation of a monitoring and learning
system

OnTrack does not yet have a system to monitor KPIs, or to assess and take
corrective action on the basis of a reliable and continuing stream of indicators.

During interviews we were informed by staff that neither the data on the
number of tickets generated and responded to, nor website traffic has been
systematically tracked or analyzed. As noted previously, much of this data
cannot be easily manipulated because the platform does not provide the
necessary functionality. Most analysis is currently carried out by manual
extraction of the data.

Indicator 4.2: Quality of relationships between different constituents
(including management of expectations)

The general feeling about relationships is mildly positive and it is reasonable to
consider relationship quality as an asset for OnTrack, especially in relation to the
PIUs.

Surveyed World Bank staff give an average rating of 7.5 out of 10 on the extent to
which relationships between different WB staff involved in OnTrack and the PIUs
are based on mutual understanding and respect.

                                  PIUs believe that their opinions are taken into
 “Lots of communications at
                                  account, even if implementation of OnTrack
 first, but then no follow up.”
                                  produced surprises on a continuous basis. The
                      Nepal PIU
                                  Nepal PIU called for more follow up.

The more negative views expressed in Zambia and from TTLs and CMUs were all
connected to the tendency to over-promise. In one case (PBCV in Bolivia) there
was frustration about the inability to conclude a formal agreement with the Bank
on OnTrack deliverables.




                                                                                    22
5. Sustainability of OnTrack3
Indicators 5.1 & 5.2: Buy in by PIU/public service providers and top-level
government authorities/Perceptions on the value of project beneficiary
feedback by PIU/public service providers

In interviews with WB staff and from our observation in our interactions with
the PIUs in Bolivia and Nepal, it became clear that OnTrack was effective in
engaging clients and in creating genuine excitement about building a citizen
feedback mechanism. The OnTrack team reports changes in the attitudes of the
PIUs towards transparency. Notably, they point to the willingness of the PIUs to
share all key project information, including financial aspects to populate the
mapping element of the OT platform. Openness to sharing information publicly
was not a given at first and has been the product of continuous engagement and
encouragement by the OnTrack team.

For Zambia we do not have enough information to make an assessment, however
it has come to our attention that lack of buy-in from the PIUs (and the higher
government authorities on which they depend) was the main reason the project
ground to a halt.

Certain nuances regarding the commitment of the PIUs to take action on the
feedback relate to opinions expressed during interviews to the effect that not all
feedback is valid. Interlocutors point to a high level of interpretation, with
project beneficiaries not always in a position to understand the projects and
provide ‘good quality’ feedback.

In the PAR project, senior management indicated that they did not want OnTrack
to become the “wailing wall”. Rather they saw it as a good platform for
beneficiaries to share their stories and learn from each other, thereby
minimizing the importance of the reporting and suggestion-making functions of
the system.

All PIUs and authorities consulted for this evaluation acknowledge finding great
potential in OnTrack for monitoring the implementation of the projects/services
and identification of issues that need attention from the provider. It is less clear
that they understand their responsibilities to respond to feedback and take
corrective actions.




3
 In addition to the findings on the specific indicators presented in this section, indicators 2.2
(beneficiary usage rate), 3.1 (OnTrack quality of advice and support), 3.2 (PIU quality of service) and
3.3 (PIU/public service providers capacity), already analyzed in previous sections are also important
for the analysis of the sustainability of a mechanism such as OnTrack.




                                                                                                      23
Indicator 5.3: Buy in by TTLs and CMUs

Operations staff consulted for this assignment expressed high interest in
beneficiary feedback mechanisms and specifically in OnTrack’s potential. They
find the concept compelling and see its potential in making a significant
contribution to the outcomes of their projects in way that is complementary to
traditional monitoring systems. This opinion was echoed in a staff meeting held
in the WB office in La Paz, where the evaluators presented their approach on
citizen engagement and reviewed together the associated opportunities and
challenges.

Regarding the specific commitment of the TTLs of the projects on which OnTrack
was piloted, the picture is more nuanced. It was challenging to secure even a 45-
minute interview with them to get their opinions on the pilot. They were
unaware about the details of the pilot’s design and implementation, and all of
them expressed frustration about the OnTrack team’s failure to provide accurate
costing for the maintenance of the platform in advance. They expressed a
commitment to the basic principles and logic of citizen feedback and to the
success of OnTrack. However, as a senior manager at WBI said: “If there was
true commitment, OnTrack would not need to be flying people around, the TTL
would have done the work and gotten local consultants”.

Indicator 5.4: Clear definition of OnTrack’s role going forward

The OnTrack team conceived OnTrack as a complete program for enabling
citizen feedback, not as a mere feedback mechanism and an online platform.
However, this message has failed to get across. The point of view of other WB
staff and PIUs is almost exclusively focused on the technological aspects. The fact
that OnTrack itself took on the development of the platform on which the system
is based has contributed to this perception.

In the context of the restructuring of the World Bank into global practices,
OnTrack is included under the “Digital Engagement” chapter of the Governance
Global Practice. Its role is becoming more clearly defined as an advisory service
to projects/PIUs for developing and implementing ICT-enabled citizen feedback
mechanisms. This is a departure from the software development role previously
assumed.


6. Replication of OnTrack
Indicator 6.1: Interest expressed by other actors in WB

WB staff indicated in interviews that one of the main achievements of OnTrack
was to raise awareness and create excitement about CE in the WB. Some
interlocutors indicated that there is broader – although non-specific -- interest in
the approach from elsewhere in the World Bank. But, they say, cost issues are a
‘turn off’. They want to see the results of the pilots before taking things further.



                                                                                  24
At the country level, the PIUs indicate that they have not made a major effort to
disseminate OnTrack. It is still seen as a pilot and although they report that the
idea generates general interest in their countries, that interest has yet to lead to
concrete uptake at this stage.


Indicator 6.2: Completeness of feedback system as product/Level of
readiness of feedback system

As mentioned, while the rhetoric about OnTrack emphasizes that it is a program,
so far efforts have been mainly concentrated on the technology – and even this
aspect of the approach remains incomplete. Consultations with a range of
different stakeholders and our own observations suggest the following
technology issues still require attention:

      Development of local platforms (underway)
      General slowness of the platform
      Making the user interface more user friendly
      Large volumes of spam on Bolivian platform
      Voice integration in Nepal (underway)
      Lack of search function
      Lack of notification mechanism when report is received

Other aspects that remain incomplete:
    A clear results framework and theory of change
    A monitoring and evaluation plan
    A strategy for engaging with TTLs and other operations staff, with clear
       roles and responsibilities
    A strategy for engaging with the PIUs
    Costing of the different aspects of the program
    The design of the feedback loop itself. There is no clear description,
       workflow or guidelines about how to the received feedback should be
       treated, analyzed and used for taking corrective action and closing the
       loop with the users and project beneficiaries.




                                                                                   25
