About: Investment Climate Unit of the Trade & Competitiveness Global Practice, World Bank Group

The Investment Climate Unit helps governments implement reforms to improve their business
environments and encourage and retain investment, thus fostering competitive markets, growth, and
job creation. For further information, please contact:




                         Christine Zhenwei Qiang
                         Practice Manager, Investment Climate
                         World Bank Group
                         cqiang@worldbank.org


                         Roberto Echandi
                         Global Lead, Investment Policy &
                         Promotion, Investment Climate
                         World Bank Group
                         rechandi@ifc.org



                         Peter Kusek
                         Program Lead, Investment Climate Applied
                         Research Program
                         World Bank Group
                         pkusek@ifc.org
Table of Acronyms
DC          Developing Countries

DVA         Domestic Value Addition

FDI         Foreign direct investment

GVC         Global Value Chains

ICD         Investment Competitiveness Diagnosis

IPA         Investment Promotion Agency

IRM         Investment Reform Map

MNE         Multi National Enterprises

SIRM        Systemic Investment Response Mechanism

UNCTAD      United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

WBG         World Bank Group
Contents


1.     Introduction                                                                                  5
     1.1. How can foreign direct investment help a country develop?                                  5
     1.2. Why is an investment vision important?                                                     6
2.     From an Investment Vision to an Investment Lifecycle                                           7
     2.1. Three Key Ideas for an Investment Policy Framework                                          7
     2.2. Not all kinds of investment are the same, nor have the same effects on development: the FDI
     Typology                                                                                         8
     2.3. Investment is a relationship, not a transaction: The Investment Lifecycle                 14
3.     From the Investment Reform Map to reform oriented results on the ground                      15
     3.1. What is the IRM Process?                                                                  15
     3.2. Investment Competitiveness for Business-Led Growth – The Investment Competitiveness
     Diagnosis                                                                                      16
4.     Toolkits developed by the WBG targeting individual stages of the Investment Lifecycle        18
     4.1. Investment Promotion                                                                      18
     4.2. Investment Entry                                                                          20
     4.3. Investment Incentives                                                                     24
     4.4. Investment Protection and Expansion                                                       26
     4.5. FDI Linkages                                                                              30
5.     Conclusion                                                                                   33
     References                                                                                     34
1. Introduction


1.1. How can foreign direct investment help a country develop?

Why are some countries rich and others poor? This is a question that has been attempted to be
answered in many different historical periods by numerous academics, politicians, social scientists and
economists. Today we face a very interesting paradox. On the one hand, according to World Bank
Statistics, the number of people in the world living on extreme poverty – that is, on less than $1.25 per
day-- has decreased dramatically in the past three decades. While in 1981 on average half of the citizens
in the developing world used to live in extreme poverty, in 2010 that figure had decreased to 21 percent
- despite a 59 percent increase in the developing world population. On the other hand, the gap between
the richest and poorest countries in the world is increasing. Indeed, in 1776, when Adam Smith wrote
“The Wealth of Nations”, the richest country in the world was approximately four times wealthier than
the poorest country. The richest country in the world is now more than 400 times richer than the
poorest country. What separates them? Knowledge, diversification and the composition of exports are
part of the answer, all areas in which foreign direct investment (FDI) has an important role to play.

History shows that at the end of the day, countries grow because they produce new and better goods
and services, or find better ways to produce those goods and services, and retain more of the value
added from their exports. Throughout this process, the key is how to connect the domestic economy
with the international private sector. FDI is an important vehicle to promote this connection.

FDI has the potential to be an important driver of economic growth and diversification. Shifting a
country’s work force from lower into higher value added jobs will depend on fostering a wider range of
opportunities for private economic activity, and on the ability of local companies to integrate into global
production value chains. FDI is the pathway to those global value chains, allowing developing countries
the opportunity to engage with and benefit from the world economy. Foreign investors can create jobs,
bring capital and new technologies, and create knowledge spillovers. But these benefits are not
automatic. Some countries attract large quantities of foreign investment and never move up the value
chain. In order to maximize the development impacts of foreign investment, a suitable investment
policy framework is needed.

The difficulty starts when decision-makers try to identify what “investment policy” is, or should be. A
huge range of stakeholders, problems, institutions, legal instruments, and administrative tools are
captured in that concept. Countries get lost. Even if policy-makers can identify a destination, it can be
difficult to know where to start, to know which concrete actions will have the most impact.

Investment policy encompasses a huge range of issues, and for a state that hopes to reap the benefits
of foreign investment, it can be difficult to know where to start. A common mistake is that countries
create investment policies to react to the challenges posed by the type of investment they are already
receiving. Instead, a state needs to identify the opportunities to receive greater benefits from existing
investments, and consider what other types of investment the country needs in order to develop. Many
developing country governments face difficulties in investment policy formulation, coordination and
implementation, thus undermining their competitiveness and compromising the ability to attract
investment. Governments may lack the information and capacity to understand the quantity, quality
and type of investment a country is receiving. Data on the quantity of FDI is often collected through
multiple agencies using different sources and leading to data gaps and inconsistencies. Information on
the quality of FDI – referring to its direct and indirect effect on the local economy – is notoriously
difficult to estimate.

Investment policy is dynamic – there is no “one size fits all” solution. An approach that works within
one country for one type of investment at one particular time may need to be continually revised,
adapted, and improved to take into account the changes in an economy, the transformation of different
types of business, and the circumstances. Further in an increasingly globalized world, characterized by
rising levels of international production, trade, competition and interaction, the need to connect the
dots between international rulemaking, domestic reforms and development becomes increasingly
evident.

Within this context, there is a need for a logical framework enabling policy makers to “connect the dots”
among the numerous variables at different levels affecting how developing countries insert themselves
into the international economy, and use investments to diversify exports, create more and better jobs
and thus improve the standards of living of citizens. The World Bank Group (WBG) has developed a
logical framework that purports to achieve three key steps in the complex process of investment policy
making.

1. To assist governments to “connect the dots” among the numerous variables at different levels
   affecting how developing countries insert themselves into the international economy, and use
   different types of investments to diversify exports, create more and better jobs and thus improve
   the standards of living of citizens.

2. Within that broad vision, to enable policy makers to design and set priorities for a domestic reform
   agenda required to enable an improved external insertion of the domestic economy into
   international markets; and

3. To help translate the country’s investment vision and reform agenda into implementation of
   concrete actions framed within national political calendars the result of which can be objectively
   measured.

The process through which countries can apply the logical framework to achieve the three objectives
referred to above is what it is called in this note the Investment Reform Map (IRM), which is based on
three key ideas discussed in chapter two.


1.2. Why is an investment vision important?


While it is important for policymakers to understand the drivers of foreign firms’ decisions to invest in
their country, it is also essential for them to appreciate what aspects of their country’s business
environment motivate a firm’s decision to locate its investment there.

Motives for investment in a particular geographic location are known as host-country determinants and
cover a set of economic, geographic, political, social, and policy factors. The relative importance of each
of these determinants and their successful combination will depend largely on the firm’s own drivers
and strategic motives, whether it is a new investment or a re-investment, whether it is made in the
form of greenfield investment or through strategic alliances with local businesses, and the sector(s) in
which the investment is made.
While there are many factors in an investment decision that are outside the control of a host
government, the investment policy framework of the host country can be an important factor in the
type, size, and modes of foreign investment that a country receives.

Because of this, it is equally important for governments to understand the specific political, economic,
social and environmental challenges affecting different types of FDI so that appropriate policy measures
can be undertaken to ensure that FDI makes a contribution to sustainable development of the host
state’s economy.


2. From an Investment Vision to an Investment Lifecycle

2.1. Three Key Ideas for an Investment Policy Framework

When defining a modern investment vision for development in the era of globalization, there are three
fundamental propositions that policy makers should keep in mind and are illustrated in Figure 1 below.
First investment policy and development is not about choosing to privilege foreign investment over
domestic or vice-versa. It is about connecting both of them. Second, investments, and in particular
foreign direct investment (FDI) are not homogenous phenomena. Different types of investment have
different effects on socio-economic development and thus require different policies. Thus there is a
need to come up with a typology of FDI that can be useful enough to distinguish among the different
types of FDI and how they affect development. Third, investments are more than just transactions, they
entail multi-staged relationships among different stakeholders. For instance, in the case of FDI, there
are foreign investors, governments and domestic investors and civil society. Such relationships have
multiple dimensions, but one way to visualize them is to follow a sequential approach, by which, in the
case of FDI, the main objective of maximizing its potential benefits entail previous stages, covering the
stage by which foreign investors are attracted to invest into the host country, the stage when such
investment is materialized and it is established, then the stage when the investment starts to be
managed, operated and once retained hopefully begins to expand, leading to linkages and thereby
“rooting” the FDI with the domestic economy.


Figure 1: Three Ideas for an Investment Vision


                       Investment policy is not about choosing between foreign and domestic investment. It is
                       about connecting them through global value chains; trade and investment are two
                       sides of the same coin.




                         Foreign investment is not a transaction; it is a relationship. An investment policy
                         strategy should not only pursue attraction, but also retention and linkages with
                         the domestic productive sector (thereby maximizing benefits from investment).



                          Not all types of investment are the same. Different types of investment have
                          different effects on socio-economic development and thus require different
                          policies.
2.2. Not all kinds of investment are the same, nor have the same effects on development: the FDI
     Typology

FDI has the potential to bring a wide range of benefits to a country – factors that are crucial to socio-
economic development such as jobs, technology, skills and access to international markets. But some
countries that receive large amounts of foreign investment fail to grow. Why? Because not all foreign
investments have the same potential to provide these benefits, and because the benefits themselves
are not guaranteed.

When considering investment policy reform, it is critical to acknowledge that the factors that motivate,
dissuade, and impact investors are vastly different depending on the business they are in, and the
markets they intend to target. The basic motivations of an investor provide an insight into the socio-
economic impacts that the firm may have in the host country. Countries often make the mistake of
designing investment policies around the type of foreign investments that they already have, rather
than tailoring policies to suit the type of investment that they want to grow. How can a country identify
those types of investors that are more likely to make a positive contribution to the domestic economy?
What differences should policy makers be aware of when designing an investment policy regime?

The framework of investment typology can help a country to distinguish between the benefits,
challenges, and impacts of different types of investment. Multi-national enterprises (MNEs) typically
enter or expand in foreign jurisdictions with one or more of the following objectives: seeking natural
resources, markets, efficiency, and/or strategic assets (Figure 2). Each type of investment has particular
features, and merits a different policy response.


Figure 2: The FDI Typology
The first type of investment discussed is “natural resource-seeking” investment. This type of FDI occurs
when an investor is lured into a country to have access to natural resources, such as oil and gas, mining
and minerals, or water or land for agricultural production. As this type of FDI is attracted by the quality
or quantity or the natural resources located in the territory of the host country, naturally not all
countries are equally attractive for this type of investment. To maximize the potential benefits of this
type of FDI it is important that governments fully understand the dynamics of this type of investment
in order to put in place adequate policies to deal with many issues. Although this type of FDI tends to
be export-oriented –with all the related advantages in terms of foreign exchange earnings it may
entail—governments should pay attention to the following challenges.

First, given that natural resources are part of the sovereign patrimony of a country, this type of
investment raises the question of what should be the adequate distribution of gains and rents resulting
from the exploitation of the natural resource. This is a delicate political issue which has to be properly
dealt with, not only at a national level, but at a subnational level too, as natural resources are often
located in remote areas where local communities may be affected by the economic activity and also
expect to benefit from its exploitation. Second, as natural resource-seeking FDI tends to flow to
resource rich countries, a typical challenge to properly maximize the potential benefits of this type of
investment is to prevent the “natural resource course”, that is, the tendencies for these activities to
crowd out economic diversification. Third, in order to properly maximize the potential gains of this type
of investment, governments must device transparent and adequate wealth management schemes to
ensure that gains derived from the natural resource sector can flow to develop public goods such as
infrastructure and education that can enable the country diversify its economy. In this regard, it is
critical to develop linkages and preventing the exploitation of natural resources to become economic
enclaves within the host country. Fourth, the very nature of the economic activity raises the need to
address potential environmental degradation and the social impact the exploitation of the resources
may entail.

Thus, natural resource-seeking FDI requires appropriate policies for its potential benefits to be
maximized. Several countries have developed on the basis of this type of FDI on the basis of smart
policies addressing the challenges mentioned above. This has been partly due to the existence of strong
institutions that have enabled these countries properly administer the natural resources in the common
good. However, unfortunately, in the case of many developing countries such institutions have not
been in place, leading to many economies to stagnate in underdevelopment despite receiving
important amounts of this type of investment.

“Domestic Market-seeking” investment is driven by the foreign investor’s interest to serve the domestic
market of the host country. Thus, FDI entails the establishment of production facilities of goods or
services to satisfy the demand of the local market. Thus, it is the size or the growth rate of the domestic
market what becomes the main magnet for this type of FDI. Countries with large markets or with high
growth rates leading to booming domestic demand will naturally generate more “pull” for this type of
investment than countries with little markets or with decreasing growth rates.

This form of investment can help to improve the competitiveness of a country, especially in terms of
transfer of technology, know-how and pushing other suppliers of goods and services operating in the
market to compete in providing better supply at lower costs. Thus, to maximize the benefits of this type
of FDI it is important to ensure that effective competition in the local market takes place. This type of
FDI has been used by many policy makers to promote import-substitution policies, often with mix
results. As this type of investment is geared towards the domestic market, it does not generate exports.
Conversely, it may generate greater imports into the host economy in situations where it may need
inputs for the local production.

“Efficiency-seeking” investment refers to the type of investment where the investor chooses to
establish operations in the host country in order to take advantage of some competitive factor that will
enable the investment to export somewhere else. Such competitive factors may include efficient labor
force –in terms of cost, knowledge or expertise- access to international markets, good infrastructure,
etc. In other words, the motivating factor to attract this type of FDI is the level of competitiveness that
host country provides to the investor in international markets, and particularly its ability to participate
in global value chains (GVCs).

For many reasons, this type of investment is the most desired by many governments. It is export-
oriented, and thus generator of foreign exchange, and for the same reason it does not entail any risk of
crowding out the local private sector. This type of FDI tends to be greenfield, that is, tends to entail the
establishment of new facilities, and consequently, tends to be a net generator of jobs. Further, because
it is oriented to competitive and sophisticated markets, evidence shows that this type of FDI is a
formidable vehicle to help a country improve the productivity of its workforce, and move up the “value
chain”. The caveat with this type of FDI, is that as most countries fiercely compete to attract it, this is
the most difficult to get. Further, contrary to natural resource-seeking FDI and domestic market-seeking
FDI, where the natural resource endowments or the size of the domestic market can provide host
countries with a lot of “pull” to attract FDI, in the case of efficiency-seeking FDI there is not inherent
“pull factor”, and countries must strive to be competitive and “push” this type of investment to locate
within their borders.

Finally, “strategic asset-seeking” investment occurs when an investor seeks access to a firm- specific
asset, such as a brand, distribution system, managerial practice or technology. For instance, in the
airline business, routes and access to slots in busy airports are strategic assets. Thus, when one airline
buys another, is frequently buying those strategic assets that will enable the firm to better compete in
the market of its choice. In this regard, strategic asset seeking FDI always entail a merger or acquisition
(M&A). Further, countries may have particular strategic assets, for instance, a beautiful natural location
or a cultural or historic patrimony that may be key to generate a tourism cluster around that asset. In
this regard tourism often starts with a country-specific strategic asset that enables additional
investments to flow into the country.

Today many countries receive the four types of FDI, some receive three, others only one. Further, one
type of FDI may be key to enable a host country to receive another. For instance, in order to compete
internationally and lure efficiency-seeking FDI, host countries often must have excellent infrastructure,
telecommunication and financial services and logistics. Often world-class providers of these services
may in fact be market-seeking investors that although they are keen in serving the domestic market,
are nevertheless key for efficiency-seeking investors looking to base its operations in the host country
with international markets in mind.

Figure 3 below, summarizes the importance to differentiate between the different types of FDI.
Figure 3: Characteristics of types of FDI

 Type of FDI            Natural Resource       Domestic Market            Efficiency Seeking     Strategic Asset
                        Seeking                Seeking                                           Seeking
 Fundamental Factors    Location, quantity      Market dimensions         International         Existence of
 attracting the         and quality of           and income per             production              strategic
 investment into the    natural resources:       capita                     patterns                assets in firms
 host country           oil, gas, minerals,     Market growth                                      located in the
                        land, water.            Consumers’ specific       Level of systemic       country
                                                 preferences                competitiveness
                                                Kind of goods and          of the host           Natural
                                                 services to be             country vis-á-vis      beauty or
                                                 provided                   other potential        Cultural
                                                                            host countries         patrimony for
                                                                                                   tourism
                                                                           Secure (or
                                                                            preferential)
                                                                            access to key
                                                                            export markets
                                                                            (see link with
                                                                            trade)

 Key Features/Process    Frequent point of      Tends to occur           Export oriented       Generation of
                           departure for any       through M &A            Net generator of       champion
                           investment policy     Traditionally it has      foreign exchange       Co’s in DCs
                           program in DC’s         been North-North,       Generator of jobs     In many DCs,
                         Traditional vehicle      and then North-         Significant            these
                           for integration into    South, over the last     potential gains in     champions
                           the world               two decades it is        terms of               are public
                           economy                 becoming South-          expansion and          investors
                         Tends to be North-       South and South-         diversification of     (SOEs and
                           South, although         North                    export supply of       SWEs)
                           increasing South-     Vehicle for               host economy
                           South                   internationalization     and transfer of
                         Export efforts start     of SMEs in DCs           technology
                          in this sector (and    Services FDI tends       Can also lead to
                          policies tend to         to concentrate in        non-equity forms
                          mirror this trend)       this type (although      of FDI
                         As exports               increasing in
                          increase, FDI tends      efficiency-seeking
                          to increase (also        through
                          efficiency-seeking       outsourcing)
                          FDI in related         Regional integration
                          sectors)                helps to promote
                                                  this kind of FDI in
                                                  smaller DC’s (to
                                                  enlarge markets
                                                  both for extra-
                                                  regional and regional
                                                  businesses).
                                                  See, however, CU
                                                    vs. FTA debate
Political                 Distribution of        Real or perceived          Systemic              Rising
Economy/Challenges         rents. Fair            effects over:               competitiveness        economic
                           distribution of         Domestic                  is difficult to        protectionism
                           gains derived from       production                achieve               More
                           exploitation of          (crowding-out            Competition            common
                           resources                argument)                 among countries        South-North
                          Sovereignty over        Reaction of               (incentives?)          FDI
                           natural resources        domestic suppliers       Importance of         Reaction
                          Dutch disease           Competition policy        signals                against SOEs
                          Rent-seeking            National security         (vulnerability of      and SWFs
                           political structures                               smaller countries)     (Public
                          Strong pressures                                  Increasing             investors)
                           for corruption                                     controversy in
                          Labor rights and                                   home countries
                           other social
                           conditions of
                           workforce
                           (i.e.health)
                          Environmental
                           matters
Historical Perspective    Oldest type of FDI      Some initial flows in    Resulting of          Traditionally
                          Rooted in                developing                GATT’s impact on       limited to
                           colonialism              countries in the XIX      liberalization of      North-North
                          Origin of North-         century                   trade in               FDI, in the last
                           South divide            Originally tended to      manufactures           20 years has
                          Currently growing        focus among              Currently in           started to
                           because increased        countries of the          vogue through          become
                           demand for raw           North                     international          increasingly
                           materials and food      Changes with              value chains           common in
                           supply                   Import-Substitution                              developing
                                                    Industrialization                                countries
                                                    (I.S.I) policies
                                                   Currently growing
                                                    and become
                                                    another way to
                                                    service a market (in
                                                    particular given the
                                                    rise in trade in
                                                    services, and the
                                                    rise of BRICs)
                                                   Increasing emphasis
                                                    on pre-
                                                    establishment issues

Relationship with         Original vehicle for    Protectionist            Makes trade to
Trade                      generation of            policies (infant          grow
                           trade                    industry argument         exponentially
                          Generates                and currently            Fosters intra-firm
                           international            protectionist             trade
                           division of labor        stances in some
                           leading to the           BRICS)
                           original North-         Original perception
                           South divide (that       that FDI substitutes
                           is currently             trade (tariff
                           changing)                jumping)
                                                   Currently close links
                                                    with international
                                                    patterns of
                                                    production
                                                    generated by
                                                    international
                                                    competition
                                                   More market-
                                                    seeking FDI leads to
                                                    more trade not only
                                                    of goods but also in
                                                    services
 Implications for policy    FDI may not           Often strong              Given clarity of
 making/ How to              necessarily             resistance from           benefits, this is
 integrate host              translate in            local interest groups     the kind of FDI
 country in value chain      benefits to local       has to be overcome        that is more in
                             economy               Typical vehicle for        demand
                            Most difficult FDI      SMEs from DC’s to        Systemic
                             to manage in            jump into                 competitiveness
                             order to minimize       international             becomes the
                             drawbacks and           markets                   core topic
                             maximize              Liberalization             around which the
                             potential benefits      becomes the core          policy discussions
                             (Norway vs.             topic around which        tend to gravitate
                             Nigeria)                the policy               FTAs become
                            Constant demand         discussions tends to      critical
                             of governments to       gravitate                Logistics for
                             increase value        Competition issues         integration with
                             added of exports        become critical.          the international
                            Need to increase                                  economy
                             beneficial                                        become key
                             spillovers and use
                             these sectors to
                             develop others.
                             (Australia,
                             Canada)
                            Export promotion
                             diversification
                             (niches) both in
                             goods and in
                             services. (Chile)


When deciding which type of FDI a country should focus on it is important to bear in mind the types of
jobs that get created. Different types of FDI generate different kinds of jobs and thus have a different
impact on the development of the local economy. As Figure 4 below shows, Natural Resource Seeking
Investment typically generates rather small-scale and low-skilled jobs. The more a country moves
towards efficiency-seeking and strategic asset-seeking investments the more knowledge-intensive and
high-skilled jobs are created in the local economy.
Figure 4: Each type of investment generates different kinds of jobs and value




2.3. Investment is a relationship, not a transaction: The Investment Lifecycle

An international firm that chooses to invest abroad and the government that hosts that firm create an
ongoing relationship. Too often, states focus only on promotion and attracting new investors to their
country. This is important, but it is only one small part of the story. The real benefits to the state come
later on in the relationship, as the foreign firm brings in capital, employs local staff, provides goods and
services, generates exports, shares technology and know-how, sources from local suppliers, and helps
to diversify and upgrade the economy. If a country wants to ensure that foreign investors come, stay,
and contribute, what does it need to do at each stage of the relationship? How can a government build
long-lasting ties with investors to improve the quality of the interaction between the foreign firm and
the domestic economy? Crucially, how can the state make sure that more investments get to the final
stage of the cycle – the point where they create the linkages and spillovers to move the country up the
value chain?

The Investment Lifecycle is a framework that identifies the different stages of foreign investment, along
with the particular policy challenges that arise at each stage.
Figure 5: The Investment Lifecycle




It begins with the government’s vision and strategy for foreign investment – the policy decisions that
the country makes about how it will attract, regulate, and engage with foreign investors. Next,
investment attraction identifies how the country will market itself to potential investors, and share
information about the potential benefits of investing. Investment establishment is the phase when an
investor has made a decision to establish an enterprise in the host country. It covers the practical and
legal steps that an investor must take to set up the business, including obtaining permissions or licenses,
bringing in foreign personnel and capital, and gaining access to industrial land and other utilities. To
retain foreign investment, states must look closely at how they treat established investors, and how
they address grievances or disputes. With re-investment becoming more important as a source of
foreign capital, ensuring clear communication and a functional relationship between businesses and
government is essential. Finally, the full benefits of investment are only achieved if a country can
enhance the linkages and spillovers from foreign investment, including technology and skills transfer,
and forward and backward linkages with the domestic economy.



3. From the Investment Reform Map to reform oriented results on the ground


3.1. What is the IRM Process?

The WBG works alongside governments to engage in “Investment Reform Mapping”. The details of this
process may vary depending on the circumstances and needs of each country, but its purpose is to help
the government set priorities, to assign responsibilities, to identify opportunities for collaboration, and
to define the intended impacts of investment policy reform.
It is important to keep in mind that the IRM is not a single document or report, nor is it a static action
plan. Instead, it is a process that allows a government to focus discussion, set priorities, and agree on
defined activities. As a country’s Investment Vision and strategy are refined over time, the IRM will also
be adjusted to the changing circumstances. Graphically, the IRM process is illustrated by Figure 4 below.

Figure 6: Typical Investment Reform Map Process




3.2. Investment Competitiveness for Business-Led Growth – The Investment Competitiveness Diagnosis
Through the IRM process, the WBG also helps client governments to improve the investment
competitiveness, which refers to the capability to attract, retain, and leverage foreign and domestic
investment for private sector-led growth.
The Investment Competitiveness Diagnostic (ICD) analyzes investment climate constraints and
opportunities in client countries. It relies on a combination of economic data analysis, legal and
regulatory review, and feedback from country stakeholders to identify specific investment climate
barriers to private investment and business growth. The analysis and reform recommendations cover
both domestic businesses and foreign direct investors, along their business lifecycles.
 Figure 7: Business lifecycles domestic and foreign investors




The ICD is composed of 7 modules in 3 sections to allow for a customized and modular approach
according to country needs.

                A. Data Analysis                           B. Policy and Regulatory Assessments          C. Subnational Diagnostic
 (1) Economic      (2) Private                                           (5) Business                        (7) Subnational
                                   (3) Investment   (4) Doing Business                  (6) Investment
   and Policy        Sector                                              Environment                        Benchmarking and
                                     Sector Scan      Reform Memo                        Reform Map
    Context       Performance                                             Deep Dive                            Assessment




Data Analysis

Economic and Policy Context
Using economic data analysis, the country is benchmarked against peers on a broad set of investment
climate factors to assess the country’s investment competitiveness. It leverages global datasets for
analysis of cross-country trends over time. It touches on broad topics including exports,
macroeconomic environment, infrastructure, and labor market, and concentrates on factors related to
investment from the public sector perspective. The focus on investment climate covers several key
dimensions: access to information, efficiency of administrative procedures, predictability of regulatory
processes, quality of legislation, effectiveness of institutions, and coherence of policies.

Private Sector Performance
Analysis of the private sector – both domestic businesses and foreign direct investments – focuses on
performance along their respective business lifecycles. It uses macro-level data and analyzes firm
dynamics to benchmark countries against peers and analyze trends over time.

Investment Sector Scan
The Investment Sector Scan is designed to help a country identify new sectors with strong potential for
investment generation and job creation. It starts with a basic analysis of the country’s background and
level of economic diversification to then make the most suitable selection from a menu of established
analytical methodologies. The approach is flexible enough to cover sector selection for a variety of
purposes, ranging from short term investment promotion efforts to more comprehensive long term
reforms to enhance competitiveness for investment. It can be applied at a broad sectoral level, or in
order to identify subsectors or products with high potential within a broader industry.
         Clarify the types of investment the country is receiving, the causes and the implications
         Prioritize: Undertake a pre-sector scan exploring feasibility to diversify types of FDI the country
          could attract and benefit from and target concrete promotion, incentives, entry, retention &
          expansion and linkages steps focused in key priority areas
         Set up minimum institutional coordination mechanisms for monitoring effective
          implementation, reform and impact
         Let investors know about new directions in policy: consider using investment policy and
          promotion statements to announce progress.
         Ensure coherence between trade and investment policy
     




 4. Toolkits developed by the WBG targeting individual stages of the Investment Lifecycle

 For every stage of the Investment Lifecycle the WBG has developed a tool addressing the specific
 challenges and offering solutions which would increase the potential of maximizing the benefits of FDI
 for the local economy of a country.


4.1. Investment Promotion

4.1.1. Why does investment promotion matter?


 The rise in the prominence of FDI has been matched by a global proliferation of public institutions
 mandated to pursue FDI. Nearly 200 investment-promoting institutions exist as part of national
 governments, while perhaps 2,000 operate as arms of subnational governments. The fierceness of this
 increased competition may be felt most strongly in years when FDI flows decline (e.g., 2008, 2009,
 2012, 2014), but even in times of growth governments must compete for new FDI and even to keep
 established investors from leaving in favor of newly more competitive locations.

 As a critical part of this process, countries need to define their value propositions as attractive
 investment locations and to proactively market investment opportunities to investors in sectors,
 subsectors, and even segments, highlighting their comparative advantages relative to other locations.
 Clear strategies and effective marketing are particularly important for countries with little track record
 of attracting FDI or with reputations as difficult places to invest.

 As illustrated by Figure 8 below, research has shown that, when investment promotion activities are
 properly targeted, there are positive correlations between promotion and investment (Wells and Wint,
 1990, Austrade 1996, Wells 1999, Morisset 2004, Jovorcik and Harding 2012). Targeted and efficient
 investment promotion activities include: servicing investors’ information needs, strengthening host
 country’s value proposition and location’s image, facilitating the establishment and expansion process
 of the investor after establishment.
Figure 8: Correlation between FDI inflows and Targeted Investment Promotion Services




Source: T. Harding and B. Javorcik (2012), “Investment Promotion and FDI Inflows: Quality Matters,”
CESifo Economic Studies



Figure 8 above shows how the better the investment promotion services (horizontal axis) the higher
the amounts of FDI that tend to be lured into the host economies.


 4.1.2. How does the WBG country diagnostics work?
In this phase WBG examines what challenges do governments face, when trying to influence investors
through investment promotion and which role do Investment Promotion Agencies (IPAs) play in this
context. The diagnostic uncovers whether the government policies designed to attract FDI are efficient
or whether they have rather negative unintended consequences on the inflow of FDI. The WBG also
analyses the role of the IPAs in this process, their internal organization and the scope of their activities
targeted at supporting investors and translating investments into development benefits.


4.1.3. What are our activities?
The WBG provides client governments with support to improve the investment policy framework, and
to maximize the effectiveness of investment promotion efforts by (i) advising on how to create a strong
IPA or how to reinforce an existing one, (ii) helping a country develop a national FDI Vision and Strategy,
an Investment Reform Map, and investment promotion strategies, (iii) strengthening investor
confidence to help retain and expand FDI through upgrading and improving legal and regulatory
framework, promoting best practices in in tracking and resolving key regulatory issues and designing
investor aftercare programs.


4.1.4. How do we measure the impact?
The impact of our work can be measured by the success of the IPA of a country. The key impact
indicators include (i) implementation of investment promotion strategies and programs linked directly
to impact indicators, (ii) effective systems for measuring organizational and staff performance, (iii)
reporting to stakeholders and clients

Figure 9: The need for diverse services to get investors from concept to project success and
development impact




 Our Work in Action
   Attracting FDI to Brazil’s Frontier States: T&C supported APEX, Brazil’s national IPI, to attract FDI to the
    poorer Northern regions of the country. T&C’s investment promotion team helped build the capacity of
    APEX and two state IPIs in Para and Pernambuco to plan and implement targeted investor outreach. This
    led to the attraction of over $1.3 billion of new investment to Brazil, of which some 70% went to the two
    frontier states in sectors such as renewable energy and agribusiness.
   Enhancing Sector Competitiveness for FDI in Rajasthan, India: T&C supported the Government of Rajasthan
    to develop its investment competitiveness in four key sectors of the economy – automotive, IT enabled
    services, solar power manufacturing and tourism. Our support focused on defining Rajasthan’s competitive
    proposition for each sector, reforming the investment environment to make the sector more attractive to
    investors and undertaking targeted sector outreach. The project team subsequently facilitated site visits
    and meetings for investors with the Government of Rajasthan and, as a result, investments of approximately
    $2 billion are currently in the pipeline in these sectors, with over $300 million of new investment having
    been achieved so far.



4.2. Investment Entry

4.2.1. Why does the reduction of investment entry barriers matter?
In today’s era of globalization and increasingly inter-related economies, both developing and developed
countries have come to appreciate the significant benefits they can derive from greater flows of foreign
investment, such as job creation, capital infusion, increased access to foreign markets, access to more
advanced technology and managerial practices, infrastructure development, and so on. Yet, countries
still create barriers to foreign investment entry.

In some cases, these barriers are imposed intentionally with certain policy objectives in mind. For
instance, Figure 10 below shows the sector that tend to be more restricted to FDI across the world.
Paradoxically, one can observe that key areas such as telecommunications and electricity, which are
key sectors to attract efficiency-seeking FDI are nevertheless restricted to foreign competitors.
Figure 10: Restrictions on foreign ownership by sector




Entry barriers can also arise in the form of red tape, without clear policy objectives. Often, however,
even the intentional barriers do not effectively serve the objectives that they are designed for, and in
fact, generate additional costs for the host country.

Figure 11 below illustrates that even putting aside the level of access host countries may want to grant
to FDI into their domestic economies, the fact is that red tape very often affects foreign investors when
completing administrative requirements to apply, enter, and establish in a country. Figure 11 shows
that although the number of procedures associated with the establishment of investments may not
vary significantly among the different regions of the world, the time and associated cost of complying
with those establishment procedures do vary substantially. Clearly such time and cost act as de facto
barriers to potential FDI inflows.

Figure 11: Procedures and days to establish a foreign-owned company in different parts of the world
         Procedures required to establish a                       Days required to establish a
             foreign-owned company                                 foreign-owned company
While in high income OECD countries it may in average around 14 days for a foreign company to get
established, in other regions it may take up to 70 days, that is 5 times more. This fact shows that in
many regions of the world, there is a clear opportunity for the G20 to promote concrete actions
facilitating the establishment of investments

What are Investment Entry Barriers?
“Investment entry barriers” are restrictions, regulations, procedures, and/or practices which impose
unreasonable, discriminatory burdens on foreign investors during Investment Entry. Investment entry
barriers can be categorized into three broad groups: legal and regulatory barriers; procedural barriers;
and de facto barriers.

Figure 12: Investment entry barriers




4.2.2. How does the WBG country diagnostics work?

To ensure that host countries receive the benefits of foreign investment, policy makers need to pay
increasing attention to minimizing and rationalizing the existence of barriers to investment entry. The
WBG helps policymakers identify barriers to entry of investment and the establishment of foreign
owned enterprises, rationalize the existence of these barriers, and improve the investment entry
regimes in a manner that improves governance and serves the country’s development objectives.
The reform process begins with a diagnostic assessment of the current situation. The WBG works
alongside country authorities and other advisers to set a reform agenda and identify solutions that are
appropriate for the country context. Technical assistance is focused to help countries to (i) decrease
and rationalize the use of legal and regulatory barriers, (ii) identify and remedy procedural barriers by
streamlining processes, (iii) discuss and address de facto regulatory barriers by promoting greater
transparency, certainty, and improved governance in the investment entry regime.
4.2.3. What are our activities?

The WBG conducts diagnostic assessments and designs solutions based on a three step approach:
     Step 1 focuses on reforms of investment entry laws and regulations, and addresses diagnostics,
      solution design and implementation.
     Step 2 focuses on reforms of procedures, also setting out diagnostics, solution design, and
      implementation.
             Step 3 focuses on the tools available to assist countries address de facto entry barriers,
              in particular by increasing transparency and reducing discretion.


 4.2.4. How do we measure the impact?

The WBG measures the impact of its engagement by benchmarking certain data available for the
country, such as (i) flows of foreign investment or stock in the country, or within in particular sectors
using the “investment generated” indicator (consider collecting historical data, where available, to
identify trends), (ii) information about how a process is being done (agencies involved, permissions
needed, and documentation required), (iii) how efficient a process is (e.g. time and cost taken,
frequency of appeal), (iv) outcomes of the implemented processes (e.g. number of
approvals/declines/withdrawals).




              Avoid discriminatory treatment to FDI: negative lists complemented by standstill,
               ratchets and rollbacks.
              Eliminate mandatory performance requirements affecting the establishment of
               investments
              Measure the impact of potential liberalization
              Diminish red tape affecting entry/establishment of investment
              Diminish red tape affecting movement of investors and technical personnel
              Ensure existence of mechanisms to address barriers to market entry from incumbent
               competitors




         In Turkey, reform of FDI policy and legislation led to the removal of minimum investment requirements
          and elimination of screening for FDI approvals. A simple registration system was established instead.
          Three years after the reform FDI inflows have increased by a factor of 10.
         In the East African Community (EAC), a scorecard assessing compliance with regional obligations boosted
          national reform efforts. For example, in Tanzania it triggered the liberalization of regulations that had
          restricted the movement of capital.
         In Tajikistan, accession to the Hague Apostille Convention has streamlined documentary requirements for
          cross-border transactions benefitting investors, traders and citizens.
4.3. Investment Incentives

4.3.1. Why do FDI investment incentives matter?

The role that FDI plays in enabling economies to join global value chains (GVCs) and in upgrading their
domestic production is so critical, that governments across the globe compete to attract this type of
investment. In this context, locational incentives, i.e. incentives designed to influence firms’ locational
decisions, play a prevalent role in governments’ policy mix to attract investment. Once investments
have been attracted to an economy, governments frequently resort to behavioral incentives to
encourage certain investor behaviors, such as hiring local staff, investing in innovation, or using local
suppliers to establish backward linkages.
Investment incentives are therefore widespread and used pervasively by governments across both the
developed and developing world.

Figure 13: Types of Investment Incentives

                                         Investment Incentives

        Measurable economic advantages that governments provide to specific enterprises
        or groups of enterprises, with the goal of steering investments into favored
        sectors or regions or of influencing the character of such investments
        -James, S. (2009) World Bank.




                    Instrument                                                 Role

 Tax Incentives: exemptions or reductions of             Locational Incentives: aimed at attracting
 government revenue otherwise due                        investment into a country (targeting
                                                         investor’s decision of where to locate)
 Financial incentives: direct transfer of funds
 or potential direct transfer of funds and               Behavioral Incentives: aimed at inducing
 liabilities; provision of goods and services, and       investors to engage in certain activities or
 payments-in-kind                                        behaviors (e.g. fostering employment,
                                                         forming linkages with local suppliers,
                                                         adopting green technologies)



 4.3.2. How does the WBG country diagnostics work?
The WBG promotes good practices in the design and implementation of incentives policies. This
includes helping clients identify if and how investment incentives can contribute to promoting FDI
inflows and other economic policy objectives such as employment generation and export promotion.

 4.3.3. What are our activities?
A typical WBG assistance in rationalizing investment incentives consists of two stages:
Under stage 1 – Assessment of country’s investment incentives - the WBG (i) prepares a comprehensive
inventory of all tax and financial incentives available in the country, (ii) assesses the cost of investment
incentives by measuring tax expenditures for tax incentives and consolidating the cost of financial
incentives, (iii) conducts investor motivation surveys in order to assess the importance of investment
incentives for investors’ decision, (iv) assesses the potential market distortions generated by
investment incentives through evaluation of granted incentives and identification of competition
distortions stemming from the investment incentive framework, (v) conducts a cost-benefit analysis of
tax and financial incentives to measure the effectiveness of investment incentives and finally (vi)
provides inputs and recommendations on a policy on tax and financial incentives.
Under stage 2 - Implementation support – the WBG delivers the report on incentive optimization to the
client and starts a process of discussion and consultations with key counterparts to identify specific
areas for reform implementation. If the authorities are committed to accepting at least some of the key
recommendations the WBG would then provide implementation support (i.e. drafting legal
amendments, subsidiary legislation and implementing regulations, as well as (re)designing of processes
and procedures and underlying supporting systems, etc.). Technical advice, guidelines and training to
(re)design incentive schemes and reduce distortions on market competition would also be part of
implementation support
The output of this phase would be a report with findings and recommendations on how to make the
incentives regime more efficient, cost-effective and transparent.

4.3.4. How do we measure the impact?

The WBG uses a number of indicator to measure the success of investment incentives reforms: Output
Indicators, Outcome Indicators, and Impact Indicators.
 Output indicators - measure what the World Bank Group project team do and deliver in the course
    of investment incentives reforms (i.e. number of entities receiving advisory services, number of
    new laws/regulations drafted, number of reports and surveys completed, number of media
    appearances).
 Outcome indicators - measure what the Government does in response to recommendations and
    technical assistance provided by the World Bank Group project team. Certain of these indicators
    are relevant for calculating the “reform count” (i.e. number of recommended laws and regulations
    adopted, average number of days and costs to comply with regulations and procedures, number of
    entities that implemented recommended changes).
 Impact Indicators – Cost-effectiveness Ratios of incentives – interpret costs and benefits under
    reforms improving the cost-effectiveness of incentives allows governments rationalize
    expenditures on incentives to achieve targeted policy objectives.
 Impact Indicators – Compliance Cost Savings - assesses whether an investment incentives reform is
    achieving its purpose in decreasing costs associated with incentives for foreign and domestic
    investors.




     Make incentives transparent: prepare and publish an incentives inventory
     Adjudication process transparent and non-discretionary: map procedures
     Make them consistent with international obligations
     Ensure that incentives reach their purpose: cost/benefit optimization
 Our Work in Action
   In Sri Lanka, we advised the government in streamlining and prioritizing the number of sectors that are
    eligible to receive incentives, while at the same time providing analytical support to implement more
    efficient incentive instruments.
   In Serbia, we conducted a detailed quantitative evaluation of a cash incentive program for investment
    promotion in order to assess its effectiveness and derive lessons learned for future program modalities
   In Jordan, we helped the government publish a comprehensive and up to date inventory of incentives on
    the internet that provides investors and other stakeholders easy reference to available incentive programs
    and application requirements.




4.4. Investment Protection and Expansion

4.4.1. Why does Investment Protection and Expansion matter?
In today’s global economy, companies have a multitude of location options and governments must
compete to attract the investment mix that will yield the most suitable development benefits. It is
typically easier to achieve development benefits through investors that have already established a
presence in the country (i.e. existing investors). Encouraging investment expansion by ensuring a long
and deep engagement of investors in the host country is therefore as critical as attracting new
investment. Many reasons justify this assertion.

First, in a significant number of economies, the lion’s share of the total annual FDI inflows is made by
investors already established in the host country –both in the form of reinvested earnings or new
investments. Second, positive testimonials of investors already established in the host country rank
among the best investment promotion tools to attract new FDI. Last but not least, evidence shows that
over time, satisfied investors tend to diversify their operations in host countries, evolving from lower
value-added towards higher value added activities.

Countries’ ability to retain investment is impacted by perceptions of political risk. Investment decisions
are influenced not just by the costs of regulatory compliance but also by the risks generated in the
investment climate. These risks may be actual or perceived. In either case, they affect the risk-return
calculations and drive up the hurdle rate of returns for investors. Without risk mitigation, many
investments that are commercially profitable and economically attractive do not materialize. Risks arise
from a number of sources, making the regulatory environment unpredictable. As Figure 14 shows WBG
research shows that around 25% of all investment established in developing countries and economies
in transition either stops expanding or totally withdraws from host countries due to political risks arising
from conduct of public agencies –in particular subnational ones or sector-specific regulatory
authorities. In particular, these risks stem from four main categories of government conduct: (i)
arbitrary/adverse regulatory changes, (ii) breach of contract, (iii) expropriations and (iv) problems
related to transfers and currency convertibility.
Figure 14: Percentages of Investors who cancel their expansion plans or totally withdraw their
investments due to political risks




In this context, there is a clear link between investor protection and investment retention and
expansion. Without protection for investors, retention and expansion becomes virtually impossible-
only very few investors with very specific objectives and plans will bear the risks associated with
malfunctioning political, regulatory and legislative systems. Enhanced levels of investor protection will
boost investor confidence, leading to generation of new investment and encouraging already existing
investors to not only stay but also expand operations.


4.4.2. How does the WBG country diagnostics work?

Strong investor protection clauses in laws are amongst the first indicators of a country’s commitment
to respect investor rights. Thus it is important for the legal framework of a country to reflect not just
the country’s international obligations, but also good practice standards. As provisions dealing with
investor protection are mostly found in a country’s Investment Act/Code, Foreign Exchange Law,
Property Law, Administrative Laws or in the Constitution, the WBG makes a diagnostic assessment and
subsequent reform proposals of these documents. Benchmarking existing laws and regulations against
international good practices will either confirm that the laws and regulations are adequate, or identify
areas of potential reform, which can then be prioritized and tackled to improve the investment climate.
Such reform may include the introduction of additional guarantees, but also improved coherence,
simplification, or clarification of existing legal instruments.  
4.4.3.   What are our activities?

4.4.3.1. Legal Framework improvement

We help governments implement reforms to enhance the policy and regulatory framework on investor
protection and its implementation on the ground. We draw on a set of tools and activities that help
assess the quality of the legal, regulatory and institutional framework, its application, its objectives and
its impact on businesses. The offerings include (i) improving of legal and regulatory framework on
investor protection guarantees, (ii) streamlining regulatory procedures, (iii) strengthening
implementation of legal and regulatory frameworks to help clients retain and expand FDI.


4.4.3.2. Ensuring of expansion of investment on the ground

The Systemic Investment Response Mechanism (SIRM) is an early warning and tracking mechanism to
identify and resolve complaints/issues that arise from government conduct. It collects data and
identifies patterns on the source of government-generated political risks affecting investments, and
quantifies investment retained, expanded or lost as a consequence of addressing or not addressing
those political risks. The SIRM ensures that governments respond to investor grievances in a timely and
suitable manner and in accordance with the country’s laws, regulations and international investment
agreements.

The implementation of SIRM entails the empowerment of a reform-oriented agency of the government,
the task of which is to influence other agencies’ actions to effectively reduce political risk at its source.
This Lead Government Agency brings to the attention of higher levels of government, problems
affecting investments in order to address them before they escalate further. Operationally, the SIRM
focuses on the following aspects (i) to identify specific patterns and origin of government conduct
generating political risks; (ii) to measure affected investment as “evidence” to advocate for timely
changes and resolutions of issues; and (iii) to strengthen capacity in relevant institutions to minimize
the recurrence of these events.
Figure 15: Systemic Investment Response Mechanism (SIRM)




      Problem            Grievance




                   Countries could improve their investment climates by
                   taking care of investor grievances at this stage




4.4.4. How do we measure the impact?

As impact indicators the WBG measures two values:
1. Investment generated and compliance cost savings of an investment transaction.
2. Investment retained, which captures the total values of assets of existing foreign and domestic
     investors facing severe investor-State grievances applying the formula “Investment retained = 
     Investment at risk before reform implementation - Investment at risk at project completion”




      Eliminate gaps between national and international commitments

      Ensure enforceability of international awards

      Promote regulatory transparency: notice, comment and right for reconsideration

      Set up mechanisms to measure investment retention, expansion and origins of regulatory
       risk (SIRMs)

      Evidence-based PPDs on systemic issues affecting investment and retention
Our Work in Action

     In Bosnia and Herzegovina, an investment climate program is helping the government to harmonize
      investment laws at a subnational level and to establish mechanisms to track and address investor grievances
      in a systematic and effective manner. This included setting up a technology tool to track investor grievances
      and capacity building to address grievances in an effective manner. The mechanism has helped the
      government receive new investments and re-investments by existing investors, which in turn have generated
      hundreds of new jobs.
     In Dominican Republic, an investment climate project is helping the government in designing and
      implementing a mechanism for tracking and addressing investor protection grievances in the manufacturing
      and tourism sectors.




    4.5. FDI Linkages

    4.5.1. Why do FDI linkages and positive spillovers into local economy matter?
    According to UNCTAD, FDI flows to developing economies reached record levels at $681 billion in 2014
    with a total FDI stock in developing countries exceeding $8.3 trillion. Governments are naturally
    concerned about attracting FDI and strengthening domestic value addition (DVA) to help spur economic
    diversification and growth, generate much needed employment and increase incomes. Research shows
    that FDI can trigger multiple direct and indirect benefits in a host country, most importantly the transfer
    of new technology, managerial capabilities and increased productivity. However, these benefits don’t
    materialize automatically.

    A combination of deliberate effort, targeted policies and hands-on support is required to facilitate FDI
    linkages. Understanding the specific contexts and transmission channels through which such benefits
    work is an essential precondition for effective policy‐design so that FDI linkages work for development.
    The linkages potential varies dependent on the investment motivation (e.g. efficiency vs market seeking
    investments) and MNE sourcing strategies, the type of value chain (e.g. supplier tiers, tradables vs.
    consumables), as well as the capacity of local suppliers (e.g. technology intensity, absorptive capacity).
    To achieve economic and job growth, it is crucial that Domestic Value-Added (DVA) is increased on a
    competitive basis, i.e. not by increasing import barriers or local content requirements, but by enabling
    local firms to upgrade and compete.


     4.5.2. How does the WBG country diagnostics work?

    Interventions of the Investment Climate (IC) team can make a positive contribution to increasing local
    linkages and domestic value addition by (i) helping client countries ensure that their investment climate
    framework indeed encourages and facilitates linkage development and spillovers wherever possible
    and by (ii) providing advice to client governments on developing a linkages strategy including tailored
    implementation solutions for linking high potential domestic firms to foreign investors and global value
    chains.
4.5.3. What are our activities?

Before going on scoping mission the WBG elaborates a desk review concentrating on identifying a
country’s (i) policy environment and priorities, (ii) economic background and rankings, (iii) institutional
setup, (iv) tools and support programs used to favor linkages, (v) partners and relevant work already
underway and (vi) relevant literature and press reviews.

As a next step the WBG prepares a template for pre-mission diagnostics of the country (i) analyzing (i)
existing FDI activity, (ii) economy and trade, (iii) sectors of the economy and (iv) linkages as part of
global value chains (GVC) dynamics.

After a scoping mission, a more comprehensive demand-supply gap analysis is done, which is a survey
to determine the scope and scale for increasing linkages between FDIs and domestic firms, by assessing
the gap between demand for inputs and local supplier availability/ability to meet this demand.

Figure 16: The IC Linkages Solution Package


                ATTRACT                                                                         CONNECT

                                    Attracting
                                     foreign                                          Local
                    Attracting                        Smart         Supplier
                                     tech &                         database       supplier dev
                     foreign                        behavioral
                                      skills                                        programs       SUPPLIER
        MNEs        suppliers                       incentives      & match-
                                     (NEMs)                          making            (SDPs)




                                  Linkages strategy & targeted policies
                                  (extractives, manufacturing, processing & services
                                                     industries)



                                                 GOVERNMENT




How do we measure the impact? The interventions aim at generating new contracts between local
firms and foreign investors measured either in number of contracts and/or value of contracts as this
should ultimately lead to increased jobs and domestic value added plus indirect spillover effects. If a
targeted supplier development program is part of the intervention, increased local firm performance
can be measured. Following either a dedicated focus on attracting international suppliers or through
the academic argument that a more capable supply base also lures in new investment, impact on
investment generated could be measured in these cases.
        Eliminate discriminatory performance requirements
        Ensure incentives regime do not conspire against local sourcing nor deter investment
        Prepare sector specific potential suppliers directories (both national and subnational level)
         and make them easily accessible to investors
        Focus on concrete mechanisms to upgrade capacities of domestic suppliers to needs of
         investors:
         A. Behavioral incentives (skills)
              Make incentives transparent: prepare and publish an incentives inventory
              Adjudication process transparent and non-discretionary: map procedures
              Make them consistent with international obligations
              Ensure that incentives reach their purpose: cost/benefit optimization

         B. Non-equity modes of investment (NEMs)
             Assess regulatory framework to ensure they are facilitated
             Assess NEMs along the cycle




Our Work in Action

Guinea: IC team helped the government to develop a Domestic Value Addition Policy not relying on local
content requirements. It is also working closely with the national investment promotion agency to, among
others, build its capacity in developing and maintaining a state-of-the-art supplier database and in providing
professional support services (matchmaking, targeted investment attraction, alignment of incentives, etc.) that
will enhance linkages between MNEs and domestic firms

Vietnam: As part of the government’s efforts to attract a “second generation of FDI”, it has requested the IC
team’s support in designing a strategy to better link local firms to the existing FDI stock and foster participation
in regional value chains in sectors that are showing a critical mass of FDI (e.g. apparel, electronics, automotive).
The design of a tailored linkages, incentives and supplier development program forms the core of the WBG’s
planned advisory support to Vietnam in order to help local firms improve their competitiveness and better link
to MNEs in addition to investment policy interventions for improved market entry for investors and increased
alignment of institutional roles and capacities.
5. Conclusion


The World Bank Group is currently assisting over 80 countries with framing their investment reform
proposals and improving their investment competitiveness. They range from resource-rich countries,
to low income economies, and to fragile and conflict states. In all countries, governments have found
the World Bank Group’s framework to be a useful stepping stone to des ign and implement a
competitive investment policy agenda. Evidence shows the compelling case for host country efforts
aimed at attracting, enabling the entry, retaining and linking FDI with the domestic economy. The
benefits of FDI go well beyond providing additional capital, and include potential productivity
improvements, export upgrading, knowledge generation, and wage increases. However, such potential
benefits are not automatic. Policy interventions responding to the specific country and investment
contexts may be required. There is also a strong case for building an investment climate to maximize
these potential spillovers and for increasing countries’ competitiveness for FDI, while bearing in mind
that different types of FDI can generate different economic, social and other benefits in the short and
long-term. But these benefits are not automatic. Investment policies are required to maximize potential
FDI gains. One challenge, however, is that there are different kinds of FDI, and each one may have
different economic, social, and environmental impacts.



This report has provided examples of the multidimensional complexity of investment policy. Not only
there are numerous variables that may affect the attraction, retention, linkages and other spillovers of
FDI, but also there are different types of FDI requiring differentiated policy mixes in order to maximize
its potential benefits. Within this context, investment policy formulation requires on the one hand, a
framework sophisticated enough to differentiate between the various kinds of FDI and their potential
challenges and benefits for development, and on the other be simple enough to enable governments
to clearly start organizing and prioritizing the multiple and complex variables affecting the maximization
of benefits of investment.



This paper has presented a bird’s eye overview of investment policy and promotion logical framework
developed by the trade and competitiveness global practice of the WBG to address the challenge for
more comprehensive yet targeted investment policy making. On the basis of three key propositions:
i.e. (i) that investment policy should aim not to choose between but connect domestic and foreign
investors, (ii) that investment policy making should be based on the whole investment cycle going
beyond promotion and (iii) that not all FDI is the same nor it has the same development impacts, this
report has attempted to summarize the logical backbone on the basis of which a concrete investment
policy and promotion intervention in a time of globalization could be implemented and lead to
measurable results. Achieving measurable result is critical, not only for governments to know whether
their policies are actually working to pursue their public policy objectives, but also, because in a time
when the benefits of globalization are being questioned, it is in the best interest of citizens and
governments alike to become familiar with policies and tools that can contribute to improve the
standards of living of the population by maximizing the potential benefits of foreign and domestic
investment.
References


Aitken, Brian J., and Ann E. Harrison. 1999. “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign Investment?
         Evidence from Venezuela.” American Economic Review 89 (3): 605-18.

Alfaro, Laura, and Maggie X. Chen. 2011. “Surviving the Global Financial Crisis: Foreign Ownership and
         Establishment Performance.” American Economic Journal 4 (3): 30-55.

———. 2015. “Market Reallocation and Knowledge Spillover: The Gains from Multinational
    Production.” Harvard Business School Working Paper 12-111. Cambridge, Mass.

Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek, 2006. "How Does Foreign
         Direct Investment Promote Economic Growth? Exploring the Effects of Financial Markets on
         Linkages." NBER Working Paper 12522, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
         Mass.

Almeida, Rita. 2007. “The Labor Market Effects of Foreign Owned Firms.” Journal of International
       Economics 72: 75-96.

Antras, Pol, Mihir A. Desai, and C. Fritz Foley. 2009. “Multinational Firms, FDI Flows, and Imperfect
        Capital Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (3): 1171-1219.

Arnold, Jens M., and Beata S. Javorcik. 2009. “Gifted Kids or Pushy Parents? Foreign Direct Investment
        and Plant Productivity in Indonesia.” Journal of International Economics 79 (1): 42-53.

Arnold, Jens M., Beata S. Javorcik, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2011. “Does Services Liberalization Benefit
        Manufacturing Firms?” Journal of International Economics 85 (1): 136-46.

Arnold, Jens Matthias, Beata Javorcik, Molly Lipscomb, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2012. “Services Reform and
        Manufacturing Performance: Evidence from India.” Policy Research Working Paper 5948.
        World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Azémar, Céline, and Rodolphe Desbordes. 2010. “Short-run Strategies for Attracting Foreign Direct
       Investment.” World Economy 33 (7): 928-57 (N).

Bamber, P., K. Fernandez-Stark, G. Gereffi, and A. Guinn. 2014. “Connecting Local Producers in
      Developing Countries to Regional and Global Value Chains—Update.” OECD Trade Policy Paper
      160. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.

Barattieri, Alessandro, Ingo Borchert, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2014. “Cross-Border Mergers and
        Acquisitions in Services: The Role of Policy and Industrial Structure.” Policy Research Working
        Paper 6905. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Becker, Sascha O., Peter H. Egger, and Valeria Merlo. 2012. “ How Low Business Tax Rates Attract MNE
        Activity: Municipality-Level Evidence from Germany.” Journal of Public Economics 96, 698–711.

Berger, A., M. Busse, P. Nunnenkamp, and M. Roy. 2013. “Do Trade and Investment Agreements Lead
        to More FDI? Accounting for Key Provisions Inside the Black Box.” International Economics and
        Economic Policy 10 (2): 247-75.

Bernard, Andrew B., and J. Bradford Jensen. 2007. “Firm Structure, Multinationals, and Manufacturing
       Plant Deaths.” MIT Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (2): 193-204.
Bernard, Andrew B., and Fredrik Sjöholm. 2003. “Foreign Owners and Plant Survival.” NBER Working
       Paper 10039. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Blalock, Garrick and Paul J., Gertler. 2009. "How firm capabilities affect who benefits from foreign
         technology." Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 90(2):192-199.

Blomstrom, Magnus, and Ari Kokko. 2003. "The Economics of Foreign Direct Investment Incentives."
       NBER Working Paper, 9489.

Blonigen, Bruce A., and Alyson C. Ma. 2010. “Please Pass the Catch -up: The Relative Performance of
        Chinese and Foreign Firms in Chinese Exports.” In China’s Growing Role in World Trade, ed.
        Robert C. Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the NBER.

Bolnick, Bruce. 2009. “Investing in Mozambique—The Role of Fiscal Incentives.” Nathan Associates for
         the U.S. Agency for International Development, Washington, D.C.

Borchert, Ingo, Batshur Gootiiz, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2012. “Policy Barriers to International Trade in
       Services: Evidence from a New Database.” Policy Research Working Paper 6109. World Bank,
       Washington, D.C.

Busse, Matthias, Jens Koniger, and Peter Nunnenkamp. 2010. “FDI Promotion through Bilateral
       Investment Treaties: More Than a Bit?” Review of World Economics 146 (1): 147-77.

Büthe, T. and H.V. Milner. 2014. “Foreign Direct Investment and Institutional Diversity in Trade
       Agreements: Credibility, Commitment, and Economic Flows in the Developing World, 1971-
       2007”, World Politics, 66 (1), 88-122.

Chen, Huiya, Swenson, Deborah L. 2014. "Multinational Exposure and the Quality of New Chinese
       Exports," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 76(1), 41-66, 02.

Colen, L., D. Persyn, and A. Guariso. 2014. “What Type of FDI Is Attracted By Bilateral Treaties?”
        Discussion Paper 346/2014. LICOS Centre for Institutions and Economic Performance. Leuven.

Conyon, Martin J, Sourafel Girma, Steve Thompson, Peter W Wright. 2002. “The Productivity and Wage
       Effects of Foreign Acquisition in the United Kingdom.” Journal of Industrial Economics 50: 85-
       102.

Criscuolo, Chiara, Ralf Martin, Henry G. Overman, and John Van Reenen. 2012. “The Causal Effects of
        an Industrial Policy.” CEP Discussion Paper No 1113. Center for Economic Performance,
        London.

De la Medina Soto, Christian, and Tania M. Ghossein. 2013. “Starting a Foreign Investment Across
       Sectors.” Policy Research Working Paper 6707. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

De Mooij, Ruud, and Sjef Ederveen. 2008. “Corporate Tax Elasticities: A Reader’s Guide to E mpirical
      Findings.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, vol. 24 (4): 680–97.

Desai, M. A., C. F. Foley, and J. R. Hines. 2002. “Chains of Ownership, Regional Tax Competition, and
        Foreign Direct Investment.” NBER Working Paper, 9224.

Devereux, Michael P., Rachel Griffith, Helen Simpson, 2007. "Firm location decisions, regional grants
       and agglomeration externalities." Journal of Public Economics, Elsevier, vol. 91(3-4): 413-435.

Du, Luosha, Ann Harrison, and Gary H. Jefferson. 2012. “Testing for Horizontal and Vertical Foreign
       Investment Spillovers in China, 1998–2007.” Journal of Asian Economics 23 (3): 234-43.
Dunning, J. H., and S. M. Lundan. 2008. Multinational Enterprises and the Global Economy. Second
       Edition. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Duranton, Gilles, Laurent Gobillon, and Henry G. Overman. 2011. “Assessing the Effects of Local
       Taxation Using Microgeographic Data.” Economic Journal, 121, 1017–1046.

Echandi, Roberto, Krajcovicova Jana and Qiang Zhenwei Christine. 2015. “The Impact of Investment
       Policy in a Changing Global Economy: a Review of the Literature”, Policy Research Working
       Paper 7437, Washington, D.C. World Bank.

Egger, Peter, and Valeria Merlo. 2012. “BITs Bite: An Anatomy of the Impact of Bilateral Investment
        Treaties on Multinational Firms.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 114 (4): 1240-66.

Farole, Thomas, and Deborah Winkler. 2012. “Foreign Firm Characteristics, Absorptive Capacity and the
         Institutional Framework: The Role of Mediating Factors for FDI Spillovers in Low- and Middle-
         Income Countries.” Policy Research Working Paper 6265. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

———. 2014. “The Role of Mediating Factors for FDI Spillovers in Developing Countries: Evidence from
     a Global Dataset.” In Making Foreign Direct Investment Work for Sub-Saharan Africa.
     Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Fernandes, Ana, and Caroline Paunov. 2012. “Foreign Direct Investment in Services and Manufacturing
       Productivity: Evidence for Chile.” Journal of Development Economics 97: 305-21.

Freedman, Matthew. 2013. “Targeted Business Incentives and Local Labor Markets.” Journal of Human
      Resources, 48, Issue 2.

Freund, Caroline and Pierola Martha Denisse. 2013. “Export Superstars”, World Bank Policy Research
        Working Papers 6222, available at: http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-
        6222

Fosfuri, Andrea, Massimo Motta, and Thomas Ronde. 2001. “Foreign Direct Investments and Spillovers
         through Worker Mobility.” Journal of International Economics 53: 205–22.

Girma, Sourafel, and Holger Görg. 2007. “Multinationals’ Productivity Advantage: Scale Or
       Technology?” Economic Inquiry 45 (2): 350-62.

Gómez-Mera, Laura, Thomas Kenyon, Yotam Margalit, José Guilherme Reis and Gonzalo Varela. 2015.
      “New Voices in Investment.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Görg, Holger, and Eric Strobl. 2005. “Spillovers from Foreign Firms through Worker Mobility: An
       Empirical Investigation.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 107 (4): 693-709.

Görg, H., and David Greenaway. 2004. “Much Ado about Nothing? Do Domestic Firms Really Benefit
        from Foreign Direct Investment?” The World Bank Research Observer 19 (2): 171–97.

Haftel, Yoram Z. 2010. “Ratification Counts: US Investment Treaties and FDI flows into developing
        Countries.” Review of International Political Economy 17 (2): 348-77.

Hanson, Andrew, and Shawn Rohlin. 2011. “The Effect of Location-Based Tax Incentives on
       Establishment Location and Employment across Industry Sectors.” Public Finance Review 39:
       195-225.

Harding, Torfinn, and Beata S. Javorcik. 2011a. “Roll Out the Red Car pet and They Will Come:
       Investment Promotion and FDI Inflows.” Economic Journal 121 (557): 1445-76.
———. 2011b. "FDI and Export Upgrading,"Economics Series Working Papers 526, University of Oxford,
        Department of Economics.

———. 2013. "Investment Promotion and FDI Inflows: Quality Matters,"CESifo Economic Studies,
     CESifo, vol. 59: 337-59.

Harris, Richard, and Catherine Robinson. 2003. “Foreign Ownership and Productivity in the United
        Kingdom Estimates for U.K. Manufacturing Using the ARD." Review of Industrial Organization,
        22: 207-23.

Haskel, Jonathan E., Sonia C. Pereira, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2007. “Does Inward Foreign Direct
        Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?“ MIT Review of Economics and Statistics
        89 (3): 482-96.

Heyman, Fredrik, Fredrik Sjöholm, and Patrik Gustavsson Tingvall. 2007. “Is There Really a Foreign
      Ownership Wage Premium? Evidence from Matched Employer-Employee Data.” Journal of
      International Economics 73 (2): 355-76.

Hijzen, Alexander, Pedro S. Martins, Thorsten Schank and Richard, Upward. 2013. "Foreign-owned firms
         around the world: A comparative analysis of wages and employment at the micro-level."
         European Economic Review, Elsevier, vol. 60(C): 170-188.

Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, Jeffrey J. Schott, Cathleen Cimino, Martin Vieiro, and Erika Wada. 2013. “Local
       Content Requirements: A Global Problem.” Policy Analyses 102. Peterson Institute for
       International Economics, Washington, D.C.

James, Sebastian. 2013. “Effectiveness of Tax and Non-Tax Incentives and Investments: Evidence and
        Policy Implications.” World Bank Group, Washington, D.C.

Javorcik, Beata S. 2004. “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic Firms?
        In Search of Spillovers through Backward Linkages.” American Economic Review 94 (3): 605-27.

———. 2014. “Does FDI Bring Good Jobs to Host Countries?” Policy Research Working Paper 6936.
     World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Javorcik, Beata S., and Yue Li. 2013. “Do the Biggest Aisles Serve a Brighter Future? Global Retail Chains
        and Their Implications for Romania.” Journal of International Economics 92 (2): 348-63.



Javorcik, Beata S., and Mariana Spatareanu. 2005. “Disentangling FDI Spillover Effects: What Do Firm
        Perceptions Tell Us?” In Does Foreign Direct Investment Promote Development?, ed. T. Moran,
        E. Graham, and M. Blomstrom. Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics.

———. 2009. “Tough Love: Do Czech Suppliers Learn from Their Relationships with
    Multinationals?” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111 (4): 811-33.

Kee, Hiau Looi, 2015. "Local intermediate inputs and the shared supplier spillovers of foreign direct
        investment," Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 112: 56-71.

Keller, Wolfgang, and Stephen Yeaple. 2009. “Multinational Enterprises, International Trade, and
        Technology Diffusion: A Firm-level Analysis of the Productivity Effects of Foreign Competition
        in the United States.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (4): 821-31.
Klemm, Alexander, and Stefan Van Parys. 2012. “Empirical Evidence on the Effects of Tax Incentives.”
       International Tax and Public Finance 19 (3): 393-423.

Kuntze, Jan-Christoph, and Tom Moerenhout. 2013. “Local Content Requirements and the Renewable
        Energy Industry—A Good Match?” International Center for Trade and Sustainable
        Development and Global Green Growth Institute. Geneva.

Lesher, Molly and Sébastien Miroudot. 2006. “Analysis of the Economic Impact of Investment Provisions
        in Regional Trade Agreements.” OECD Trade Policy Papers 36, OECD Publishing.

Lipsey, Robert E., and Fredrik Sjöholm. 2004. “Foreign Direct Investment, Education and Wages in
        Indonesian Manufacturing.” Journal of Development Economics 73 (1): 415-22.

Lipsey, Robert, Fredrik Sjöholm, Jing Sun. 2010. Foreign Ownership and Employment Growth in
        Indonesian Manufacturing. NBER Working Paper No. 15936.

Long, Guoqiang. 2005. “China’s Policies on FDI: Review and Evaluation.” In Does Foreign Direct
       Investment Promote Development?, ed. Theodore Moran, Edward M. Graham, and Magnus
       Blomstrom. Washington, D.C.: Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Meyer, Klaus, and Evis Sinani. 2009. “When and Where Does Foreign Direct Investment Generate
       Positive Spillovers? A Meta-Analysis.” Journal of International Business Studies 40 (7): 1075–94.

MIGA (Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency). 2014. World Investment and Political Risk 2013.
      Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.

Moran, Theodore H. 1998. Foreign Direct Investment and Development: The New Policy Agenda for
       Developing Countries and Economies in Transition. Washington, D.C.: Peterson Institute for
       International Economics.

———. 2006. Harnessing Foreign Direct Investment for Development: Policies for Developed and
     Developing Countries. Washington D.C.: Center for Global Development.

———. 2011. Foreign Direct Investment and Development: Launching a Second Generation of Policy
     Research: Avoiding the Mistakes of the First, Re-Evaluating Policies for Developed and
     Developing Countries. Washington, D.C.: Peterson Institute for International Economics.

———. 2014. “Foreign Investment and Supply Chains in Emerging Markets: Recurring Problems and
     Demonstrated Solutions.” Working Paper 14-12. Peterson Institute for International
     Economics, Washington, D.C.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) - WTO (World Trade Organization)
       Database on Trade in Value Added (TiVA). Preliminary results from 2013 data.
       https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/miwi_e/tradedataday13_e/oecdbrochurejanv13
       _e.pdf

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), WTO (World Trade Organization),
       and WBG (World Bank Group). 2014. “Global Value Chains. Challenges, Opportunities and
       Implications for Policy.” Report prepared for submission to the G20 Trade Ministers Meeting
       Sydney, Australia, 19 July 2014.

Paniagua, Jordi, and Andrew Myburgh. Forthcoming. “Does International Commercial Arbitration
       Promote Foreign Direct Investment?” Catholic University of Valencia, Faculty of Economics and
       Business, Spain, and World Bank Group, Washington, D.C.
Piermartini, Roberta, and Stela Rubínová. 2014. “Knowledge Spillovers through international supply
       chains.” World Trade Organization Working Paper ERSD-2014-11.

Poole, Jennifer. 2013. “Knowledge Transfers from Multinational to Domestic Firms: Evidence from
        Worker Mobility.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (2): 393-406.

Rahardja, Sjamsu and Gonzalo Varela. 2014. “Nothing to Fear but Fear Itself: Evidence on Imported
       Intermediates in Indonesia”. World Bank Economic Premise, 85983.

Rahman, Aminur. 2014. “Investment Climate Reforms and Job Creation in Developing Countries: What
      Do We Know and What Should We Do?” Policy Research Working Paper 7025. World Bank,
      Washington, D.C.

Sánchez-Martín, Miguel Eduardo, Jaime De Piniés, and Kássia Antoine. 2015. “Measuring the
       Determinants of Backward Linkages from FDI in Developing Economies: Is It a Matter of Size?”
       Policy Research Working Paper 7185. World Bank, Washington D.C.

Sauvant, Karl P., Lisa E. Sachs. 2009. “The Effect of Treaties on Foreign Direct Investment: Bilateral
       Investment Treaties, Double Taxation Treaties, and Investment Flows”. New York: Oxford
       University Press.

Swenson, Deborah L. 2008. "Multinationals and the Creation of Chinese Trade Linkages." Canadian
      Journal of Economics, Canadian Economics Association, 41(2): 596-618.

WBG (World Bank Group). 2011. “Igniting Innovation: Rethinking the Role of Government in Emerging
      Europe and Central Asia”. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 2005. World Investment Report
      2005: Transnational Corporations and the Internationalization of R&D. New York and Geneva.

———. 2007. “Elimination of TRIMS: The Experience of Selected Developing Countries.” New York and
     Geneva.

———. 2013. World Investment Report 2013: Global Value Chains: Investment and Trade for
     Development. New York and Geneva.

———. 2014. World Investment Report 2014: Investing in the SDGs: An Action Plan. New York and
     Geneva.

Wagle, Swarnim. 2011. “Investing across Borders with Heterogeneous Firms: Do FDI-Specific
       Regulations Matter?” Policy Research Working Paper 5914. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

WEF (World Economic Forum). 2013. “Foreign Direct Investment as a Key Driver for Trade, Growth, and
      Prosperity: The Case for a Multilateral Agreement on Investment.” Global Agenda Council on
      Global Trade and FDI, Geneva.

Wren, Colin, and Jonathan Jones. 2011. “Assessing the Regional Impact of Grants on FDI Location:
       Evidence from U.K. Regional Policy, 1985-2005.” Journal of Regional Science 51 (3): 497-517.

Yackee, Jason. 2009. “Do BITs Really Work? Revisiting the Empirical Link between Investment Treaties
        and Foreign Direct Investment.” In The Effect of Treaties on Foreign Direct Investment: Bilateral
        Investment Treaties, Double Taxation Treaties, and Investment Flows, ed. Karl P. Sauvant and
        Lisa L. Sachs. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
