GOOD PRACTICE NOTE

IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels




                           Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | i
© International Finance Corporation 2017. All rights reserved.
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433 Internet: www.ifc.org

The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation
of applicable law. IFC encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work
promptly, and when the reproduction is for educational and non-commercial purposes, without a fee, subject to such attributions and
notices as we may reasonably require.

IFC does not guarantee the accuracy, reliability or completeness of the content included in this work, or for the conclusions or judgments
described herein, and accepts no responsibility or liability for any omissions or errors (including, without limitation, typographical errors
and technical errors) in the content whatsoever or for reliance thereon. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information
shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory
or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent.

The contents of this work are intended for general informational purposes only and are not intended to constitute legal, securities, or
investment advice, an opinion regarding the appropriateness of any investment, or a solicitation of any type. IFC or its affiliates may
have an investment in, provide other advice or services to, or otherwise have a financial interest in, certain of the companies and parties.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to IFC’s Corporate Relations Department, 2121
Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433.

International Finance Corporation is an international organization established by Articles of Agreement among its member countries,
and a member of the World Bank Group. All names, logos and trademarks are the property of IFC and you may not use any of such
materials for any purpose without the express written consent of IFC. Additionally, “International Finance Corporation” and “IFC” are
registered trademarks of IFC and are protected under international law.

July 2017

Photo credits: Adobe Stock




ii | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
This Good Practice Note (GPN) was prepared by the consulting firm FPC Risk
and peer reviewed by John Graham, Bernard Micallef, Luis Cestari, and Elena
Chuzhakova (all IFC).

This GPN is intended to be used as a reference for IFC’s investment and project
teams. It is not intended to be a compliance guide or substitute for IFC’s Performance
Standards or the World Bank Group’s Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines.

The purpose of the Good Practice Series is to share information about private
sector approaches for addressing a range of environmental and social issues,
that IFC believes demonstrate one or elements of good practice in these areas.
Information about these approaches may be taken from publicly available or
other third party sources. IFC and/or its affiliates may have financial interests
in or other commercial relationships with certain of the companies.

While IFC believes that the information provided is accurate, the information is
provided on a strictly “as-is” basis, without assurance or representation of any kind.
IFC may not require all or any of the described practices in its own investments,
and in its sole discretion may not agree to finance or assist companies or projects
that adhere to those practices. Any such practices or proposed practices would
be evaluated by IFC on a case-by-case basis with due regard for the particular
circumstances of the project.

For more information on IFC’s commitment to sustainability, including links to
the Sustainability Framework, visit www.ifc.org/sustainability.




                                                     Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | iii
Table of Contents
    List of Abbreviations	                                                v

    Introduction	                                                         1

1. Hotel-Specific Fire Risks	3

2. Life and Fire Safety Components	3

	Approach	                                                                3

	      Structural Fire Resistance	                                        3

	      Fire Compartmentation	                                             4

	      Interior Finish	                                                   7

	      Furnishings, Mattresses, Decoration	                               7

	      Fire Detection	                                                    9

	      Fire Alarm	                                                       10

	      Means of Egress	                                                  13

	      Fire Control and Suppression	                                     16

	      Smoke Control	                                                    19

	      Protection from Fire Hazards	                                     20

3. Documentation 	23

	      Fire Safety Master Plan	                                          23

	      Fire Safety Design Documentation	                                 23

	      Fire Prevention Program	                                          23

	      Management of Change Program	                                     24

	      Emergency Response Plans	                                         25

	      Maintenance Plan and Contract for all Fire Protection Systems	    25

	      Test Plans for all Fire Protection Systems	                       25

	      Incident Reporting Documents	                                     25

4. Fire Safety Project Approaches	26

5. Project Approval 	26

    Annexes 	                                                            28

	      Annex A. Guideline Key Life and Fire Safety Design Principles	    28

	      Annex B. Key Life and Fire Safety Audit Aspects	                  30

	      Annex C. Inspection and Maintenance Schedule	                     34	

	      Annex D. Life and Fire Safety Documentation and Approval Flow 	   38	




iv | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
List of Abbreviations
dBA		     decibel (A-weighting)

FACP	     Fire Alarm Control Panel

GPN		     Good Practice Note

IFC		     International Finance Corporation

LFS		     Life and Fire Safety

m		 meter

m.s-1		   meter per second

MAC		     Manual Alarm Callpoint

min		     minutes

N		 Newton

Pa		 Pascal

SHEVS	    Smoke and Heat Exhaust Ventilation System

WBG		     World Bank Group




                                                      Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | v
vi | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
Introduction

The Life and Fire Safety (LFS) Good Practice Notes (GPNs) are technical reference documents developed for two
main purposes:1

     •	 To support IFC’s investment decisions when evaluating if life and fire safety objectives have been achieved

     •	 As a general guideline for the project team to develop a life and fire concept for the specific occupancy

This GPN is a guideline for investment projects in both new and existing occupancies.


The GPN provides further guidance to section 3.3 of the World Bank Group (WBG) General Environmental,
Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines, which are the core of IFC’s requirements on life and fire safety.

DOCUMENT STRUCTURE

This GPN consists of two main parts:

     •	 A description of fire safety approach, specific requirements and components of fire protection

     •	 Four annexes:

            -- Annex A. Guideline Key Life and Fire Safety Design Principles

            -- Annex B. Key Life and Fire Safety Audit Aspects

            -- Annex C. Inspection and Maintenance Schedule

            -- Annex D. Life and Fire Safety Documentation and Approval Flow



LIFE AND FIRE SAFETY OBJECTIVES

The following objectives should be demonstrated by the project team when designing a building:

     •	 Safe evacuation of occupants

     •	 Limit fire and smoke spread to one fire compartment

     •	 Safe intervention for fire brigade

These life and fire safety objectives can only be achieved through implementation of technical and operational
measures.




1
    This document is not a legal reference.



                                                                     Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 1
2 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
1. Hotel-Specific Fire Risks

Hotels are residential occupancies that are primarily transient in nature. The presence of sleeping occupants should
be central to the provisions taken on life and fire safety, because occupants who are asleep will be unaware of a
developing fire and, when awakened and alerted to the emergency, might be somewhat confused. Furthermore,
most occupants have little or no familiarity with the building.

The provisions are also based on the presence of additional hazards (such as cooking and heating equipment,
smoking in rooms) that might be present in the hotel rooms.

Unfamiliar surroundings and the possibility of being asleep when a fire occurs are factors that increase risk to hotel
guests. An additional challenge is the potential exposure to heat and smoke of corridor and room fires, because
typical hotel building configurations often require escaping guests to traverse an interior corridor.




2. Life and Fire Safety Components

APPROACH

The basic strategy is to provide occupant warning in case of fire and limit fire and smoke spread by providing
proper compartmentation, smoke management and sprinklers. Also
good staff training and emergency response plans are essential.

Hence, the required level of life and fire safety can be achieved by         Unfamiliar surroundings
the implementation of a range of fire safety measures.                       and the possibility of being
                                                                             asleep when a fire occurs
A summary table of the key LFS design criteria is included in Annex
A of this document. In the following paragraphs, each of the key
                                                                             are factors that increase
aspects is described in more detail.                                         risk to hotel guests.



STRUCTURAL FIRE RESISTANCE

GOALS

The structural fire resistance of a hotel building should be
sufficient to:

  •	 Enable a safe evacuation of the building
  •	 Allow firefighters ample time to enter the building, organize
     a search and rescue operation and control the fire




                                                                    Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 3
REQUIREMENTS

As a main code of good practice, the building structure should be non-combustible.

Other requirements of the building structure depend on the height of the building. In areas where the public fire
department can intervene within 15 minutes after the fire alarm goes off, the following values are recommended:
     •	 Single-story building: 30 minutes structural resistance
     •	 Buildings lower than 25 m: 60 minutes structural resistance
     •	 Buildings higher than 25 m: 120 minutes structural resistance

These structural fire resistance requirements can be achieved by following materials:
     •	 Columns and beams of reinforced concrete. Design of these elements should take into account static and
        dynamic forces, fire resistance, etc.

     •	 Metal columns and beams. Since metal loses its strength at elevated temperatures, these elements should be
        protected by intumescent2 coatings or material insulation such as gypsum casings. Another option is to use
        concrete poured metal elements.

MAINTENANCE

Maintenance of fire resistance structures depends on the material used. Concrete elements don’t require specific
maintenance. Of course, strength calculations need to be performed if higher loads are applied or if elements are
altered.

Coatings are more vulnerable to damage and should be visually inspected regularly. Coatings need to be reapplied
at regular intervals, in accordance with maintenance instructions. Fire resistant casings might also be vulnerable
to damage and need to be visually inspected regularly.


FIRE COMPARTMENTATION

COMPARTMENTATION GOALS

Well-maintained fire compartmentation confines fire and smoke to a limited area in the building. It is the fundamental
basis of passive fire protection. A fire compartment can contain single or multiple rooms. Fire compartmentation
enables three goals of fire protection:
     •	 Life safety
     •	 Property protection
     •	 Continuity of operations

The following good practices are recommended:
     •	 Every floor forms a single fire compartment
     •	 Every occupancy type / function area forms a single fire compartment
     •	 High-risk areas are located in separate fire compartments
     •	 Safe means of egress are enclosed by fire rated walls and doors
     •	 Vertical openings (stairs, elevators, utility shafts) are enclosed by fire rated walls and doors

In the following sections, more guidance is given.

2
    Materials that swell when exposed to heat, providing insulating or sealing properties



4 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
COMPARTMENTATION BETWEEN FLOORS

Fire compartmentation between floors prevents a fire from spreading quickly between floors. The fire compartmentation
of the floor slab should have at least the same rating as the structural resistance of the building. Attention should
also be given to prevent possible flame spreads through the openings on the outside of the building.

If a compartmentation between floors is not feasible (e.g., hotel rooms located around an atrium), additional fire
safety measures should be taken to limit fire spread and to control the smoke (e.g., smoke extraction by smoke
vents or mechanical extractors, installation of smoke curtains, etc.).

COMPARTMENTATION BETWEEN OCCUPANCIES / FUNCTION AREAS

The following occupancies / function areas should form separate fire compartments, with a fire rating of at least
60 minutes:

  •	 Guest rooms
  •	 Kitchen and restaurant
  •	 Laundry
  •	 Reception area
  •	 Conference area
  •	 Shopping areas
  •	 Parking garages
  •	 Electrical/mechanical areas                                     Well-maintained fire
                                                                     compartmentation confines fire
SAFE MEANS OF EGRESS
                                                                     and smoke to a limited area in
In order to protect people against toxic effects and heat impact     the building
of smoke resulting from a fire, only a limited evacuation
distance is allowed through which one can be exposed. After
this evacuation distance, people should be able to evacuate
through safe means of egress to the outside. These means of
egress are separated from the rest of the building by walls
and doors with sufficient fire rating.

VERTICAL OPENINGS

Vertical openings in floors are particularly hazardous because
they enable rapid fire and smoke spread through the building
if they are not protected. As a general guideline, these vertical
openings should have the same fire rating as the building’s
structural resistance.

COMPARTMENT CONSTRUCTION

A well-constructed fire compartment consists of walls that are
strong enough to provide the required fire rating. Openings
in these walls can only be made if they are sealed by certified
components. An overview of the most important components
is given in the following sections.


                                                                    Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 5
FIRE RATED DOORS

Fire rated doors should be always certified to have a defined fire rating. As a general guideline, the fire doors
should have the same fire rating as the fire walls. Exceptions are however possible if national legislation accepts
doors with a lower fire rating than the walls (e.g., U.S. standards accept that doors have a fire rating which is
approximately 2/3 of the wall’s fire rating).

The installer of the fire rated doors should follow the manufacturer’s published instructions, and should provide
for every door a certificate that the door is installed in accordance with these requirements.

FIRE RATED WINDOWS

Windows are possible in fire rated walls if they have a certified fire rating. The fire rating of the window should
be equal to the wall fire rating.

FIRE RATED DUCTWORK

When ducts are installed through fire walls, one of following options should be installed to protect the opening
against fire spread:

  •	 The duct should be encased in a fire rated enclosure that has the same fire rating as the fire rated wall

  •	 A fire rated damper should be installed in the duct where it penetrates the fire rated wall. This fire rated
     damper should have a certificate for the same fire rating as the fire rated wall. The opening between wall
     and duct should be sealed with material having the same fire rating as the wall

SEALING OF OPENINGS

All other openings (cables and cable trays, plastic or metal pipes) should be sealed with a material that provides a
fire rating equal to the fire rating of the wall. If plastic pipes protrude through a fire rated wall, specific fire rated
collars should be installed in the penetration through the wall. It is recommended that a certificate is provided
for every specific penetration through a fire rated wall.

MAINTENANCE

Compartmentation as such doesn’t require much maintenance, since most of the protection measures are passive.
However the following items should be inspected anually:

  •	 Fire doors:

         -- If doors are self-closing, check if they still latch correctly and check for damage to the door

         -- If doors should close upon fire detection: test the mechanism by activating a fire detector

  •	 Fire dampers: inspect the closing mechanism

  •	 Smoke dampers: test if the damper closes upon fire detection

The effectiveness of fire compartmentation to confine fire and smoke relies heavily on the protection of openings
through the fire rated wall/floor. A well-implemented ‘management of change’ program is necessary to identify
alterations that can have an impact on a fire compartment. It is often noticed that fire wall penetrations are not
properly sealed after modifications (e.g., additional penetration for cables), which can have an immense impact
on the performance of the fire rated wall.




6 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
INTERIOR FINISH

GOALS OF INTERIOR FINISH

The provision of safe evacuation routes is one of the more important life safety aspects in hotel buildings. A
correct choice of interior finish materials in these routes is a key aspect to reach this goal.

Combustible interior finish materials can lead to a quick fire spread and block the access to exits or even the exits
themselves. Such scenarios can be avoided by selecting interior finish materials that are more difficult to ignite.

It is not the intention of this paragraph to prohibit the use of certain interior finish materials in guest rooms
themselves. One should however consider that fewer combustible materials in the rooms will lead to lower fire
spreads and to more time for the occupants to escape safely.

CHOICE OF INTERIOR FINISH MATERIALS

Since standards of reaction to fire are hard to compare, it is difficult to define in this section requirements on class
of materials.

The following guidelines, however, can be given:

  •	 Exit enclosures should consist completely of non-combustible elements: concrete elements, gypsum finishes,
     ceramic materials, metal ceiling elements, rockwool elements for false ceilings. Plastics or other combustible
     materials are never allowed.

  •	 Corridors and lobbies should consist of non-combustible materials and of materials that are hard to ignite.
     Test certificates should be presented for plastic and wood materials to demonstrate that the material is hard
     to ignite and thus suitable to use.

  •	 The higher the building, the more attention is needed to the choice of interior finish materials since both
     evacuation and intervention take longer time.

  •	 The use of sprinklers can lead to less stringent requirements for interior finish materials. Materials that
     are easily ignitable (low density fibreboards, wood- based panels, plastic based insulation products) should
     however be avoided at all times.

MAINTENANCE

No specific requirements on maintenance exist.

A well implemented ‘management of change’ program is however necessary to identify which materials are to be
used during modification projects in the building.

FURNISHINGS, MATTRESSES, DECORATION

GOALS

Just as with interior finish materials, the room furnishing has a big impact on the potential spread of a fire. By
selecting proper materials, the hazard to people close to the fire can be significantly reduced. The choice of
furnishing, mattress type and decoration has most impact on life safety.




                                                                     Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 7
8 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
CHOICE OF FURNISHINGS, MATTRESSES AND DECORATION

Foam materials can contribute significantly to the strength of a fire. For this reason, it is recommended to avoid
as much as possible upholstered furniture in guest rooms. Specific standardized tests on performance of this type
of furniture in fires exist. If such furniture is selected, it is highly recommended to select certified items that have
a better performance in a fire.

Mattresses may also contain combustible foaming materials. As a minimum, these mattresses should pass tests
on their resistance against smouldering cigarettes or other small objects.

Curtains can also have a large impact on the fire spread, due to their vertical orientation. Attention should be
paid to the selection of fire retardant materials.

MAINTENANCE

Also for this topic, a well-implemented ‘management of change’ program is necessary to identify which materials
are to be used during modification projects in the building.


FIRE DETECTION

GOALS OF FIRE DETECTION                                                        Automatic fire detection
Automatic fire detection systems provide a fast and reliable means             systems provide a fast and
to detect a fire in its incipient stage. As such, they enable following        reliable means to detect a
goals of fire protection:                                                      fire in its incipient stage.

  •	 Life safety

  •	 Property protection

  •	 Continuity of operations

In guest room areas, smoke detectors with a built-in buzzer are of
great value to warn sleeping people (specially in smoking rooms)
before they get incapacitated by the smoke. In all other areas, the
installation of a well-designed automatic fire detection system leads
to a fast fire detection, which on its turn provides more time to
react to the fire and to initiate an evacuation and fire intervention.

INSTALLATION OF FIRE DETECTION SYSTEMS

An automatic fire detection system consists of following components:

  •	 A fire alarm control panel (FACP) that manages the complete system

  •	 Fire detectors

  •	 Manual alarm callpoints (MACs)

  •	 Input / output modules (I/O modules) that integrate specific signals from / to equipment managed by the FACP

It is strongly recommended to only install fire detection systems that are accepted by national standards or
approved by accredited bodies. The design of the system should be performed by a company that is certified for
the installation of such systems.


                                                                      Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 9
A ‘cause and effect matrix’ should be developed during the design. This matrix should summarize all actions that
need to be activated by the FACP upon fire detection in one of the detection zones.

The FACP or one of its repeater panels should be located in a continuously staffed location (e.g., in the hotel
reception area), or the fire alarm / fault signal should be automatically transmitted to a dedicated person.

It is recommended to automatically transmit a confirmed fire alarm signal to the fire department or to a dedicated
command post in order to initiate fire fighting intervention as soon as possible. Procedures in which the alarm is
verified by personnel before the alarm is transmitted are permitted.

MAINTENANCE

Since a fire detection system is composed of often sensitive electronic equipment, proper maintenance of the system
is vital: the system should be maintained annually by a certified company.

Besides this yearly maintenance, the system owner is responsible for the daily follow-up of technical alarms.
Equally important is a ‘management of change’ procedure: with every change of layout or function of any area, a
verification should be performed that the detection system in the area is still able to detect a fire swiftly.

FIRE ALARM

GOALS OF FIRE ALARM

The main goal of a fire alarm system is to start the evacuation of a compartment or complete building in a timely
and orderly manner.

In order to meet this goal, the alarm signal should be:

  •	 Clearly distinct from any other sound in the building

  •	 Loud enough in all areas

  •	 Understandable by hearing-impaired persons

Fire alarm signals can be roughly divided into following categories:

  •	 Audible alarms (e.g., siren, bell)

  •	 Voice evacuation systems	

  •	 Visible notification signals

  •	 Vibrating pillows in rooms for hearing-impaired persons

A siren system can be installed in all hotel areas that are not accessible to guests: hotel personnel should know
the fire alarm signal and should know what to do in case of fire alarm.

In public areas, a voice evacuation system is preferred: this system combines a general alert system with pre-
recorded messages to leave the building. With this system, specific directives can also be given for one alarm zone
or for the complete building.

Visible notification means can be provided in areas with potential high noise levels, but are only permitted as an
extra signal above sirens.




10 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
INSTALLATION OF FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS

Alarm sounders should be strategically installed in the building to obtain a distinctive alarm signal throughout.
The following sound levels should be obtained:

  •	 Guest rooms: at least 75 dBA or 15 dBA above the average ambient sound level, measured on the pillow
     level. If there are any barriers between the sounder and the pillow (e.g. door, rectractable partition, curtain,
     etc.), the sound level should be measured with these barriers closed.

  •	 Other areas: at least 65 dBA or 15 dBA above the average ambient sound level, measured 1.5 m above floor
     level.

  •	 Voice messages don’t need to meet the sound levels indicated above. The message should however be
     intelligible within specific spaces in the building. These areas should be predetermined during the design
     and should include at a minimum:

          -- Guest room corridors
          -- All large public areas as reception, restaurants and bars, large conference rooms, etc.

The maximum sound level in any location should not exceed 110 dBA. Visible notification means can be provided
in areas with potential high noise levels (e.g., generator
rooms).
                                                                             Alarm sounders should
If the guest room can be occupied by hearing-impaired                        be strategically installed
persons, additional notification means should be provided.
                                                                             in the building to obtain
Flashing lights should be installed in these rooms, the
                                                                             a distinctive alarm signal
installation of a vibrating pad under the pillow is an
optional notification. Further, it is highly recommended
                                                                             throughout.
to organize a system of manual alerts for hearing- and
mobility-impaired persons.

The fire alarm system can be divided into alarm zones in
order to allow for a phased evacuation of the building.
Several fire compartments can be combined into one alarm
zone, but it is not allowed to subdivide a fire compartment
into different alarm zones.

The fire alarm system is an installation that needs to
remain in service during fire conditions: care should be
taken to install fire rated cabling and to supervise the
correct working of all electronic equipment.

MAINTENANCE

The alarm system should be maintained annually by a
certified company. The alarm should be tested at least
annually to check if sound levels comply.

During change projects, it should always be verified that
the sound levels are still attained in every area.



                                                                    Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 11
12 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
MEANS OF EGRESS

EGRESS GOALS

The means of egress allow people to evacuate safely from the hotel. In order to achieve this goal, the following
requirements should be met:

  •	 The path on which people can be exposed to fire and smoke should be limited in distance.

  •	 The means of egress should have sufficient width to allow all occupants to evacuate in due time.

  •	 Enough independent evacuation ways should be available to allow a safe evacuation if one of the routes is
     blocked by a fire.

  •	 People are not impeded on the evacuation route by blocked or locked doors, low ceiling heights, too narrow
     routes, steep stairs, low illumination levels, storage of materials, etc.

  •	 People should be able to locate the exits easily.


MAXIMUM EVACUATION LENGTHS

The evacuation route consists of a number of components for which
definitions are given below:

  •	 Common path: The portion of a route that must be traversed              In order to protect people
     before separate and distinct paths of travel to at least two            against toxic effects and
     exits are available. In hotel areas, the evacuation route in            heat impact of smoke
     the guest room itself is often not part of the common path, a           resulting from a fire, only a
     separate maximal guest room distance is normally prescribed             limited evacuation distance
     in local codes.                                                         is allowed.
  •	 Exit: That portion of a means of egress that is separated from
     all other spaces of the building or structure by construction,
     location, or equipment as required to provide a protected way
     of travel to the exit discharge. Staircases or direct accesses
     to the outside are typical examples of exits. Under certain
     conditions, another fire compartment can also be an exit.

  •	 Exit discharge: That portion of a means of egress between the
     termination of an exit and a public way.

  •	 Dead-end corridor: That part of an exit access corridor that
     continues past an exit and creates a pocket into which an
     occupant might travel.

Recommended maximal evacuation lengths can be found in Annex A.

The following other guidelines should be taken into account:

  •	 Maximum 50 percent of the exit capacity is allowed to discharge
     through a lobby or reception area



                                                                    Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 13
  •	 Main entrance requirements for areas with occupant loads that are higher than 50 persons (restaurants, bars,
      conference areas, etc.):

          -- The main entrance should be of a width that accommodates one-half of the total occupant load
          -- If a discotheque is provided, the main entrance shall be of a width that accommodates two-thirds of
            the occupant load
          -- In any case, additional exits shall be provided for at least one-half of the occupant load

ARRANGEMENT OF MEANS OF EGRESS

Enough means of egress should be available to allow people to evacuate safely if one of the exits cannot be
reached due to the fire. In general, it is recommended to organize evacuation routes in such a way that at least
two independent exits can be reached from every area in the building. A part of these exit routes can be ‘common
path,’ see Annex A for recommendations on maximum lengths.

The larger the maximum occupant load of an area, the more independent evacuation routes should be provided.

The means of egress should be organized in such a way that maximum one route can be blocked in case of a single
fire: exits, exit accesses and exit discharges shall be remotely located from each other.

As a general guideline, exits are considered to be remote from each other if the distance between at least two of
the exits is not less than one-half the length of the overall diagonal dimension in the area of the building.

MEANS OF EGRESS COMPONENTS

People should be able to move quickly on means of egress: all components should be designed to enable a fluent
evacuation. The following recommendations are given:

  •	 Evacuation doors should never be provided with locks with the exception of secure areas where special
      locking arrangement could be used (delay locks, glass rod locks, exit push buttons, etc.). People should
      always be able to evacuate through emergency doors if necessary. All doors should be able to be opened
      without excessive force.

  •	 Exits and exit accesses should be well illuminated: people should be able to see all possible obstructions and
      dangerous components such as turns in corridors, junctions, stair treads, ramps, etc.

SIGNAGE

All exits should be well marked: signage should be provided above the exit doors and directional signs should be
installed judiciously throughout the building. The signs should be illuminated by dedicated emergency lighting.
Due to the often wide variety in nationality of hotel guests, it is recommended to install internationally accepted
evacuation pictograms.

In addition to the signage along the evacuation routes, a floor diagram shall be posted on every guest room door.
This diagram shall contain following information:

  •	 Actual floor arrangement
  •	 Exit locations
  •	 Room identifications
  •	 Location of fire extinguishers and hose reels
  •	 Procedures in case of an emergency (in local language and English)


14 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
MAINTENANCE

Regular inspection rounds are needed to check that all means of egress are free and unobstructed. These inspections
can be performed by the security teams or during so-called ‘self-inspection’ rounds on which this and other fire
safety aspects are checked. Formalized records should be kept on the findings of these rounds and the actions that
were taken as a result of the inspections.

The emergency lighting requires at least yearly maintenance by a certified company. During these maintenance
rounds, the performance of system batteries should be checked. Other failures like broken bulbs should be
corrected as soon as possible.




                                                                  Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 15
FIRE CONTROL AND SUPPRESSION

GOALS OF FIRE SUPPRESSION

The objective of a fire suppression system is to control or extinguish the fire in its early stage. These means of
suppression can be manual (fire extinguishers, hose reels) or automatic (sprinkler systems, gas extinguishing
systems, etc.). The primary goal of these suppression means is to limit property damage and to control the fire
before it becomes hazardous to people not close to the fire or to intervention teams.

FIRE EXTINGUISHERS

Fire extinguishers are active fire protection devices used to extinguish or control small fires. They are intended
to be used by the hotel’s first intervention team or by guests that have the expertise to use them. They are not
intended for use on an out-of-control fire that can endanger the user.




16 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
Many types of fire extinguishers are available: water, foam, dry chemical, carbon dioxide, etc. All of them have
specific advantages and disadvantages and should be selected by experienced persons.

At a minimum, fire extinguishers are required in hazardous areas of unsprinklered buildings, but are recommended
to be installed throughout the hotel building. In any case, the position of fire extinguishers should comply with
local code requirements.

STANDPIPE SYSTEM

A standpipe systems is a type of rigid water piping that is built in multi-story buildings to which fire hoses can
be connected. The presence of standpipe systems saves time for firefighters: laying a firehose up a stairwell takes
considerable time.

Two types of standpipe systems are available:

  •	 Wet standpipe systems, that are filled with water and are pressurized at all times. Often, hoses are already
     connected to the system, which allows the fire department to quickly attack the fire. Wet standpipe systems
     can be combined with sprinkler systems by connecting them to the same piping network.

  •	 Dry standpipe systems, that are empty at normal conditions and need to be connected to a fire hydrant (or
     other water source) in case of an intervention.

Wet standpipe systems are recommended in both sprinklered and unsprinklered buildings, because they provide
a means of suppression that is readily available and less restricted than fire extinguishers.

Dry standpipe systems are particularly recommended in buildings higher than 4 floors without a wet standpipe
system.




                                                                  Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 17
Both systems are best installed in staircases, since these form a relatively safe location for the fire department to
prepare an attack of the fire.

Apart from the two standpipe systems described above, hose reel cabinets can be installed throughout the building
and connected to the sprinkler system or directly to the water distribution system. These hoses work on a lower
pressure which allows them to be used by first intervention teams or occupants. Hose reel cabinets are only suitable
for smaller fires, since water flows are considerably lower than the systems described above.

AUTOMATIC SUPPRESSION

If well-designed and maintained, automatic sprinkler systems are considered to be the most effective and reliable
fire suppression system available. Statistical information shows that approximately 95% of fires are confined to
the room of origin when a sprinkler system is installed. For this reason, sprinkler systems are highly recommended
in all hotel buildings.

Sprinkler systems should be designed in accordance with approved standards. Sprinkler installation design is based
on minimum spray densities over a maximum area of operation. The higher the risk classification of the rooms,
the higher the requirements will be for the spray densities and the area of operation. The water supply should be
reliable: it is recommended to install a dedicated fire water tank and a fire pump certified by an accredited body.
The fire pump should have a reliable power source: an electric driven pump should be connected to an emergency
generator, or an engine driven fire pump should be installed instead.

Furthermore, the installation of valves in the system should be limited to the strict minimum to operate the
system – statistics show that most sprinkler systems fail due to a closed valve.

Besides the systems mentioned above, other systems are available to protect specific rooms:

  •	 Automatic gas extinguishing systems are suitable to protect vulnerable spaces in the building that are susceptible
      to water damage. These systems are commonly used in server rooms or in electrical rooms. It is advised to
      install such a system if a fire in the room can lead to a large business interruption or a high value loss.

  •	 Kitchen hood systems are designed to extinguish cooking fires caused by grease or grease-laden vapors. The
      suppression agent consists of a wet chemical or a water mist.

MAINTENANCE

Proper maintenance of fire extinguishers, fire hoses and all mechanical parts of automatic suppression system is
needed to ensure proper performance. Maintenance should be performed at least annually by a certified company.

Besides this yearly maintenance, the system owner is responsible for some general maintenance tasks and regular
checks. Equally important is a ‘management of change’ procedure: every change of layout or function of any area,
requires verification that the suppression system in the area is still able to control or suppress a fire effectively.




18 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
SMOKE CONTROL

GOALS OF SMOKE CONTROL

Smoke control systems are designed to control the area affected by smoke, to limit the smoke temperature or to
provide smoke-free zones in egress routes. As such, they enable the following goals of fire protection:

  •	 Life safety

  •	 Property protection

Smoke control can be performed by passive means (smoke barriers or smoke curtains) and/or active systems.
Active systems consist of natural ventilation, mechanical smoke extraction, or smoke pressurization systems.

In hotels, the following systems are regularly used:

  •	 Smoke and Heat Exhaust Ventilation Systems (SHEVS) in atria or large compartments

  •	 Corridor smoke removal systems in guestroom corridors

  •	 Pressurization systems in stairwells and / or elevator shafts

SMOKE AND HEAT EXHAUST VENTILATION SYSTEMS

SHEVS are designed to limit the smoke spread to a certain area (‘smoke control zone’), to obtain a smoke-free
height in the smoke control zone and to limit the smoke temperature.

SHEVS are typically installed in atria – the open connections between floors are extremely vulnerable to rapid
smoke spread. This creates very hazardous situations and occupants can be surprised by toxic fumes.

A SHEVS’ design is based on a design fire that can be obtained from specific standards. Based on the design fire
and the required smoke-free height, calculations can be performed to estimate the required mechanical extraction
rate or the required amount of ventilation openings.

Equally important to the extraction rate is to provide enough supply air to the area. Without this fresh supply air,
the system will not be able to extract smoke from the smoke control area.

Since SHEVS extract hot air from the smoke control area, the system can delay sprinkler activation. Attention
should be paid to this interaction if both systems are combined in the same area. In general, it is good practice
to activate the SHEVS by a sprinkler flow alarm.

CORRIDOR SMOKE REMOVAL SYSTEM

Corridor smoke removal systems are fairly basic systems in which a fixed number of air changes is imposed in
corridors. A corridor smoke removal system creates safer egress routes, due to the constant supply of fresh air
which dilutes the smoke that enters the corridor. Corridor smoke removal systems are often required by local codes.

STAIRWELL AND ELEVATOR SHAFT PRESSURIZATION SYSTEMS

Pressurization systems impede smoke spread to certain areas of the building by creating an overpressure. They
are commonly used and highly recommended in staircases in high-rise buildings, since they provide an extra grade
of protection that allows for longer evacuation times.




                                                                     Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 19
Pressurization systems in staircases should be carefully designed, they should create a pressure difference of at least
50 Pa (all doors closed) and an airflow of at least 0.75 m.s-1 through an open door. On the other hand, it should
still be possible to open the staircase doors easily (most codes prescribe a maximum opening force of 100 N).

Pressurization systems can also be installed to protect elevator shafts against vertical smoke spread.

MAINTENANCE

Proper maintenance of all mechanical parts of the system is needed to ensure proper performance of the system.
Maintenance should be performed at least annually by a certified company (preferably the installer of the system).

PROTECTION FROM FIRE HAZARDS

GOAL

Certain areas in hotel buildings typically contain a higher fire risk than most of the other areas. Typical examples are:

  •	 Areas used for storage of combustibles or flammables:
         -- Flammable liquid rooms (storage of solvents, etc.)
         -- Large archives
         -- Trash collection rooms
         -- Linen rooms




20 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
  •	 Areas housing heat-producing appliances:
        -- Boiler rooms
        -- Generator rooms
        -- Kitchens
        -- Laundries

  •	 Areas used for maintenance purposes:
        -- Workshops

  •	 Areas containing a higher fire load:
        -- Employee locker rooms
        -- Gift or retail shops

  •	 Car parking areas

Due to the higher risk, these areas should be well segregated from the other hotel areas and/or protected by
dedicated fire suppression systems. Examples of such fire suppression systems are wet chemical systems in kitchen
hoods, powder extinguishing systems protecting gasoline burners in boiler rooms, gas extinguishing systems on
power generators, etc.

A proper separation of the fire hazards enables following goals of fire protection:

  •	 Property protection

  •	 Business continuity

DESIGN OF FIRE HAZARD PROTECTION

Protection from fire hazards can be done by separating the area from the remainder of the hotel with fire rated
walls, by active fire suppression systems or a combination of both. The required fire rating depends on the fire
load and/or potential ignition sources in the area, but following ratings can be used as a guideline:

  •	 2 hour fire rating: flammable liquid rooms, boiler and generator rooms, transformer rooms with oil-filled
     transformers.

  •	 1 hour fire rating: large archives, trash collection rooms, laundries, linen rooms, kitchens, workshops, employee
     locker rooms and gift shops, high-tension areas and transformer rooms.

The installation of active suppression systems can lead to a reduction of the recommended values above.

MAINTENANCE

As for other active and passive systems, regular maintenance is needed. We refer to the chapters above for the
recommendations.




                                                                   Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 21
22 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
3. Documentation

This section describes documentation that should be developed during the design, construction and operation of
the hotel.

FIRE SAFETY MASTER PLAN

The fire safety master plan describes on a conceptual basis all the life and fire safety aspects that are integrated
in the building.

The document should include all major fire risks, applicable codes, standards and regulations, and mitigation
measures. The master plan will be prepared by a suitably qualified professional acceptable to IFC.

It should cover following aspects:

  •	 Fire prevention

  •	 Means of egress

  •	 Detection and alarm systems

  •	 Compartmentation

  •	 Fire suppression and control

  •	 Emergency response plan

  •	 Operation and maintenance

The fire safety master plan should be updated during the building’s lifetime. After every significant modification,
alterations should be checked against the plan and additional life and fire safety measures should be taken if
necessary.


FIRE SAFETY DESIGN DOCUMENTATION

The fire safety design documentation provides more detailed information on the systems installed in the building;
it typically contains following information:

  •	 As-built plans of the systems

  •	 Verification calculations if required

  •	 Data sheets of all components

  •	 List of necessary spare parts

  •	 Supplier list

  •	 System certificates

  •	 Fire safety design documentation


FIRE PREVENTION PROGRAM

The fire prevention program typically describes the staff responsibilities to prevent a fire. It should also include
a training program for staff.




                                                                  Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 23
MANAGEMENT OF CHANGE PROGRAM

An effective Management of Change Program consists of procedures that consider:

  •	 The basis for the proposed change

  •	 The impact of the change on safety and health of employees and guests

  •	 Necessary modifications on operating and emergency procedures

  •	 Required authorization of the proposed changes

Each of these aspects should be formalized in a plan that demonstrates that the LFS level of the hotel is at least
maintained throughout the change.




24 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLANS

The emergency response plan describes the staff responsibilities in case of a fire or other emergencies (see WBG
EHS General Guidelines for additional information).

Special attention should be paid to the procedures to the safe evacuation of persons with mobility impairments:

  •	 The mobility impairment should be indicated on the registration form.

  •	 The persons should be accommodated in specially adapted rooms, by preference as close as possible to the
     level of exit discharge.

  •	 A personal evacuation plan should be handed over to the hotel guest, and should be available at the emergency
     response team.

MAINTENANCE PLAN AND CONTRACT FOR ALL FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

Fire protection systems require maintenance by qualified persons. A maintenance plan that shows what systems
are maintained with a certain frequency should be available.

The plan should include checklists with the tasks done in-house (e.g., a fire pump needs to run +/- 15 min per
week) and the tasks done by maintenance contractors.

Maintenance contracts should be available for all tasks done by external parties.

TEST PLANS FOR ALL FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

Apart from the maintenance, the systems should be tested on a regular basis. Typically, these tasks can be performed
in-house without the support of a maintenance contractor.

Test plans should include checklists with the tasks performed and their frequency. All test activities should be logged.

INCIDENT REPORTING DOCUMENTS

Incident reporting documents enable an organization to analyze incidents and remediate.

They should contain at least:

  •	 Event details: time, location, consequences

  •	 Event analysis:

        -- Was the event caused by an unsafe act or unsafe condition?

        -- Could the incident be avoided?

        -- Are additional safety measures necessary to avoid similar incidents?




                                                                    Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 25
4. Fire Safety Project Approaches

There are different approaches to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the LFS section (section 3.3) of
the WBG EHS General Guidelines. Complying with local life and fire safety regulations is a minimum requirement
to be eligible for IFC investment.

Compliance with local regulations and with an internationally accepted level of life and fire safety should be
demonstrated by one of following approaches:

  •	 Compliance with international acceptable guidelines: there a number of international guidelines that are used
     worldwide and can be referenced when developing and implementing fire safety.

  •	 Performance based design: this alternative approach sets clear performance objectives by all stakeholders with
     regard to life and fire safety. It uses specific methods and techniques often supported by computer modeling
     to demonstrate that a hotel building with certain defined fire safety measures is safe to operate.




5. Project Approval

For new developments, IFC will require an audit during following project phases:

  •	 Finalization of Fire Safety Masterplan

  •	 Finalization of Fire Protection Design

  •	 Final testing and commissioning of fire protection systems

  •	 Final Delivery Life and Fire Safety Documents


For existing properties, approval of the fire protection measures will be based on a technical due diligence:

  •	 Verification of all available fire safety documentation

  •	 Review of the hotel fire safety aspects, based on IFC Good Practice Notes, WBG EHS General Guidelines and
     codes of good practice




26 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 27
Annex A. Guideline Key Life and Fire Safety Design Principles

 STRUCTURAL RESISTANCE
 Recommended                    Single-story: 30 min          < 25 m: 60 min                  > 25 m: 120 min


 COMPARTMENTATION
 Required                       Between building floors                      Same rating as structural resistance, self-
                                Between function areas                       closing doors
                                Safe means of egress
                                Vertical openings
 Required                       Corridors in guest room areas                30 min, self-closing doors
 Required                       High-risk areas                              Rating dependent on hazardous area and
                                                                             active protection, self-closing doors


 INTERIOR FINISH / FURNISHING, MATTRESSES, CURTAINS
 Required                 As a minimum, all materials should comply with local regulations
 Required                 Non-combustible materials in exits and exit enclosures
                          Non-combustible materials or materials that are difficult to ignite in corridors and lobbies
                          Special attention to material selection of mattresses, upholstered furniture and curtains


 FIRE DETECTION
 Required                 Guest rooms: detector with built-in buzzer
 Required                 Throughout the building
                          Indicative price range(1):
                          New: 20 – 40 USD/m2
                          Existing: 25 – 45 USD/m2


  FIRE ALARM
  Required                 Alarm throughout buildings
  Required                 Flashing lights in areas with high noise levels
                           Flashing lights in rooms for hearing-impaired persons
  Recommended              Voice evacuation system


  MEANS OF EGRESS
  Required                 maximum evacuation lengths in sprinklered occupancies
  Occupancy                Common path              Dead-end corridor      Distance to exit         Distance in guest
                                                                                                    room
  Guest room               15 m                     15 m                   60 m (from guest         40 m
                                                                           room door)
  Restaurant                5 m                      5 m                   75 m
  Commercial
  Conference area
  Offices                  30 m                     15 m                   90 m




28 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
MEANS OF EGRESS
Required                      maximum evacuation lengths in unsprinklered occupancies
Occupancy                     Common path                   Dead-end corridor             Distance to exit               Distance in guest
                                                                                                                         room
Guest room                    10 m                          10 m                          30 m (from guest               25 m
                                                                                          room door)
Restaurant                      5 m                           5 m                         60 m
Commercial
Conference area
Offices                       25 m                            5 m                         60 m


Required                      Minimum 2 separate and independent exits per area(2)
                              Minimum 3 exits if 500 < number persons > 1000
                              Minimum 4 exits if 1000 < number persons
Required                      Evacuation widths as per local codes.
Required                      Minimum 50% of exit capacity to discharge through safe means of egress, not leading
                              through the hotel lobby at exit discharge level.


FIRE EXTINGUISHERS
Required                     Hazardous areas of unsprinklered buildings
Recommended                  Throughout the buildings (as per local codes)


STANDPIPES
Recommended                Wet standpipes and/or standpipes as per local codes
                           Hose reels throughout the building


AUTOMATIC SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS
Required                   Kitchen hood systems protecting hazardous cooking equipment (e.g., fat fryers) in open
                           kitchens
Recommended                Sprinkler systems throughout the building
                           Indicative price range(1):
                           New: 40 – 70 USD/m2
                           Existing: 50 – 80 USD/m2
Recommended                Kitchen hood systems in kitchen areas that are separated from restaurants
Recommended                Gas extinguishing systems in area where a fire can lead to large business interruption (e.g.,
                           computer rooms, important archives)


SMOKE CONTROL
Required                      Stairwell pressurization system in buildings > 25 m
Required                      SHEVS in atria
Recommended                   Smoke removal system in guest room corridors, as per local code

(1): The indicative price ranges are general estimates that are considered to be representative for typical hotel buildings. Further variance might
occur, due to complexity of the building and regional price differences.

(2): Separate exits so that if one exit is blocked during an emergency the other is available for evacuation (a good practice is a distance of minimum
30 m between exits or exits separated more than one-half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the building or area).




                                                                               Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 29
Annex B. Key Life and Fire Safety Audit Aspects
OVERALL FIRE SAFETY

Is a LFS master plan available?

Is the building accepted by local authorities? Are acceptance documents available?

FIRE COMPARTMENTATION

Are as-built compartmentation plans, showing all fire separations, available?

Are certificates for all components of fire separations available?

  •	 Fire doors

  •	 Fire dampers

  •	 Cable, pipe and duct sealing materials

Is the actual fire compartmentation in line with what is indicated on the plans?

  •	 Are certified fire doors installed in fire separation walls?

         -- Are any fire doors blocked open?

         -- Do door closers work properly?

  •	 Are any unprotected openings visible?

INTERIOR FINISH / FURNISHING, MATTRESSES, CURTAINS

  •	 Are certificates available on the reaction of these materials to a fire?

EVACUATION

Are evacuation plans available?

  •	 In the as-built file of the hotel

  •	 On strategic locations in the building

  •	 In every guest room

Are all evacuation routes clearly marked?

  •	 Are enough signs installed to show the evacuation routes?

  •	 Is enough emergency light installed?

         -- Are all evacuation pictograms illuminated?

         -- Are evacuation routes well illuminated?

         -- Is the emergency light system designed for a duration of 1 hour at least?

         -- Is a meeting point clearly marked on a safe location outside the building?




30 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
Can the evacuation routes be used at all times?

  •	 Are all evacuation doors free from locks?

  •	 Are any evacuation doors blocked?

  •	 Are all corridors, passages and stairs free from obstructions?

  •	 Does at least 50% of the exit capacity discharge to the outside through safe means of egress, not leading
     through the hotel lobby?

FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM

Is all fire detection and alarm system information available?

  •	 Fire detection plans, single-line diagrams

  •	 Datasheets of all components

  •	 Calculations (voltage drop calculations, battery capacity)

  •	 Cause and effect matrix

  •	 Testing and commissioning documents

  •	 System logbook

Is the fire detection and alarm system installation approved by an independent body?

Is the actual fire detection and alarm system in line with what is indicated in the system information?

  •	 Are tests in conformity with what is shown on the cause and effect matrix?

  •	 Is the fire alarm signal easily notifiable?

        -- Is the alarm signal loud enough and distinct from other signals?

        -- Are additional flashing lights foreseen in areas with high noise levels?

        -- Are flashing lights (and/or vibrating pillows) foreseen in rooms for hearing-impaired persons?

Is the actual fire detection and alarm system fully operational?

  •	 Is the fire alarm control panel free from technical faults?

  •	 Are maintenance reports available and are all issues indicated on the reports resolved?

AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSION / SMOKE CONTROL

Is all information on automatic suppression / smoke control systems available?

  •	 As-built installation plans

  •	 Datasheets of all components

  •	 Calculations (flow calculations, required capacity)

  •	 Testing and commissioning documents



                                                                   Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 31
Is the automatic fire suppression / smoke control system approved by an independent body? Is the actual system
fully operational?

  •	 Do any technical errors appear on the control panel?

  •	 Are maintenance reports available and are all issues indicated on the reports resolved?

FIRE EXTINGUISHERS / HOSE REELS

Are plans available showing the location of all fire extinguishers and hose reels?

  •	 In the as-built file of the hotel

  •	 On the evacuation plans

Are all fire extinguishers and hose reels clearly marked?

  •	 Are signs installed to show their location?

  •	 Is emergency light installed to illuminate the signs?

Can the fire extinguishers / hose reels be used at all times?

  •	 Is access free of locks?

  •	 Are any fire extinguishers / hose reels blocked?

Are maintenance reports available and are all issues indicated on the reports resolved?

STANDPIPES

Are standpipes installed as indicated in the fire safety master plan and/or building permit?

Are the fire department connections at the base of the riser and in the building free from obstructions?

FIRE PREVENTION

Are good housekeeping rules applied and are they well followed?

Are formalized permit procedures applied for hot works and other activities that create a higher fire risk?

Is every employee aware of the fire risks related to his job and how to mitigate the consequences of a fire incident
(e.g., are kitchen employees aware of the risks involved with fat fryers, the presence of kitchen hood systems, fire
blankets, means to cut the energy supply, etc.)?

Is a formal inspection procedure applied for life and fire safety aspects?

EMERGENCY RESPONSE

Is a formalized emergency response plan available?

Is every employee informed on how to react in case of a fire alarm? Do the employees receive regularly an update
of these procedures?




32 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
Are at all times enough employees available that are skilled in a first response to a fire alarm?

  •	 Inspection of a fire alarm

  •	 Use of fire extinguishers

  •	 Activation of fire alarm

  •	 Communication with local fire department

Are at all times enough employees available that are skilled in the use of fire extinguishers?

  •	 Is the training of fire extinguishers repeated regularly?

Are at all times enough employees available that are skilled in the evacuation of guests?

  •	 Is the evacuation training repeated regularly?

Are evacuation drills practiced at least once a year?




                                                                  Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 33
Annex C. Inspection and Maintenance Schedule
  Frequency           Automatic             Standpipes            Fire pump             Water tank           Kitchen hood          Emergency
                      sprinkler                                                                              suppression           standby power
                      systems                                                                                systems               systems
  WEEKLY              Record                Visual                Check pump            Check heating                              Inspect the
                      pressure              inspection of         house heating         system during                              generator and its
                                            dry standpipe                               freezing                                   components
                                            control valves                              weather
                                            Record                Fire pump             Check water                                Check the
                                            pressure of wet       operating test        level                                      house-keeping
                                            standpipes                                                                             in the generator
                                                                                                                                   room
                                                                  Check packing                                                    Generator
                                                                  gland tightness                                                  operation test
                                                                  Check suction
                                                                  and discharge
                                                                  pressure
                                                                  gauges
                                                                  Check position
                                                                  of valves
                                                                  Control alarms
                                                                  function
                                                                  properly
  MONTHLY             Visual                Visual                Remove battery        Check water          Visual                Inspect and
                      inspection of         inspection of         corrosion, clean      temperature          inspection of         check the fan
                      section valves        wet standpipe         and dry battery                            system                and alternator
                      and alarm             control valves        case                                                             belts
                      valves
                                                                  Check battery                                                    Inspect the
                                                                  charger and                                                      battery charger
                                                                  charger rate                                                     and charger rate
                                                                  Equalize                                                         Inspect and
                                                                  charge in                                                        check the circuit
                                                                  battery system                                                   breaker and
                                                                                                                                   fuses
                                                                  Exercise                                                         Inspect and test
                                                                  isolation switch                                                 the governor oil
                                                                  and circuit                                                      level and linkage
                                                                  breaker
                                                                  Inspect, clean                                                   Test each battery
                                                                  and test circuit                                                 powered unit for
                                                                  breakers                                                         30 seconds
                                                                                                                                   Operate the
                                                                                                                                   transfer switch




          By building owner.

          By maintenance contractor.

          Certification by accredited body as per legal requirements. Legal requirements prevail if they are more stringent. If certification is not
          legally required, it should be done by third party accepted by IFC.




34 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
Frequency             Automatic            Standpipes            Fire pump             Water tank            Kitchen hood          Emergency
                      sprinkler                                                                              suppression           standby power
                      systems                                                                                systems               systems
QUARTERLY             Test sprinkler       Visual                Check                 Visual                                      Inspect the
                      flow and             inspection of         crankcase             inspection of                               crankcase
                      pressure             hoses and fire        breather on           tank                                        breather
                      alarms               department            diesel pump
                                           connections           for proper
                                                                 operation
                      Verify that fire     Visual                Clean water                                                       Inspect the
                      department           inspection of         strainer in                                                       exhaust system
                      connections          pictograms            cooling system                                                    insulation
                      are visible and                            for diesel fire
                      accessible                                 pump
                                           Test flow             Check exhaust
                                           switches              system
                                                                 insulation
                                                                 for integrity
                                                                 and check
                                                                 exhaust system
                                                                 clearance to
                                                                 combustibles
                                                                 to prevent fire
                                                                 hazard.
                                                                 Check battery
                                                                 terminals to
                                                                 ensure they
                                                                 are clean and
                                                                 thight.
SEMI-                 Test quick-          Test tamper           Check                 Check water           Check all             Test the
ANNUALLY              opening              switches              operation of          level alarms          components            antifreeze
                      devices and                                safety devices                                                    protection level
                      accelerators                               and alarms
                      of dry pipe
                      systems.
                      Test fire                                                                              Verify that           Test the
                      detection                                                                              hazard has not        operation of
                      system for                                                                             changed               safeties and
                      preaction                                                                                                    alarms
                      and deluge
                      systems.
                      Test tamper                                                                                                  Test emergency
                      switches                                                                                                     generators
                                                                                                                                   greater than
                                                                                                                                   600 V under full
                                                                                                                                   load
ANNUALLY              Visual               Visual                Conduct               Check                 Replace fusible       Inspect and test
                      inspection of        inspection of         fire pump             accessibility         links                 tank vents and
                      sprinklers,          piping                performance           and condition of                            overflow piping
                      piping, hangers                            test                  fire department                             for obstructions
                                                                                       connection
                      Check anti-          Check nozzles         Verify setting of                                                 Inspect fuel
                      freeze solution                            relief valve                                                      piping
                      of glycol
                      systems.



 By building owner.

 By maintenance contractor.

 Certification by accredited body as per legal requirements. Legal requirements prevail if they are more stringent. If certification is not
 legally required, it should be done by third party accepted by IFC.




                                                                                  Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 35
  Frequency          Automatic              Standpipes            Fire pump             Water tank            Kitchen hood        Emergency
                     sprinkler                                                                                suppression         standby power
                     systems                                                                                  systems             systems
                     Maintenance of         Lubrication of        Lubrication of                                                  Inspect and test
                     valves                 swing-out racks       various parts                                                   louver motor and
                                                                                                                                  controls
                     Cleaning of            Reracking of          Replace oil                                                     Inspect exhaust
                     strainers              hoses                 and oil filters if                                              system hangers
                                                                  needed                                                          and supports and
                                                                                                                                  test for excessive
                                                                                                                                  back pressure
                     Functional test of                           Calibrate                                                       Inspect transfer
                     sprinkler system.                            pressure switch                                                 switch main
                                                                  settings and                                                    contacts and
                                                                  check accuracy                                                  exercise the circuit
                                                                  of pressure                                                     breakers
                                                                  sensors
                                                                  Inspect fuel                                                    Check and test the
                                                                  piping                                                          ignition system of
                                                                                                                                  the engine and test
                                                                                                                                  injection pump and
                                                                                                                                  injectors
                                                                                                                                  Measure and
                                                                                                                                  record resistance
                                                                                                                                  readings with
                                                                                                                                  insulation tester
                                                                                                                                  Test each battery
                                                                                                                                  powered unit for its
                                                                                                                                  required autonomy
                                                                                                                                  Test the emergency
                                                                                                                                  generator under full
                                                                                                                                  load or under bank-
                                                                                                                                  load full test
                                                                                                                                  Replace oil and oil
                                                                                                                                  filters if needed
  EVERY 5            Internal                                                           Inspection of
  YEARS              inspection of                                                      tank interior
                     check and alarm
                     valves
                     Calibrate                                                          Check all
                     pressure gauges                                                    valves
  Certification      Every year                                   Every year                                  Every year          Every year
  inspection by
  third party

  MONTHLY            Visual inspection      Verify that no
                     of panels (no          alterations have
                     technical faults).     been made to
                                            the room
                                            Doors are self-
                                            closing or close
                                            automatically
                                            in case of
                                            suppression




          By building owner.

          By maintenance contractor.

          Certification by accredited body as per legal requirements. Legal requirements prevail if they are more stringent. If certification is not
          legally required, it should be done by third party accepted by IFC.




36 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
Frequency           Fire detection         Gaseous                 Portable fire        Fire doors              Fire dampers        Smoke control
                    and alarm              extinguishing          extinguishers                                                     system
                                           system
QUARTERLY           Visual inspection                             Visual                Visual inspection
                    of system                                     inspection of         of doors
                    (callpoints not                               accessibility
                    blocked, free
                    space around
                    detectors, …)
                                                                                        Verify that doors
                                                                                        are not blocked
                                                                                        open
SEMI-                                      Visual                                                                                   Functional test
ANNUALLY                                   inspection of
                                           system and
                                           containers
                                           Record
                                           container
                                           pressures and
                                           weights
ANNUALLY            Functional test        Visual                 Maintain and          Check door for          Visual
                    of all detectors,      inspection of          recharge as           physical damage,        inspection of
                    call points and        hoses                  required by           no open holes           hinges and
                    alarms                                        maintenance           left from replaced      other moving
                                                                  instruction           hardware.               parts
                    Functional             Inspect                                      Check door              Remove
                    test of alarm          enclosures                                   closers on              fusible link
                    transmission           or rooms for                                 functionality and       and operate
                                           tightness                                    coordination of         damper
                                                                                        door leaves at
                                                                                        double doors
                    Battery test                                                        Check closing           Lubrication
                                                                                        of automatically        as per
                                                                                        closing doors
                                                                                        upon fire
                                                                                        detection
                    Inspection of log
                    book
EVERY 5             Revision of            Hydrostatic test
                    all detectors          of system
YEARS
                    (without self-
                    check option)
                                           Complete visual
                                           inspection of
                                           gas containers
EVERY 8             Revision of all
                    smoke detectors
YEARS
                    with self-check
                    option
Certification       Every year             Every year                                                                               Every year
inspection by
third party




         By building owner.

         By maintenance contractor.

         Certification by accredited body as per legal requirements. Legal requirements prevail if they are more stringent. If certification is not
         legally required, it should be done by third party accepted by IFC.




                                                                                Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 37
                                                              Annex D. Life and Fire Safety Documentation and Approval Flow
                                                                LFS DOCUMENTATION & APPROVAL FLOW FOR IFC PROJECTS
                                                             PHASE                                              IFC REQUIREMENTS                             DOCUMENTATION                               IFC APPROVAL
                                                             CONCEPT DESIGN
                                                                                                                WBG General EHS         LFS Good Practice
                                                                                       LFS Cornerstones           Guidelines                  Note

                                                                                  Prescriptive vs performance
                                                                                             based                                                                                                          LFS Masterplan in
                                                                                                                                                                        LFS Masterplan
                                                                                                                                                                                                           accordance with IFC
                                                                                   Definition of design and                                                                                                    Guidelines?
                                                                                                                Local Legislation
                                                                                      installation codes




                                                             DETAILED DESIGN                                                                                                                                LFS Masterplan and




38 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Detailed design
                                                                                                                  Int. Accepted LFS                                       Detailed Design                     certified by LFS
                                                                                                                                          Local LFS Codes
                                                                                        Detailed design                 Codes                                              Documents                            specialist?




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Installation according
                                                             INSTALLATION                                                                                                                                   to LFS Masterplan?

                                                                                         Construction             Int. Accepted LFS      LFS Good Practice    Construction           Certificates of       System test results in
                                                                                                                        Codes                  Note            Documents              installation           accordance with
                                                                                   Testing & Commissioning                                                                                                       codes?



                                                             OPERATION
                                                                                                                LFS Good Practice                             Maintenance                                  “Due diligence”:
                                                                                                                                      Int. Accepted Codes                            Emergency plan
                                                                                                                      Note                                      records                                    Design in accordance
                                                                                         Maintenance                                                                                                       with codes of good
                                                                                                                                                                                                           practice?
                                                                                    Management of change                                                                                                   Inspection and tests of
                                                                                                                                                                                                           existing systems?
                                                                                        Housekeeping              Maintenance                                Fire prevention        Incident reporting
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Issues identified
                                                                                                                   manuals                                       program                documents
                                                                                                                                                                                                           during supervision by
                                                                                   Emergency preparedness                                                                                                  E&S specialist?



                                                             Footnote: all projects are expected to meet local fire safety requirements
Stay Connected


SCRIBD:

http://www.scribd.com/IFCSustainability



LINKEDIN:

http://www.linkedin.com/pub/ifc-sustainability/1b/729/1ba



CONTACT:

asksustainability@ifc.org



ACCESS THIS AND OTHER IFC SUSTAINABILITY PUBLICATIONS ONLINE AT:

http://www.ifc.org/sustainabilitypublications




                                                     Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels | 39
2121 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20433
Tel. 1-202-473-1000
www.ifc.org/sustainability
asksustainability@ifc.org




40 | Good Practice Note – IFC Life and Fire Safety: Hotels
