                     What is possible by 2040?


        Will a rising Chinese middle class choose the Pacific Islands as their holiday destination?

         Are recent increases in revenues from tuna fisheries likely to continue into the future?

        What should countries do to respond to increasing interest in deep sea minerals mining?

         Will the ICT revolution help Pacific Island countries overcome the tyranny of distance?

        What would it take to expand overseas employment opportunities for Pacific Islanders?

              How can the Pacific Island countries mitigate the threats of climate change,
           high vulnerability to natural hazards, and the non-communicable diseases crisis?




 By taking a closer look at what is happening in the Pacific — what resources are available, and what
opportunities can be taken advantage of both globally and across the region — Pacific Possible paints
     a realistic and promising picture of what is economically achievable in the Pacific, as well as
        what can happen if specific dangers are not properly managed over the next 25 years.




   To do this, Pacific Possible poses and answers the following questions:

                         •	        Why has the Pacific struggled with economic growth?

               •	   Why should development in the future be better than the last 25 years?

                         •	        What is realistically possible for the Pacific by 2040?

              •	    What does this mean for income, employment, and government revenue?

                                         •	   What are the risks to prosperity?

                              •	    How can prosperity by 2040 be properly achieved?
      As we answer these questions, you will discover the most significant opportunities and risks
               for the Pacific in seven particular areas. Each opportunity has the potential
            to create a significant boost in income, employment and government economy.
        Alternatively, the risks pose a real threat to development if they are not managed well.




                                         O P P O RT U N I T I E S

                                               Tourism

                                        Knowledge economy

                                               Fisheries

                                          Deep sea mining

                                           Labor mobility




                                                RISKS
                                            Climate change
                                             and disasters


                                          Non-communicable
                                              diseases

                By exploring what is possible by 2040, Pacific Possible offers a deeper
                 insight into the future while discussing what action is required across
                     the Pacific to close the gap between opportunities and reality.




  Why has the Pacific struggled with economic growth?

          Economic growth across many Pacific Island nations has been low in the last 20 years,
particularly in comparison with other developing nations around the world and what they have achieved.
   Over this time, the discussion about why the Pacific has struggled to achieve real growth has been
       a frustrating debate among many Pacific people, policy makers and development partners.


                 From these debates arise two commonly held views
                     — that low economic growth is caused by:

                     1     Poor policy and institutional environment; or



                     2     Unique geographic location of Pacific island nations.
Why should the future be better than the last 25 years?


              With this in mind, why should growth in the Pacific be better than what
  it has been in the last 25 years? It is an important question as many barriers to growth will still
     be around in the future, especially when it comes to geographic and capacity constraints.


     Pacific Possible suggested that a major positive shift in economic
               growth and opportunity will be influenced by:

              1     A growing middle class in China;



              2     The aging of the population of developed countries in the region,
                    including Australia, New Zealand, Japan, and Korea;


              3     Technological progress; and



              4     The shift to a more multipolar geopolitical environment,
                    with growing levels of insecurity.




  These global megatrends mean a greater demand for what Pacific
          Island countries can offer competitively, such as:


              1     An attractive and safe island and marine environment;



              2     Labor;



              3     Natural resources, especially fish and potentially deep sea minerals; and



              4     Their geostrategic position.
     What is realistically possible for the Pacific by 2040?

                                                 TOURISM



   Let us look at the figures. With a projected addition of one million arrivals to the Pacific by 2040, tourism
will provide the main opportunity for growth and employment for most Pacific nations. What will this look like?

                                 Additional transformational impact in 2040




                                   Increasing the Chinese Market



              650,000                  65,000               US$950m                  US$35m
                tourists                  jobs                 receipts             airport taxes




                                     Home-basing 4 Cruise Ships



              250,000                   4,000                US$60m                 US$9.0m
                tourists                  jobs                 receipts               port fees




                            Expanding the High-end Resorts Market



              130,000                  30,000               US$450m                 US$8.0m
                tourists                  jobs                 receipts             airport taxes




                                    Capturing the Retiree Market



               10,000                  13,000               US$200m                 US$0.5m
                retirees                  jobs                 receipts             airport taxes
                                                   FISHERIES




 What about natural resources? Can fisheries play a part in real economic growth
               economic growth in the Pacific Island Countries?
           A regional arrangement (the Vessel Day Scheme) has already brought significant increases
       in revenue from fishing licenses during the past five years. Pacific Possible reports that fisheries
     can generate more than US$300 million in additional revenue by 2040, without an increase in catch
        levels or threats to the sustainability of the fisheries stock. This increase can significantly boost
    incomes in Kiribati, Tuvalu, and the Federated States of Micronesia. For Kiribati and Tuvalu, this could
translate into an increase of between 50 and 60 percent in per capita incomes by 2040. The Federated States
    of Micronesia could see an increase in per capita incomes by about 20 percent due to fisheries alone.


                            For this to happen, the Pacific would require:
                       •	   Participation by other major resource owners such as Indonesia
                                     and the Philippines in the Vessel Day Scheme;

               •	   Ensuring compliance with robust catch limits, including limits in the high seas;

                                    •	   Improvements to the Vessel Day Scheme;

 •	   Significant investments in skills and capacity, and inclusion of coastal communities in the fisheries; and

                               •	   Targeted investments to maintain food security.



                                Additional transformational impact in 2040




                                          Sustainable Fisheries



                                         15,000              US$300m
                                     additional jobs       additional public
                                                            revenue/year


                                             DEEP SEA MINING



           As an additional natural resource, will deep sea mining
offer a potential growth opportunity for the Pacific? If so, how can deep sea
       mining be utilised without seriously harming the environment?
  Deep sea mining still involves significant uncertainty and knowledge gaps, particularly with regard
   to resource potential, technology, economic viability, social, cultural and environmental impacts.

 Given the many unknowns and risks, Pacific Possible rrecommends that Pacific Island countries take
a Precautionary Approach to deep-sea mining; which requires strengthening of knowledge of affected
  eco systems, continuous updating of information, monitoring, as well as stakeholder consultations.
       IMPROVED INTERNET ACCESS AND CONNECTIVITY




      Can improved Internet access and connectivity mean better
            income and better employment opportunities?

                 We think so – it has the potential to translate to more than
                 US$5 billion and close to 300,000 additional jobs by 2040.

          For the larger economies in the Pacific, particularly Melanesian countries,
        improved connectivity can accelerate the spread of knowledge and adoption
of productivity-enhancing technologies, helping to close productivity gaps to other countries.




                       Expansion of Mobile Phone Services



         6m                   17,000                 US$1.1b               US$300m
   additional mobile             jobs                 receipts                  taxes
     subscribers




                          Global Outsourcing Services



          US$500m                        17,000                       $150m
             revenue                       jobs                        taxes




                              Increased Productivity



        US$3.5billion                   250,000                      $700m
               GDP                         jobs                        taxes
                                       LABOR MOBILITY




      What will the economy look like when Pacific people
have better access to employment in neighbouring countries like
                  Australia and New Zealand?

    There are several opportunities that could be exploited:
                   •	         Australia-New Zealand Atoll Access Agreements

                         •	     Pacific Access Category (PAC) for Australia

                                  •	    Pacific caregiver program; and

           •	    Entry into new labor markets such as Canada and Korea.

           Pacific Possible estimates that these opportunities could generate
  an additional net income of US $13 billion for 240,000 permanent migrants by 2040
   and an increase in remittances and seasonal workers’ income by US$900 million.




                        Additional transformational impact in 2040




            Expanding Opportunities for Labor Mobility




   20,000                         30,000                  US$13b                US$900m
  additional                     additional              additional               additional
 non-seasonal                     seasonal               income for            remittances and
 migrants/year                  workers/year            migrants/year         seasonal workers’
                                                                                 income/year
 How can these transformational opportunities impact
income, employment and government revenue by 2040?


                Making the most of these opportunities could mean a huge increase in
        the long-term average growth rate for most Pacific Island countries by between 0.6
       and 1.3 percentage points, resulting in incomes that are about 15 to 40 per cent higher
                in 2040 compared to projections based on trends of the last 25 years.




  What are the risks
to prosperity?

                                             •	   Noncommunicable Disease (NCD) crisis, which is
Pacific Possible looks at the
                                                  affecting the lives of many Pacific Islanders; and
impact of two key risks that
could significantly impact                   •	   Climate change and natural disasters, which could
growth and standards of living                    have more dire impacts on the Pacific Islands than
in the Pacific by 2040:                           on any other country in the world.




Pacific Possible examines the                •	   Climate and Disaster Resilience
financial burden of further                       The economic costs of natural disasters are
illness and death due to NCDs,                    already high for most Pacific countries — on
as well as the potential cost of                  average between 0.5 to 6.6 per cent of GDP
selected measures to enhance                       is lost annually–and climate change will
climate and disaster resilience:                  increase vulnerabilities.

                                             •	   Pacific Possible estimates that the annual
                                                  cost for coastal adaptation to deal with
                                                  sea level rise and adaptation to increases
                                                  in rainfall and temperature alone could be
                                                  between US$400 million and US$1.2 billion.
                                                  Pacific Possible identifies a range of options
                                                  and policies for countries to deal with risks
                                                  and uncertainty.

                                             •	   Noncommunicable Diseases
                                                  The economic burden of NCDs in the Pacific
                                                  is already high compared with other middle-
                                                  income countries, and is increasing over time,
                                                  especially as incomes rise.

                                             •	   Pacific Possible estimates that unless effective
                                                  measures are adopted to stem the NCD crisis
                                                  in the Pacific, GDP could be reduced by up
                                                  to 9 percent for the most affected countries
                                                  by 2040. Implementation of measures
                                                  contained in the NCD Road Map, which was
                                                  adopted by Pacific Ministers of Finance in
                                                  2014, is thus essential.
                 How can the Possible become reality?



         In addition to actions in the specific areas examined,
 Pacific Possible highlights five cross-cutting issues that are central
            to achieving prosperity and managing threats:

                             •	   Focusing on policies and investments;

                                       •	   Investing in people;

             •	   Promoting regional cooperation to unlock economic opportunities;

            •	    Ensuring sustainability and sound environmental management; and

                  •	   Addressing the special challenges of low-lying atoll nations




Focusing policies and investments to unlock growth opportunities
Given the thin capacity in the public sector, limited financial resources, and scarce political
capital — these countries must choose very carefully which reforms to pursue and which
investments to make. This implies that Pacific Island countries identify clearly where their most
promising economic opportunities lie and what needs to be done to unlock these opportunities.

Investing in people
Opportunities will rely on the availability of adequate skills. Education sector reforms should thus
be designed with a view as to what is needed to be able to harness targeted economic opportunities.


Promoting regional cooperation to unlock economic opportunities
Regional arrangements for granting access to Pacific Island countries’ fishing grounds has generated
massive economic payoffs. Coordinated approaches to deep sea mining, harmonized rules for
investors in the tourism sector, or collaboration between labor sending and receiving countries
are examples where regional cooperation can be expected to have high economic payoffs.


Ensuring sustainability and sound environmental management
Three of the opportunities discussed in Pacific Possible — fisheries, sea-bed mining
and tourism — are based on natural resources. These resources require strong regulations
and processes to protect sustainability and the health of the environment.


Addressing the special challenges of low-lying atoll nations
Because of their extreme remoteness and small size, economic opportunities
in atoll nations are even more limited than those in other Pacific countries,
including in the areas of knowledge economy and tourism.
For more information, please find the Pacific Possible Overview Report
and Background Papers at www.worldbank.org/pacificpossible
