        2017




Study of Operational Strategies
to Reduce Malnutrition in Nepal
MANAV BHATTARAI, CHHITIJ BASHYAL AND ABEYAH A. AL-OMAIR




    Health, Nutrition & Population
b   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL
        2017




Study of Operational Strategies
to Reduce Malnutrition in Nepal
MANAV BHATTARAI, CHHITIJ BASHYAL AND ABEYAH A. AL-OMAIR




    Health, Nutrition & Population
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpreta-
tions, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board
of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.


The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.


Rights and Permissions


The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.


Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publi-
cations, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.
Acknowledgements




T
     his qualitative study reviews operational strategies of some major nutrition and
     food security projects/programs implemented in Nepal. The study team was led
     by Manav Bhattarai who has also authored this report with Chhitij Bashyal and
Abeyah A. Al-Omair.

E. Gail Richardson (Practice Manager, GHNDR South Asia), Rekha Menon (Practice
Manager, GHNDR South Asia); and Takuya Kamata (Country Manager, Nepal) provid-
ed overall guidance to the study team. Jaya Karki, Martha P. Vargas and Ajay Ram Dass
provided timely and helpful administrative support. The study was financially support-
ed by the Japan Trust Fund for Scaling Up Nutrition administered by the World Bank.

The study team met and held invaluable discussions with the project managers and im-
plementers of some nutrition and food security projects including government officials
and Development Partners and International/Non-Governmental Organizations (I/
NGOs) and academia. The New ERA Nepal team and their field researchers provided
excellent data collection work.

The study team is grateful to the following list of colleagues who shared their insights
and provided substantial feedback on the final report, including Dhushyanth Raju (for
also being a peer reviewer), Pooja Pandey Rana and Pradiumna Dahal. Additional writ-
ten comments were provided by Tej Bahadur Subedi, Indra Bahadur Bhujel and Dhan-
anjaya Paudel.

Finally, the study team expresses deep gratitude to relevant agencies in Nepal, including
the National Planning Commission, Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development,
Ministry of Agriculture Development and the Ministry of Health, Development Part-
ners, I/NGOs as well as the District, Village, and Ward-level officials and stakeholders
involved in the qualitative interviews and focus group discussions.




                                                   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   iii
                             Abbreviations




                             ACF	           Action Contre La Faim
                             ADB	           Asian Development Bank
                             AFSP	          Agriculture and Food Security Project
                             BMI	           Body Mass Index
                             CBS	           Central Bureau of Statistics
                             CEDAW	         Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against
                                            Women
                             CEPRED	        Center for Environmental and Agricultural Policy Research, Extension and
                                            Development
                             CHD	           Child Health Division
                             CRC	           Convention on the Rights of the Child
                             CSANN	         Civil Society Alliance for Nutrition, Nepal
                             DADO	          District Agriculture Development Office(r)
                             DAG	           Disadvantaged Group
                             DDC	           District Development Committee
                             DFAT	          Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
                             DFID	          Department for International Development
                             DFTQC	         Department of Food Technology and Quality Control
                             DHO	           District Health Office(r)
                             DPHO	          District Public Health Office(r)
                             DLO	           District Livestock Office(r)
                             FAO	           Food and Agriculture Organization
                             FCHV	          Female Community Health Volunteer
                             FGD	           Focus Group Discussion
                             GDP	           Gross Domestic Product
                             GON	           Government of Nepal
                             HKI	           Hellen Keller International
                             IDI	           In-Depth Interview
                             IFAD	          International Fund for Agricultural Development
                             INGO	          International Non-Governmental Organization
                             JT/JTA	        Junior Technician/Junior Technical Assistant
                             LDO	           Local Development Officer



iv   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL
                                               STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   v




MDG	       Millennium Development Goal
MI	        Micronutrient Initiative
MICS	      Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
MOAD	      Ministry of Agricultural Development
MOE	       Ministry of Education
MOF	       Ministry of Finance
MOFALD	    Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development
MOH	       Ministry of Health
MOWCSW	    Ministry of Women, Children and Social Welfare
MOWSS	     Ministry of Water Supply and Sanitation
MSNP	      Multisector Nutrition Plan
NAGA	      Nutrition Assessment and Gap Analysis
NDHS	      Nepal Demographic and Health Survey
NFS	       Nutrition and Food Security
NFSSC	     Nutrition and Food Security Steering Committee
NGO	       Non-Governmental Organization
NPC	       National Planning Commission
RRNI	      Rapid Results Nutrition Initiative
SAARC	     South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
SABAL	     Sustainable Action for Resilience and Food Security
SAPPROS	   Support Activities for Poor Producers in Nepal
SHD	       Sunaula Hazar Din (Golden Thousand Days)
SPRING	    Strengthening Partnerships, Results, and Innovations in Nutrition Globally
SUN	       Scaling Up Nutrition
VDC	       Village Development Committee
VNFSSC	    Village Nutrition and Food Security Steering Committee
UNICEF	    United Nations Children's Fund
USAID	     U.S. Agency for International Development
WASH	      Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WFP	       World Food Program
WHO	       World Health Organization
                             Table of Contents




                             Acknowledgements	iii
                             Abbreviations	iv
                             Executive Summary	                                                                                   vii


                             1.	 Introduction	                                                                                     1
                             1.1	   Malnutrition in Nepal	                                                                         1
                             1.2	   Existing Nutritional Interventions and Organizations in Nepal	                                 3
                             1.3	   Prospects and Challenges for Effective Operation of Nutrition and Food Security Strategies	    5


                             2.	 Study Purpose and Design	                                                                         7
                             2.1	Rationale	                                                                                        7
                             2.2	   Key Questions	                                                                                 8
                             2.3	Methodology	                                                                                      9
                             2.4	   Challenges and Limitations of the Study	                                                      11


                             3.	 Key Findings and Thematic Discussions	                                                           13
                             3.1	   National Policy and Priorities	                                                               13
                             3.2	   Developing Technical Approaches for Nutrition and Food Security Projects	                     15
                             3.3	   Investment Mechanism	                                                                         21
                             3.4	   Institutional Modality	                                                                       25


                             4.	Conclusion	                                                                                       39

                             5.	 Bibliography	                                                                                    41

                             6.	Annexes	                                                                                          43




vi   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL
Executive Summary




M
           alnutrition is a serious problem in Nepal. Malnutrition negatively affects
           human and economic development and the country’s overall prosperity.
           Malnourishment during childhood results in a lifetime of lost earning poten-
tial and consequently the perpetuation of intergenerational poverty (Alderman, 2006).
Chronic malnutrition and micronutrient deficiency decrease gross domestic product
(GDP) by an estimated 2–3 percent annually (World Bank, 2011).

It is impressive to note that Nepal has made a credible achievement in reducing stunting
from 57 percent in 2001 to 40.5 percent in 2011. However, these rapid reductions in stunt-
ing rates have plateaued more recently. For example, the stunting rate among children
under five decreased from about 49.3 percent in 2006 to 40.5 percent in 2011, which is a
drop of 8.8 percentage points in five years (2006 to 2011). By 2016, however, the stunting
rate declined to 35.8 percent, a five-year decrease of only 4.7 percentage points (Ministry
of Health, Nepal; New ERA; and ICF, 2017).

Maternal malnutrition is also a major problem in Nepal. In 2016, about 17 percent of women
aged 15–49 were undernourished, as defined by a body mass index (BMI) of less than 18.5
(Ministry of Health, Nepal; New ERA; and ICF, 2017). At the same time, a growing problem for
Nepalese women is overweight; 22 percent of women were overweight or obese according
to the 2016 Nepal Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS), up from 9 percent in 2006.
Anemia continues to be a significant problem for women and children in Nepal. In 2016,
53 percent of children and 41 percent of women were anemic. Nutritional outcomes vary
across the country’s geographical regions and by wealth and educational status.

Despite the challenges, Nepal’s prospects for improving the population’s nutritional
profile are promising. The Government of Nepal (GON) has committed to reducing
malnutrition by cultivating the proper investment climate for nutrition interventions
and donors have committed to financing nutrition programming. The Government has
made nutrition and food security a national priority by undertaking the Nutrition As-
sessment and Gap Analysis (NAGA, 2011), preparing the Multisector Nutrition Plan
(MSNP, 2012), and creating the National Nutrition and Food Security Secretariat under
the umbrella of National Planning Commission (NPC). The Government’s challenge is
to best utilize the resources that are available in the country.

                                                     STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   vii
viii   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                            Reducing malnutrition is a challenge. The causes of malnutrition are many, and they
                            interact differently in different locations. A package of interventions might work well
                            at one place but not at another. Rigorous evaluations of the implemented interventions
                            are lacking and the causative factors affecting overall nutrition status have not been
                            determined. The lack of monitoring and evaluation to provide data results for nutrition
                            programming with many interventions and sometimes the same interventions as well
                            as crowding-in of resources, might not be an efficient and effective way of utilizing
                            scarce resources to reduce malnutrition.

                            Currently, different nutrition projects and programs are aimed at reducing malnutrition
                            in Nepal. Some are implemented by government agencies with technical and financial
                            support from donors, and some are implemented mainly by International Non-Govern-
                            mental Organizations (INGOs), but financed by donors. Lessons have emerged from
                            the interventions, which could positively guide future nutrition interventions and help
                            to anticipate as well as address the risks, bottlenecks, and challenges that have arisen in
                            those projects.

                            The World Bank conducted this study to identify and understand the bottlenecks to
                            effective implementation of nutrition operations in Nepal and to provide strategies and
                            recommendations to overcome those challenges to achieve more effective and sustain-
                            able nutrition outcomes. It is a qualitative study in which in-depth interviews (IDIs)
                            were conducted with project and program managers and implementers of government
                            and nongovernmental partners’ nutrition interventions at central and local levels. Fo-
                            cus group discussions (FGDs) were conducted at the communities. The preliminary ev-
                            idence was further analyzed and discussed during an Evidence Synthesis Workshop
                            (ESW) with key stakeholders from ministries, the NPC, the Child Health Division (CHD)
                            of the Ministry of Health (MOH) and academia. The feedback and additional insights
                            on emerging trends and findings helped to enhance the analysis, a process culminating
                            in this report.



                            Research Findings

                            Current nutrition and food security policies in Nepal are conducive to investment in
                            nutrition. The Government is finalizing the MSNP 2. It must start to tap the potential of
                            the private sector, which can use its social marketing skills to promote fortified foods,
                            produce the different therapeutic foods locally, and support water, sanitation, and hy-
                            giene interventions. Simultaneously, the country should execute the provisions it has to
                            restrict the promotion of harmful practices like the use of infant formulas as a substitute
                            for breastfeeding and children friendly-advertisement of processed junk-food, which
                            are regarded as empty calories.

                            Malnutrition is caused by a complex interplay of issues requiring specific nutrition in-
                            terventions for different areas. Every nutrition program or project must gather evidence
                            to determine the causative factors for the prevalence of malnutrition in the particular
                                                    STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   ix




geographical area in order to apply an effective nutrition intervention. Although there
are data for regions and nation as a whole, often data specific to particular localities
where interventions are being planned are lacking. Due to the dearth of such data, pri-
or formative research should be undertaken in the targeted area of high malnutrition
to identify the cause(s) of malnutrition so cost-effective specific nutrition interventions
can be implemented. The nutrition interventions implemented for the Suaahara Project,
financed by USAID, were based on prior formative research.

Although multisector planning is key to reducing malnutrition, it is essential that ac-
tivities are implemented sectorally. All identified nutrition interventions should be im-
plemented by the sectors with a comparative advantage by having previously imple-
menting the activities as well as having the capacity to do so. For example, the MOH
has a comparative advantage in promoting breastfeeding and complementary feeding,
whereas, the Ministry of Agriculture has expertise in promoting homestead kitchen
gardens. Cash transfers to improve nutrition are best coordinated by the Ministry of
Federal Affairs and Local Development (MOFALD) with the collaboration of the MOH.
This study found that the Sunaula Hazar Din (SHD) Project implemented by the MO-
FLAD included activities usually carried out by other line agencies e.g., breastfeeding,
complimentary feeding, chicken rearing, iron/folic acid supplementation, etc), and the
activities were not implemented effectively. Whereas the Agriculture and Food Securi-
ty Project (AFSP) implemented by the Ministry of Agricultural Development (MOAD)
collaborated with the MOH for delivering nutrition specific interventions. Since MOH
already had the capacity to implement nutrition specific interventions, nutrition compo-
nent of this project was effectively implemented.

While operating in a resource-constrained environment, due consideration should be
given to the targeting mechanism to avoid the risk of omitting the poor and those who
cannot afford the program conditions. Targeting not only means bringing interventions
where they are needed but also entails efficiency and costs of screening. Sometimes,
for the ease and cost effectiveness of implementation, it is appropriate for a project to
cover the entire boundary of an administrative unit rather than a sub-set of the unit.
For example, selecting further a small area within a local government boundary for
project interventions would entail an additional cost of screening which might be high-
er than implementing the project in the entire administrative unit. Within a particular
framework of beneficiary selection, e.g., interventions for “1,000 days” households or
households with under-five children, or adolescents or pregnant and lactating moth-
ers, conflicts and challenges can be avoided if targeting is universal at certain autono-
mous administrative units and universal at the communities’ beneficiaries, irrespective
of their income status or whether they are marginalized or non-marginalized. Nutri-
tion-specific interventions of the Suaahara Project were implemented district-wide and
a targeted approach was used to reach Disadvantaged Group (DAG) households with
nutrition-sensitive interventions. The SHD Project, on the other hand, covered only 25
percent of the village development committees in a district and provided amenities only
to the poorer households, which created conflicts in the communities.
x   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                         Approvals and funds that must pass through various administrative layers before reach-
                         ing the intended targets can delay implementation and provide avenues for rent-seek-
                         ing behaviors. Community-driven projects like the SHD Project seems to have suffered
                         such issues, delaying implementation. Financial accountability should be the responsi-
                         bility of the units receiving the spending authorization. For a community-driven project,
                         it is essential that a central unit approves the proposals and releases the funds directly to
                         the communities. Communities have very minimal capacity to follow bureaucratic pro-
                         cesses of documenting technical and financial reports. Such processes at the community
                         level generate exhaustion and disinterest for the project. Communities need to be made
                         accountable for the money they receive but not at the cost of complying with complex
                         bureaucratic processes.

                         To ensure effective collaboration from various sectors, a project or program should ini-
                         tially define shared responsibilities with clear provisions for authority and resources to
                         execute those responsibilities. It is essential to give adequate authority and resources
                         to different sectors if their input is required in certain nutrition interventions. Collabo-
                         ration between sectors without empowering them with proper authority and required
                         resources does not produce desired results.

                         Each sector should have adequate human resource and relevant technical expertise to
                         monitor nutrition interventions. If the necessary capacity does not exist, the required
                         services should be procured as soon as possible. Annual work plans should be detailed
                         and implementation should be regularly monitored to reflect progress and achieve-
                         ments on a dashboard for everyone to see. This ensures transparency, accountability,
                         and the early identification of issues for the management team to address in a timely
                         manner. If implementation and monitoring functions are outsourced to nongovernment
                         partners, whether NGOs or private firms, their accountability can be ensured by paying
                         for verified results.

                         Targeted project beneficiaries in some cases received benefits late into the project be-
                         cause of the evaluation design. While rigorous impact evaluation is necessary to gen-
                         erate evidence, this should be done without compromising project implementation as
                         was seen in some projects where beneficiaries had to wait to be included in the project
                         in order to fulfill the requirement of evaluation design.
1. Introduction




1.1 Malnutrition in Nepal



M
          alnutrition is a serious problem in Nepal, which negatively affects human
          and economic development and the nation’s overall prosperity. Malnourish-
          ment during childhood leads to lifetime losses in earning capacity and the
perpetuation of intergenerational poverty (Alderman, 2006). Nepal loses an estimated
2–3 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) annually from high rates of malnutrition
and micronutrients deficiencies (The World Bank, 2011).

It is impressive to note that stunting in Nepal declined from 57 percent in 2001 to 40.5
percent in 2011. As per the WHO/UNICEF/World Bank joint monitoring estimates
2015, Nepal with stunting at 37.4 percent has similar position compared to India (38.7
percent), Myanmar (35.1 percent), Bangladesh (36.1 percent) and Indonesia (36.4 per-
cent) in the South East Asia Region. Those with better stunting rates in the region are
Thailand at 10.9 percent, Sri Lanka at 14.7 percent and Maldives at 20.3 percent (World
Health Organization Regional Office for South-East Asia, 2016).

Since 2012, Nepal has been exemplary in its nutrition policy. In 2011, the Government
and its partners started joining forces to improve the country’s nutritional status. They
jointly produced the NAGA report. The NAGA emphasizes that a concerted and coordi-
nated effort by the nation’s various sectors is necessary to reduce malnutrition and that
a central coordination body needed to be established to design a MSNP and to oversee
the implementation of sectoral plans. The GON was actively involved in the global Scal-
ing Up Nutrition (SUN) Movement and has been recognized for its efforts in nutrition
policy.

It is now well understood “what” needs to be done to address malnutrition- a life cy-
cle approach with a special focus on the “window of opportunity” from conception
to two years of life (first 1000 days). Such interventions would be related to activities
which support: improved nutrition of adolescents, pregnant and lactating mothers and
children; multisectorality; promotion of accountability and commitments from govern-
ments, donors and civil societies; and nutrition governance with political commitment

                                                   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   1
2   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                         guided by relevant sectoral policies, regulatory framework and evidence informed ac-
                         tions.

                         Even though the GON’s efforts have generated increased investments in nutrition by
                         the Government and donors, Nepal has not yet made rapid progress in reducing stunt-
                         ing. The stunting rate among children under five decreased from about 49.3 percent in
                         2006 to 40.5 percent in 2011, which is about 8.8 percentage points in five years (2006–11).
                         By 2016, however, the stunting rate was at 35.8 percent, indicating that stunting had
                         declined by only 4.7 percentage points from 2011 to 2016. Even though Nepal has made
                         progress in reducing poverty from 42 percent between 2003–04 to 25 percent in 2011,
                         malnutrition has not decreased. Nepal also missed the target of reducing the stunting
                         rate to 28 percent by 2015 to meet the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) malnutri-
                         tion target (see Annex 1, Table 1). The cost of malnutrition and micronutrients deficiency
                         to Nepal remains unacceptably high.

                         Nepal’s nutritional outcomes have been poor from other perspectives. In 2016, 27 per-
                         cent of children were underweight and 10 percent were wasted. Moreover, about 2 per-
                         cent of children under five were overweight (Ministry of Health, Nepal; New ERA; and
                         ICF, 2017), which is a concern especially in urban areas. Nutritional outcomes also vary
                         by geographical regions, development levels, class, wealth, education, and caste status.
                         Regional variations in poverty rates, malnutrition, and food insecurity problems also
                         roughly correlate. The poverty rates in the mid-west and far-west regions of Nepal are
                         very high. The overall development problems are also severe in those regions, including
                         infrastructure, access to health, sanitation, and education (Adhikari, 2008). Disaggregat-
                         ed data for 2001, 2006, 2011, and 2016 are presented in Annex 1, Table 1.

                         Maternal malnutrition is a major concern in Nepal. In 2016, about 17 percent of women
                         in the 15–49 age group were undernourished—as defined by a BMI of less than 18.5
                         (Ministry of Health, Nepal; New ERA; and ICF, 2017). In 2011, 18 percent of women were
                         undernourished (Ministry of Health and Population (MOHP) [Nepal], New ERA, and ICF
                         International Inc., 2012). Overweight is also a growing problem for women; 22 percent
                         are overweight or obese according to the 2016 Nepal Demographic and Health Survey
                         (NDHS). The 2006 NDHS showed that only 9 percent of women were overweight, indi-
                         cating an increasing trend. Anemia continues to be a significant problem for women and
                         children in Nepal; 53 percent of children and 41 percent of women were anemic in 2016.

                         The Nepal Living Standard Survey (NLSS) III data shows an interesting relationship
                         between food security and nutritional status. If food security is considered as consump-
                         tion of adequate food, then food security status has been improving. For example, the
                         percentage of households reporting less than adequate food consumption has been con-
                         sistently declining at a fast rate—from 50.9 percent in 1995–96 to 31.2 percent in 2003–04
                         to 15.7 percent in 2010–11. Only 7.5 percent of households in 2010–11 reported food
                         shortages at any time in the last 30 days, with many households meeting the shortages
                         through various means (see Annex 1, Table 2). Nutritional improvement over the period
                         is very slight in the last decade until 2011, but improvement is drastic in food consump-
                                                    STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   3




tion status. This finding indicates that food consumption alone is not a good indicator of
nutritional improvement. The food consumed must be nourishing, diversified, as well
as protein and micronutrient rich.

The average food consumption in Nepal was adequate by 2010–11, as shown above. The
national average calorie intake is more than the requirement of 2,536 Kcal per capita
against the requirement of 2,220 Kcal per day, which defines the GON’s poverty line.
However, the problem of poor diet diversity in Nepal remains. More than 84 percent
of households in rural areas have a high staple diet, that is more than 60 percent of
the households’ total calories are from staples, and more than half (52 percent) have
a very high staple diet, that is more than 75 percent of their total calories are from sta-
ples (Central Bureau of Statistics, National Planning Commission, World Food Program, World
Bank, AusAID and UNICEF, Nepal, 2013). This finding indicates that production patterns
should change to produce good food—rather than just food. The agricultural sector also
faces problems in producing diversified and nutritious foods.

Other factors linked to malnutrition need to be addressed. For example, sanitation ser-
vices are still inadequate, with 38 percent of the population defecating in the open (Min-
istry of Health and Population (MOHP) [Nepal], New ERA, and ICF International Inc., 2012).
The 2014 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) shows that household members
with E. Coli risk levels in their household water are 82 percent and from the source of
water are 71 percent. Even though access to drinking water (piped water) has increased
to 93 percent in Nepal—96 percent in urban area and 93 percent in rural area—the qual-
ity of water is very poor. Only 48 percent children’s stools (0–2 years) were disposed
of safely, and 73 percent of households have a designated place for handwashing with
soap. Just 60 percent of households have improved sanitation facilities. Only 82 percent
of households take iodized salt. The smoking and tobacco use prevalence rate is 9 per-
cent and the alcohol use prevalence rate is 10 percent among women (15–49 years), the
use of which are known to have adverse consequences for maternal and child nutrition.



1.2 Existing Nutritional Interventions and Organizations in Nepal

In the past, nutrition interventions were regarded solely as the responsibility of the
MOH, and specifically, the Nutrition Section under the Child Health Division of the
Department of Health Services of the MOH. The Nutrition Section budgets for nutri-
tion-specific interventions, including prevention and treatment services related to nutri-
tion. Following the 2011 NAGA and the development of the MSNP, the entire GON has
been active in efforts to reduce the population’s malnutrition. The MSNP is implement-
ed by the MOAD, the MOH, the Ministry of Education (MOE), the Ministry of Water
Supply and Sanitation (MOWSS), the MOFALD, and the Ministry of Women, Children
and Social Welfare (MOWCSW), each with their various programs and activities. A sec-
retariat in the NPC oversees and coordinates the nutritional interventions undertaken
by all the ministries. Nepal’s Ministry of Finance (MOF) has been financing the imple-
mentation of the MSNP for last two years with the contributions by various donors.
4   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                         The World Bank has provided financial and technical assistance for Nepal’s nutrition
                         and food security interventions for the following projects. The Nepal Agriculture and
                         Food Security Project (AFSP) 2013–18 (World Bank, 2013), Sunaula Hazar Din– Com-
                         munity Action for Nutrition Project (SHD) (World Bank, 2012), and the Rural Water
                         Supply and Sanitation Improvement Project (2014–19) (World Bank, 2014). The AFSP,
                         implemented by MOAD, supports nutrition-sensitive agricultural activities to promote
                         the production and consumption of nutritious foods in marginal regions. MOFALD im-
                         plemented the SHD Project, which is a demand-driven community-led project imple-
                         mented at the ward level by community teams. The Rural Water Supply Project aims to
                         improve access to quality drinking water and sanitation, which is a major component
                         of nutrition-sensitive interventions. The World Bank also provides technical support
                         through the South Asia Food and Nutrition Security Initiative (SAFANSI), a program
                         financed by the Department for International Development (DFID) and the European
                         Commission.

                         Other international organizations with nutrition programs in Nepal include UNICEF,
                         the World Health Organization (WHO), the World Food Program (WFP), the Food and
                         Agriculture Organization (FAO), and the International Fund for Agricultural Develop-
                         ment (IFAD). UNICEF provides a wide range of financial and technical support for the
                         GON to develop policy and to implement nutrition activities. UNICEF’s activities cov-
                         er health, water and sanitation, nutrition, child friendly local governance, social poli-
                         cy, child protection, education and adolescent development. It aligns its activities with
                         the Health Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) Program to support maternal, neonatal, and
                         child health, the micronutrient program, community management of acute malnutri-
                         tion, and school sanitation (UNICEF, 2013). UNICEF has remained one of major partners
                         for the GON to support scaling up of implementation of MSNP in Nepal. The WFP has
                         partnered for decades with the GON to provide food transfers to reduce vulnerability
                         in Nepal. The WFP has embraced a safety net approach with a focus on children by
                         promoting mother-child health nutrition (MCHN), school meals, and for adults through
                         asset creation activities. The FAO and IFAD work through government channels to im-
                         prove food production. WHO mainly supports the GON in the areas of food safety,
                         chemical safety, and capacity building of government staff.

                         USAID has been financing food and nutrition and food security programs implemented
                         by competitively hired international organizations, such as Save the Children and Helen
                         Keller International (HKI). Among other projects, USAID finances the Suaahara Project,
                         with a focus mainly on nutrition, Sustainable Action for Resilience and Food Security
                         (SABAL) Project with a focus on livelihood, health, and nutrition, and Feed the Future
                         or the KISAN Project with a focus on food security, markets, and the private sector. The
                         Swiss Agency for Development Cooperation has programs to improve livelihood and
                         food security through business activities. The European Commission has supported the
                         GON’s Agricultural and Nutrition Extension Program. The Asian Development Bank
                         (ADB) has financed the project Reducing Child Malnutrition through Social Protection
                         in districts of the Karnali Zone and supported Flour Fortification in the Chakki Mill
                         Projects to address micronutrient deficiencies.
                                                   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   5




INGOs involved in food and nutrition in Nepal include Care Nepal, HKI, Micronutrient
Initiative (MI), Oxfam, Plan Nepal, Heifer International, Save the Children, and Action
Contre la Faim (ACF) (Action Against Hunger). HKI’s activities include essential nutri-
tion actions, homestead food production, local multisector governance, and improved
nutrition interpersonal communication. The INGOs work with local NGOs and commu-
nity-based organizations to achieve social mobilization of targeted population. Often,
they are also able to reach pockets of marginalized communities.

Of the many NGOs working in Nepal, the Center for Environmental and Agricultur-
al Policy Research, Extension and Development (CEPRED), the Support Activities for
Poor Producers in Nepal (SAPPROS), and the Forum for Rural Welfare and Agriculture
Reform for Development (FORWARD) are NGOs involved in nutrition and food secu-
rity. They work with farmers’ groups to increase income and food consumption by the
commercial cultivation of vegetables and other high value crops. The three NGOs cover
a wide geographical area of Nepal.

Several civil society organizations are also active in food and nutritional security. They
include the Civil Society Alliance for Nutrition, Nepal (CSANN), the National Network
on Right to Food Nepal (RtFN), comprising more than 50 national and international
NGOs, the NGO Federation, the Federation of Community Forest Users Nepal, the Irri-
gation Water User Federation, Drinking Water and Sanitation Federation, human rights
networks, women rights networks, peasants’ federations, and youth organizations. The
National Alliance for Food Security in Nepal (NAFOS) and Food-First Information and
Action Network (FIAN) Nepal are involved in food rights.



1.3 Prospects and Challenges for Effective Operation of
Nutrition and Food Security Strategies

Nepal has very good prospects to reduce malnutrition. The country has the proper in-
vestment climate for nutrition interventions and is receiving donor financing for the
interventions. With the MSNP and National Nutrition and Food Security Secretariat
under the umbrella of the NPC, the nutrition and food security agenda has gained mo-
mentum in Nepal. Besides the GON’s own revenue, resources from donors are also
flowing into the country to reduce malnutrition.

The GON’s challenge is to make the best use of available resources to reduce malnu-
trition. There are many causes of malnutrition and they differ from place to place and
require different solutions. A package of interventions might be effective in reducing
malnutrition in one place but not in another. Rigorous analysis of the problems and
solutions that are specific to each issue are lacking. Without data about outcomes, pro-
gram interventions may be pouring resources into ineffective and inefficient interven-
tions that underutilize available resources.
6   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                         The Government must better harmonize the various nutrition programs underway by
                         numerous organizations. Many different projects are operating in the same localities.
                         For example, the SHD Project and the government-financed MSNP work in the Par-
                         sa District, and the SHD Project and the USAID financed SABAL Project work in the
                         Makwanpur, Sindhuli, Ramechhap, Khotang, Okhaldhunga, and Udayapur Districts.
                         Some of the districts where the Suaahara Project is being implemented overlap with the
                         districts with the government’s MSNP interventions. Some projects have focused on a
                         district-wide approach, such as the Suaahara Project. Other projects only have programs
                         in some of the districts’ village development committees (VDCs), for example SHD proj-
                         ect and the AFSP. The variations increase the likelihood of resource duplication in some
                         places and a lack of funding and attention in other places that need nutrition interven-
                         tions. To ensure necessary coverage where required, all government and partners’ nutri-
                         tion activities must be harmonized. The GON needs to assume a strong leadership role
                         in directing where and how nutrition investments are made in the country.
2. Study Purpose and Design




2.1 Rationale



M
           ost studies in the relevant literature discuss the design of various interven-
           tions to address malnutrition (that is, how a program should work), while
           other studies simply examine whether interventions worked or not. For
example, convergence approach where both nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive
interventions are jointly targeted to vulnerable geographical populations worked well
in Peru to reduce stunting by four percentage points per year in the districts reached
(Levinson & Balaranjan, 2013).

According to an extensive literature review done by the Strengthening Partnerships,
Results, and Innovations in Nutrition Globally (SPRING) project, there is a document-
ed evidence that nutritional intervention during pregnancy and early childhood can
increase offspring size and adult stature of women. The study also documents that
improvements in girls’ early nutrition have led to increased years of schooling and to
delays in age at first pregnancy and delaying age at first pregnancy enhance maximal
attainment of height (Caulfield & Elliot, Program in Human Nutrition, the Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, for SPRING, 2015).

Very few studies dig into what implementation-related factors aid or impede the suc-
cess of interventions. Effective implementation of any intervention is a global challenge.
There can be several crucial and unknown factors that interplay to hamper implemen-
tation. This study has attempted to shine light into the “black box” of implementation,
based on qualitative information. Based on the overall findings, the study has narrowed
down the potential factors to be considered into certain thematic areas as detailed under
the Key Findings section.

This study did not delve into generating evidence of effects of any nutrition-specific or nutri-
tion-sensitive interventions but was conducted to identify and understand the bottlenecks
in nutrition operations in Nepal and to provide strategies and recommendations to over-
come them to achieve more effective and sustainable nutrition outcomes. The findings of
the study will help guide future operational support to reduce malnutrition in the country.

                                                       STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   7
8   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                         This study sought to generate rigorous evidence for decision makers for three areas of
                         intended impact:

                         (a)	Matching supply and demand of nutritional responses for greater technical effec-
                              tiveness.
                         (b)	 Investment modalities for nutrition and food security programs.
                         (c)	 Identifying effective program design and engagement strategy for future nutrition
                              programs.



                         2.2 Key Questions

                         The following table explains in detail the abovementioned impact goals of the study, the
                         key decision evidence sought, and the guiding research questions to gather such evidence.


                          Study Impact Areas                          Key Research Questions and
                                                                      Learning Objectives
                          (a) Matching supply and demand of •	 Understanding the demand side of inter-
                              nutrition responses for greater       ventions and matching it with supply.
                              technical effectiveness. The study •	 Gathering evidence of effectiveness of var-
                              particularly seeks answers in the     ious beneficiary targeting approaches.
                              following areas.
                          (b) Generating evidence for effec- •	 How have some investment modalities,
                              tive investment modalities for        input-based versus results--based, condi-
                              nutrition and food security pro-      tional versus unconditional cash transfers,
                              grams. The study seeks to gather      and in-kind transfers worked for different
                              evidence that will help guide in-     interventions?
                              vestments in future nutrition pro- •	 What sort of challenges have nutrition and
                              grams, particularly by generating     food security projects/programs faced
                              the following answers.                when they were financed through govern-
                                                                    ment systems versus outside-of-govern-
                                                                    ment systems?
                          (c) Effective program design and •	 Determine strengths, key bottlenecks, and
                              engagement strategy for future        positive deviances of various institutional
                              nutrition programs. For this pur-     modalities including partnership arrange-
                              pose, the study will conduct a        ments and monitoring and evaluation
                              thorough operations research of       mechanisms of nutrition and food security
                              its current programs, particularly    programs that sought to improve nutrition
                              with the following goals.             outcomes.
                                                                 •	 Determine pros and cons of various insti-
                                                                    tutional arrangement framework existing
                                                                    for some major nutrition and food security
                                                                    programs in the country.
                                                             STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   9




2.3 Methodology

The research employs a multi-staged qualitative methodology to achieve the above-men-
tioned objectives, as illustrated in the diagram below.


   The Preparatory Stage              The Evidence Collection Stage              The Evidence Synthesis Stage

   l	 Desk research to understand     l	 In depth interviews (IDIs) with            l	 Primary analysis
      nutrition and food security        national, district & VDC officials         l	 Evidence synthesis
      (NFS) strategies, priorities,   l	 Focus group discussions                       workshop
      policies, and programs in          (FGDs) with community                      l	 Final analysis
      Nepal                              beneficiaries




2.3.1 The preparatory stage
The preparatory stage consisted of desk research to understand the landscape of nu-
trition and food security (NFS) policies, priorities, and programs in Nepal. The back-
ground developed from this stage helped to develop specific selection criteria to iden-
tify key nutrition and food security (NFS) projects to explore at the central, district,
village development committee (VDC), and local levels, in the second stage.

2.3.2 The evidence collection stage
The second stage used in-depth interviews (IDI) with national, district, and VDC-level
stakeholders, as well as focus group discussions (FGDs) with community-level benefi-
ciaries. A purposive sampling of projects for IDI and FGDs were done with the follow-
ing considerations:

•	 The samples must represent a diversity of technical approaches, such as food and
   agriculture-based interventions, health systems-based interventions, communi-
   ty-driven development approaches or a combination of these interventions.
•	 The samples must be large-scale across many districts and multi-year projects be-
   cause the lessons will be used to help implement projects at scale. This excludes any
   small-scale projects or pilots done by other entities.
•	 The samples must also capture different investment or fund-flow mechanisms, such
   as through the government system and nongovernment structures.
•	 The samples must also capture different operational modalities, such as through
   government line-agencies, autonomous government bodies, health delivery units,
   nongovernment project structures, and private sector engagement.

The policy-level stakeholders and experts from the NPC and Child Health Division
(CHD) were consulted at the central level to capture additional insights about the over-
all policy environment and priorities.

Data collection methods and sampling
The sampling techniques used to identify respondents from the selected projects and the
four study instruments used in data collection are described below (see Annex 1, Table 3).
10   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                          •	 National-level IDI: The first component was national-level stakeholder consulta-
                             tions with managers and experts to understand their perspectives about the tech-
                             nical, investment, and operational aspects of their respective NFS projects and ac-
                             tivities. Fifteen interviews were conducted. The consultations with national-level
                             project managers from six selected projects helped to identify samples for IDIs at
                             the district level. The national project managers were asked to provide the names
                             of three project districts with high-performing and low-performing VDCs based on
                             ease of implementation and project outputs. The purpose of selecting the two dif-
                             ferent types of VDCs is to allow for a comparative assessment of challenges and op-
                             portunities faced in those contexts, and to capture any positive deviances and local
                             innovations in projects operating in their own political economic background.
                          •	 District-level IDI: The district-level interviews were mostly conducted at the head-
                             quarters of the seven districts selected through the national-level IDIs. The districts
                             included in the terai (southern plains), Nawalparasi, Siraha, Saptari, and in the hills,
                             Surkhet, Jumla, Dadeldhura, and Okhaldhunga. Sixteen interviews were conducted
                             involving government officials stationed at the time of the interview in district head-
                             quarters. They included the Local Development Officers (LDO),1 the District (Public)
                             Health Officer (DHO/DPHO),2 and the District Agriculture Development Officer
                             (DADO).
                          •	 VDC-level IDI: The district-level officials helped further identify and coordinate
                             with VDC-level stakeholders from selected high-performing and low-performing
                             VDCs. Their identities are omitted from this report to maintain the confidentiality
                             of the respondents and projects. Twenty-four IDIs were conducted with local-level
                             facilitators called coaches of the SHD Project, VDC secretaries, Junior Technicians or
                             Junior Technical Assistants of the AFSP, and the Female Community Health Volun-
                             teers involved in the Suaahara, UNICEF, and MOH’s activities.
                          •	 Community FGDs: Altogether, 17 FGDs were conducted with the beneficiaries of
                             the selected projects. Beneficiaries included the Rapid Results Nutrition Initiative
                             (RRNI) team of SHD Project, mothers’ groups (UNICEF, Suaahara), farmers’ groups
                             of the AFSP, and KISAN. In each FGD, 8–10 members were selected from existing
                             groups of beneficiaries from each of the respective projects for the discussion.

                          Study Instruments
                          All study instruments followed a standardized general content structure and modules.
                          Such consistency across four different modules allowed for effective comparison of re-
                          sponses by stakeholders at different levels and by stakeholders from different projects.
                          The modules are described in detail below.

                          •	 Module 1: Respondent Information. The purpose of this module was to understand
                             the role, level, and nature of the respondent’s engagement in project preparation,
                             implementation, and evaluation.
                          •	 Module 2: Review of Project Implementation. The purpose of this module was
                             to understand the respondents’ perspective of the overall project operations and


                          	 In the absence of LDOs, persons who were acting for them were interviewed.
                          1

                          	 In the absence of DHOs/DPHOs, persons who were acting for them were interviewed.
                          2
                                                   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   11




   to capture the lessons learned for eight categories, which are project acceptability,
   adoption, appropriateness, feasibility, fidelity, implementation cost, coverage, and
   sustainability. The module allowed for respondents to rate each indicator from 1–5
   to sum up the discussion for each indicator.
•	 Module 3: Review of Project-Specific Approaches. The purpose of this module was
   to discuss specific operational, technical or investment approaches to further eluci-
   date the process flow, and particularly to help identify key bottlenecks or constraints
   in three functional areas: (a) decision making, (b) execution, or (c) monitoring / ac-
   countability. The module also used a process map to probe respondents to point to
   constraints along the various interfaces from the national to the local-level stake-
   holders.

2.3.3 The evidence synthesis and analysis stage
The data collected from the previous stage was transcribed and translated into English.
All transcripts were then coded in NVivo, a qualitative data analysis computer soft-
ware, from which emerging themes were developed within the broad categories of a
project’s technical strategy, investment mechanisms, and operational modalities. The
preliminary evidence was further analyzed and discussed during an Evidence Synthesis
Workshop (ESW), which was held with key stakeholders from the ministries, NPC, the
Child Health Division (CHD), and academia. The feedback and additional insights on
emerging trends and findings helped to further enhance the perimeters of the analysis,
a process culminating in this report.



2.4 Challenges and Limitations of the Study

The research was intended to gather information and to draw lessons from the major
nutrition and food security (NFS) projects in Nepal to guide future World Bank support
to improve nutrition in Nepal. Given the diversity of NFS projects, the study attempted
a non-probability and convenience sampling to capture various technical, investment,
and operational dimensions employed in Nepal’s political-economic context. The first
challenge was to ensure that the project diversity was captured adequately in the sam-
pled projects and districts. This was accomplished by broad review of projects at the be-
ginning followed by focused consultations with national level experts. The second chal-
lenge was in sampling high-performing and low-performing VDCs in the absence of
more objective performance metrics. Because the study focused more on the operational
or process dimensions, rather than quantitative indicators of success, the second-best
method was used to identify the samples, which was relying on the experiences and
challenges managers faced in project implementation across different communities. Al-
though such a grounded-approach can identify interesting positive deviances and their
determinants, the selection process can be biased.

The third challenge was to ensure the truthfulness of the responses by various actors.
Although every effort was made to discourage interviewees from providing biased re-
sponses by explaining the value of a truthful assessment of the projects and other actors’
12   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                          activities, it is very likely that some respondents were motivated to censor their honest
                          assessments. Because the same assessments were collected from various actors, from
                          national to local levels, the study did allow for some degree of triangulation of informa-
                          tion to identify and investigate any data discrepancies. The final challenge is inherent
                          to analyzing qualitative data, particularly in developing conceptual themes based on
                          information from a non-probabilistic sample. To improve the reliability and validity of
                          the findings, the specific context from which the information was derived is presented
                          in the analysis. In sum, despite some of the inherent and practical limitations discussed
                          above, the research team adhered to the highest standards of qualitative data design,
                          collection, and analysis to meet the objectives of the study.
3. Key Findings and Thematic
Discussions




T
        his section highlights the key findings in relation to Nepal’s national policy and
        priorities to reduce malnutrition and to the project-specific operational assess-
        ment of six large-scale projects, which employ various modalities to deliver nu-
trition and food security interventions.



3.1 National Policy and Priorities

3.1.1 Key policies and priorities
The GON has been implementing the 2012–17 MSNP, which is expected to accelerate
gains in nutritional outcomes to assist in meeting the MDGs for food and hunger, and
to break the cycle of intergenerational poverty and undernutrition in the long term. The
Government’s commitment to reduce malnutrition is visible in other policy documents
including Agriculture Development Strategy (2015-2025), National Health Policy 2014,
Food and Nutrition Security Plan of Action (2013-2023), Nepal Zero Hunger Challenge:
National action Plan (2016-2025) and Nepal Health Sector Strategy (2015-2020).

The GON’s commitment to food and nutrition is also demonstrated by maintaining and
reaffirming food security or the right to food as a fundamental right in the Nepalese con-
stitution in 2006 and 2015. Food sovereignty also has provisions in the constitution. The
provisions in the constitution and in various laws and regulations are also supported by
Nepal’s status as a signatory to various international covenants and agreements. They
include the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), the Convention on the Elim-
ination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), the SUN Initiative,
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). At
the regional level, Nepal is party to the South Asian Association for Regional Cooper-
ation (SAARC) Development Goals and the South Asian Regional Nutrition Strategy.

Nepal’s current three-year periodic plan 2013/14 – 2015/16 aims to reduce the rates of
infant, child, and maternal mortality through proven and cost-effective interventions.
The current plan, as well as the forthcoming plan 2016/17 – 2018/19, focuses on 26 dis-


                                                   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   13
14   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                          tricts of Karnali, which have been facing a long-term food crisis. The other key expected
                          programs of the government include a national framework for social protection, which
                          also aims to universalize child protection grants (cash transfers) to improve child nutri-
                          tion and expand maternal services. In the health and agriculture sectors, nutrition and
                          food security have been emphasized in strategies and plans. The National Nutritional
                          and Food Security Policy is being prepared.

                          The High-Level Nutrition and Food Security Steering Committee and the National Nu-
                          trition and Food Security Coordination Committee under the NPC, which were estab-
                          lished in 2012, are intended to ensure central coordination of nutrition and food security
                          activities. For effective coordination of activities at the grassroots level, the Nutrition
                          and Food Security Steering Committee exist at the district and VDC levels.

                          3.1.2 Current constraints
                          Effective monitoring of the MSNP’s implementation has been a challenge due to a lack
                          of an effective reporting mechanism. It appears that the institutional home within each
                          line agency, except for a few, needs to be recognized and established to aggregate and
                          report sectoral indicators identified by the MSNP. The Ministry of Federal Affairs and
                          Local Development has been working on reporting tools to strengthen monitoring and
                          reporting.

                          The role of the private sector in improving malnutrition is important to highlight. It can
                          use its social marketing skills to promote fortified foods, produce different therapeutic
                          foods locally, and support areas such as water, sanitation, and hygiene. The country
                          should execute the provisions it has to restrict the promotion of harmful practices like
                          the use of infant formulas as a substitute for breastfeeding and children friendly-adver-
                          tisement of processed junk-food, which are regarded as empty calories.

                          The private sector’s involvement in food security and nutrition is limited. Although, the
                          Breast Milk Substitute Act exists to regulate the private sector market, the consensus is
                          that the act is not implemented effectively. The Chaudhary Group, a private company,
                          developed a product called Instant Meal, which is the first fortified cereal-based blend-
                          ed food. Its production facilities are recognized and approved to produce and distrib-
                          ute fortified blended food in the South Asian region by UN agencies such as WFP and
                          UNICEF.

                          The Nepal Government’s Department of Food Technology and Quality (DFTQC) has
                          innovated and developed various nutritious foods, but it lacks a private company to
                          produce the products and introduce them in the market. Nonetheless, a few examples
                          exist of private sector linkages with food processing. For example, Bel-Juice is produced
                          through target groups co-operatives, and the Federation of Nepalese Chambers of Com-
                          merce and Industry is helping market it. More research is required to develop local pro-
                          duced varieties of therapeutic foods to reduce the costs of purchasing the same products
                          internationally.
                                                                  STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   15




3.1.3 Future directions
Nepal’s nutrition profile has been raised at the central level, which is evident by nutri-
tion’s coverage by journalists in quality news articles and its visibility in talk shows.
The GON is currently drafting its second MSNP. As Nepal undergoes federalization, it
is essential that advocacy for nutrition is replicated at the states and local government
levels, since they will be autonomous and have authority over the resources to imple-
ment development programs. Therefore, the next phase of the MSNP should be drafted
to ensure that those who will lead the provinces will also have ownership and be ac-
countable for outcomes.



3.2 Developing Technical Approaches for Nutrition and Food
Security Projects
Nepal implements a range of technical interventions to minimize key risk factors for
malnutrition. Figure 1 illustrates the three-step process for developing a technical strate-
gy, starting by identifying key risk factors for malnutrition and designing interventions,
assessing demand and supply match, and finally, by developing a beneficiary targeting
strategy. This study is not intended to review risk factors of malnutrition and identify
nutrition specific and sensitive interventions. (Interested readers may refer to them in
Annex 2). This section presents a systematic methodology for matching supply side in-
terventions with demands in the community, the contextual best practices in identifying
and engaging target groups, and a close analysis of selected interventions.


Figure 1: Steps for developing a technical strategy
Step 1: Identify the Key Risk Factors of   Step 2: Assess demand and                  Step 3: Develop Targeting
Malnutrition and explore interventions     supply match                               Strategy

   l	 Identify objectives specific          l	 Match demand and supply                   l	 Target beneficiaries
      to addressing the key risk               sides of interventions                         through multiple levels of
      factors associated with                                                                 governance
      malnutrition                                                                       l	   Central level
   l	 Explore nutrition specific                                                         l	   District level
      and sensitive interventions                                                        l	   Local level
                                                                                         l	   Consider positive deviances
                                                                                              and considerations



Step 1- See Annex 2.

Step 2- Matching Demand and Supply Sides of the Interventions
For an intervention to be successful, the demand and the supply sides of the interven-
tions must be developed simultaneously. Therefore, while designing interventions, the
next step is to thoroughly assess the constraints and prospects, first from the perspective
of the community’s level of awareness and demand for a nutrition intervention (the
demand-side), and second from the perspective of the health and nutrition systems,
markets, and the socio-cultural and political environment (the supply-side). The follow-
ing Demand-Supply Matching Matrix illustrates the keys areas of possible (mis)match
in some projects in Nepal.
16            STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                                                                     DEMAND
                                            Weak                                                   Strong
                       Weak-weak scenario is created when the            High-demand mismatch is created when the
                       community is unaware or unconvinced               community has accepted the need and even
                       of the need for intervention and when             demanded the intervention or a practice but
                       the health systems or programs lack               are limited by inadequate supply-side efforts or
                       adequate effort or capability to provide the      resources.
                       intervention.
                                                                         Example: Households understand the need for
              Weak




                       Example: Low awareness about the                  pregnant women to consume a high-protein diet,
                       importance of exclusive breastfeeding             but there is limited support to provide actual
                       in communities (demand) and limited               financial or technical resources to enable poor
                       counseling capabilities in health facilities to   households to raise poultry for eggs or animals for
                       encourage the practice (supply).                  meat.
 S U P P LY




                       Low-demand mismatch is created when               Ideal matching is possible when both sides of
                       emphasis is provided only on the supply           the intervention are properly addressed. The
                       side of the intervention and limited effort       community or beneficiary should be convinced of
                       is exerted to convince communities or             the value of a given intervention and supply-side
                       beneficiaries about the importance of             actors must match the community’s expectations.
                       intervention.
              Strong




                                                                         Example: To create demand, FCHVs provide proper
                       Example: Construction of unused latrines          counseling and encouragement to pregnant mothers
                       for defecation through subsidies and              to choose institutional deliveries over unsafe delivery
                       grants is a most noted challenge in               at home. This is matched by proper provision of
                       addressing community-level risk factors for       midwifery and referral services at local health facilities.
                       malnutrition.



                                     Recommendations
                                     •	 Any nutrition operation needs to garner evidence of the prevalent causative factors
                                        for malnutrition in the particular geographical area of intervention. This will help
                                        one understand the demand side. If there is a lack of existing evidence, a prior for-
                                        mative research might be helpful to identify the cause(s) of malnutrition in the area
                                        and to plan particular interventions to improve nutrition for the area.
                                     •	 Always match the demand created—as identified through formative research or
                                        baseline surveys—with adequate supply-side interventions. For instance, a food in-
                                        secure household should be provided with the means to secure nutritious food, in
                                        addition to advocating for better nutritional behaviors in the household.
                                                      STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   17




Step 3 – Develop Beneficiary Targeting Strategy
Another critical step of developing a technical strategy is ensuring that the intended
beneficiaries adequately receive the interventions. The aggregate outcome of the project
is determined by the success of the interventions in producing the anticipated changes
in each beneficiary.

Target Beneficiaries at Multiple Levels
The review of various nutrition and food security (NFS) projects in Nepal reveals that the
process of identifying beneficiaries occurs across multiple levels, from central to local. Each
level is prone to structural and implementation constraints, as described in detail below.

1)	 First Level targeting: It is used to identify the regions and districts with poor nu-
    trition status using a range of data source and indicators (see Box 1). This process
    allows a project to quantify the need for engagement, prioritize malnutrition risk
    factors to address, design interventions, and estimate costs and resource require-
    ments. Some of the key constraints at this level of targeting include the following.
    •	 Reliability of data to infer true need or nutritional status: Most of the indicators
        used in target selection are derived at the level of ecological regions, such as the
        hills, terai or mountains, or at the aggregate level of administrative units, such as
        by districts or clusters of VDCs. Examples of commonly used sources for target
        selection include the Demographic Health Survey, the Multiple Indicator Cluster
        Survey, and the Nepal Living Standard Survey. While the information is useful
        for prioritization of project regions, the data are not adequate to select the VDCs
        or wards with the greatest needs.
    •	 Inability to customize interventions to economical, geographical or cultural
        differences: Given the inadequacy of information at the local level, the aggregate
        information only points to the problem, as represented by corresponding malnu-
        trition indicators. The problem might be the result of diverse root causes or risk
        factors depending on local-level factors arising from socio-economic, geographic
        or cultural differences. For instance, compared to the flat plains of the terai, the
        hills and mountains have scattered population across difficult terrain. Interven-
        tions and investments to address the same problem in the terai or in the hills
        and mountains can vary greatly. Similarly, in communities with a larger share of
        poor and food insecure households, interventions require greater logistic support
        until the communities are economically capable. In terms of cultural differences,
        women in the terai, especially daughters-in-laws, are often restricted from partic-
        ipating in community groups. In contrast, due to the high migration of men from
        the hills, women are often the active participants in community groups.
    •	 Reducing overlap with existing projects and interventions: Various nutrition
        programs in the country operate differently. Some programs operate within the
        government budget systems and others are outside the systems and are imple-
        mented at different times. The programs and the types of interventions may
        overlap geographically.
18   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




        Box 1: Data Sources Commonly Used to Select and Target Project Beneficiaries

                •	 Periodic Household Surveys: The                        interventions have to be implemented
                   Demographic and Health Survey, the                     at a small scale with limited capacity
                   Nepal Living Standard Survey, and the                  and resources. The data is produced at
                   Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey are done             ilaka level (a few VDCs) by combining
                   periodically but generate disaggregated                Nepal Living Standard Survey III data
                   information at the ecological zones rather             with auxiliary data derived from Census
                   than by administrative units.                          2011. The Nepal Small Area Estimates of
                •	 Routine Information Management                         Poverty 2011 was developed by the CBS
                   System: A Health Information                           with support from the World Bank.
                   Management System generates yearly                  •	 DAG Score: The DAG score is based on
                   data from facilities. The data are generally           the indicators comprised of (1) food
                   supply side and based on population                    sufficiency of less than three months, (2)
                   projections.                                           the presence of marginalized groups, (3)
                •	 Small Area Estimation of Food Insecurity               lack of access to basic services, (4) the
                   and Undernutrition of Nepal (2014):                    lack of representation / participation
                   Developed in collaboration with the Central            of / by women, Dalits and Janajati in
                   Bureau of Statistics (CBS), GON, World                 decision-making bodies, (5) the prevalence
                   Bank, WFP, and UNICEF, this data can be                of gender discrimination, and (6) the
                   used to identify locations where nutrition             presence of vulnerable groups.



                          2) Local level targeting: The second level of targeting occurs at the regional (or pro-
                          vincial) or district (or local government) levels. The district-level authorities selected
                          the VDCs and wards for the project. Because district-level officials would have a better
                          understanding of the needs of the VDCs and wards in their districts, the central line
                          agency decentralized the selection process to the district. For the AFSP and SHD Proj-
                          ect, the central authority gave the project districts a set of criteria for project selection,
                          which the latter used to rank prospective VDCs for projects. One of the criteria used by
                          the districts was the DAG Score (see Box 1). For projects operated by nongovernment
                          agencies, the selection of VDCs and wards rested with the project itself, but the imple-
                          menters consulted with the government entities, e.g., KISAN Project. The decentralized
                          targeting process faces a few constraints as described below.

                          •	 Unreliability and utilization of data – For projects relying on DAG scores for selec-
                             tion, one concern was whether the DAG scores might not truly represent the status
                             of the VDCs. In addition, when VDCs have the same DAG scores, but only a limited
                             number of VDCs are to be selected per project, how should the selection decision be
                             determined?
                          •	 External pressure in selection of VDCs – Decision makers often faced pressure
                             from lobbyist to include their VDCs in a project. In such cases, decision makers often
                             successfully convinced lobbyist of the objective criteria used in the selection process
                             by sharing the criteria. However, district officials reported that interventions should
                                                     STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   19




   have been district-wide instead of being only in certain VDCs as there was a push-
   back from those VDCs not benefitting from the project despite being in the same
   districts.
•	 Time consumption and delays – Even though the decentralized process helps to
   increase the ownership of district-level stakeholders and to leverage their expertise
   in the targeting process, it is nonetheless a time-consuming process. District officials
   are expected to consult with other district-level stakeholders, often by convening a
   district-level meeting to resolve any conflicts or concerns from different actors. They
   also face other logistical constraints, such as in communicating with central-level
   officials and the unavailability of VDC- level officials to provide inputs.

3) Community-level targeting: The third level of targeting is done by community
groups or structures formed by the project to identify households and individuals who
should receive project benefits. Some interesting approaches used for effective local-lev-
el targeting implemented by the community members themselves are described below.

•	 Household data collection by community teams: For the SHD project communi-
   ty-based teams implementing the project went door-to-door to identify households
   that fall within the selection criteria, and thus created a roster of beneficiaries for
   sub-projects. This approach provided teams with data to not only select beneficiaries
   more objectively but also to resolve any concerns from groups or individuals exclud-
   ed from the project.
•	 Using health facility data to identify beneficiaries: In Suaahara, the project im-
   plementers obtained data from health facilities to select their beneficiaries and to
   identify Female Community Health Volunteers (FCHVs) for mobilization. While
   this process may exclude individuals not using the facilities or those who might not
   have access to FCHVs, the approach nonetheless provided extra tools to estimate the
   size of target groups and to assist in identifying individuals.

Critical Considerations in Beneficiary Selection
However, projects did face common challenges to ensure that only needy people were
selected as beneficiaries. Some of the most prominent issues that should be considered
during the selection process are as follows.

•	 Possibility for elite capture: In introducing or starting projects that require strong
   community participation or formation of community groups, the projects must go
   beyond finding the “local champions.” It is important to conduct a more thorough
   assessment, instead of simply relying on such individuals, and to ensure a more
   inclusive channel of communication, such as the Ward Citizen Forum or existing
   groups such as mothers’ groups.

    “However, in my personal experience, in many of these programs, generally one contact
    person from the village is picked up. He is solely contacted and consulted for commu-
    nity group formation. In those community groups, favoritism and nepotism are highly
    practiced.” – VDC Stakeholder, AFSP
20   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                          •	 Well-intended selection criteria often prevent effective inclusion: In some cases,
                             interventions are designed with conflicting criteria that unintentionally exclude
                             certain groups. For instance, when a certain intervention modality requires group
                             members to have a certain level of literacy, but certain historically excluded groups,
                             such as Dalits or women, do not meet the criteria, then such provisions defy the very
                             goal of ensuring inclusion in interventions.

                              “In my opinion, I haven’t seen any Dalits getting the opportunity of working as vol-
                              unteer because there is no education among the backward groups... Volunteers are only
                              from the educated family.” – VDC Stakeholder, AFSP

                          •	 Marginalized groups may not participate or speak up due to socio-economic fac-
                             tors: During the process of beneficiary selection, marginalized groups may not ac-
                             tively participate or voice their opinions given their low-level of empowerment and
                             economic opportunity costs. Therefore, extra effort must be taken to ensure margin-
                             alized groups’ constraints are thoroughly considered in planning information ses-
                             sions or beneficiary selection in villages.

                              “… the poor people and marginalized are suppressed and silenced. They do not want to
                              speak up. They don’t have enough to eat. They have bigger things to worry about; why
                              would they want to go and listen to speeches?” – Coach from a terai district, SHD Project

                          •	 Rollout of interventions in multiple phases can help increase coverage in areas
                             with large or dense population. Such rollouts can be based on settlements, priority
                             groups, or operational considerations and can help resolve possible conflicts or ob-
                             jections from community members who are concerned about being excluded from
                             the project.

                          Targeting- Blanket Approach versus Selective Targeting
                          One of the most contentious issues in beneficiary selection is the choice between a blan-
                          ket approach (covering everyone in a project location) and selective targeting (covering
                          only those people in-need in a project location). Malnutrition with multi factor causes
                          and requiring interventions at various stages of human life cycle possesses a challenge
                          while selecting beneficiaries. This issue arises especially when the project intends to pro-
                          vide certain amenities (cash, in-kinds, etc) to people to change their behavioral practices
                          for better nutrition.

                          Selection of beneficiaries could depend on the nature of interventions. Blanket approach
                          is appropriate to addresses risk factors that are community-wide, e.g., open defecation
                          practices, or society-held misguided belief systems. Selective targeting is usually prac-
                          ticed when a risk factor is concentrated in certain economic groups e.g. poor households
                          which are food insecure. However, whether to adopt a blanket approach or selective tar-
                          geting also depends on geographical spread of the risk factor for which an intervention
                          is designed and marginal cost of operations. Selective targeting would involve the cost
                          of identification of the beneficiaries and if the risk factor in consideration is spread over
                          multiple locations, then the marginal cost of interventions might increase.
                                                   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   21




In community-driven projects, like the SHD Project which provided amenities to peo-
ple, there was a strong resistance from people such as those who were not poor or are
from “higher” castes or who were not selected for the benefits. This sort of attitudes in
the community hampers smooth implementation of activities. Sometimes it might be
more convenient to include all the beneficiaries (like pregnant and lactating women,
children under two years, etc) irrespective of their income status or castes considering
the high opportunity cost of resistance from hostile community participants.

Recommendations
•	 Given the resource constraints, targeting should be strategically planned. One
   should make use of all the information available to narrow down the geographical
   location of intervention, and further identify spatial orientation of risk factors and
   risk groups within that location. In the dearth of relevant information at the inter-
   vention area, a prior survey or formative research will be helpful in designing an
   effective methodology for beneficiary targeting.
•	 One can select beneficiaries within a framework, for example, intervention for the
   first 1,000 days, or for households with under-five children, adolescents, or preg-
   nant and lactating mothers. Conflicts and challenges can be avoided if interventions
   cover an entire autonomous administrative unit. For example, one should use a dis-
   trict-wide (or Local Government-wide) or province-wide approach and select bene-
   ficiaries irrespective of their income status or whether they are marginalized or not.
   If resources are limited, interventions should be implemented in phases in different
   autonomous administrative units.

3.3 Investment Mechanism

3.3.1 Financing Sources
Nepal uses a range of financing mechanisms to implement nutrition interventions. The
mechanism depends on various factors, such as the objective and type of nutrition inter-
ventions, the number and nature of target beneficiaries, and the scale of coverage across
geographic areas and districts. The four primary categories of financing mechanisms
used in Nepal are described below.
•	 Development partners financed large-scale interventions using the government’s
   financial system: The European Union through UNICEF finances nutrition-spe-
   cific interventions by partnering with the MOH and other all relevant ministries
   including MOFALD, MOE, MOWSS and MOWCSW and their line agencies. The
   World Bank had financed a separate nutrition project, the SHD Project, through the
   MOFALD. Other donors that have financed nutrition-related programs in Nepal are
   DFID, DFAT, WFP, FAO, and ADB.
•	 Development partners financed large-scale interventions using their own finan-
   cial system. USAID has financed Suaahara, SABAL, Pahal, and KISAN (Feed the
   Future) Projects. Those projects are implemented through international NGOs, in-
   cluding Save the Children, HKI and FHI 360, which are selected through competi-
   tive bidding.
22   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                          •	 Government financed large-scale interventions using its revenue resources: The
                             GON has directly invested its own revenue in nutrition-specific and nutrition-sen-
                             sitive activities through various line ministries and agencies. For instance, the Nu-
                             trition Section of Child Health Division of Department of Health Services supports
                             micronutrient supplementation, therapeutic feeding, supplementary feeding, op-
                             timum breastfeeding, complementary feeding, and responsive feeding practices.
                             Since 2015, the MOF has been contributing funds to implement the government’s
                             MSNP through the MOH and MOFALD.
                          •	 Other organizations financed small-scale interventions: Some small-scale, stand-
                             alone interventions are financed by NGOs. ACF with the help of UNICEF has sup-
                             ported Saptari District in managing acute malnutrition.

                          Some projects directly contribute to the government’s budget and use government fi-
                          nancing systems, as described above. Whereas some projects use partially separate or
                          completely separate financing systems. Nutrition interventions implemented solely
                          through government’s traditional line-item annual budgeting include the MOH’s own
                          nutrition-specific activities, the World Bank financed Sunaula Hazar Din–Community
                          Action for Nutrition Project, AFSP, Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project, and the
                          Government’s MSNP. UNICEF also primarily finances through on-budget programs
                          which also includes direct payment method. Other donor-funded programs like Suaa-
                          hara have also contributed through an on-budget direct funding modality to districts
                          through relevant line agencies. Suaahara has funds for its project via off-treasury mech-
                          anism too. Suaahara has channeled some of its funds through competitively selected
                          NGOs and partner organizations. USAID projects, such as KISAN, adhere to USAID’s
                          financial and procurement policies, and fund-flow occurs to competitively selected
                          firms.

                          Activities financed through government systems depend solely on the timing of the
                          spending authorization received by the implementing units from the center to the local
                          levels. If the implementing unit is a community, as happens in a community-driven
                          project, it appears that the community receives funds only towards the latter half of
                          the fiscal year. The delay in receiving funding can happen anywhere at various levels
                          of government. Even if the budget is announced on time, the program approval takes
                          time before the central implementing agency obtains the funds to spend. If donors have
                          committed the funds, then the central government might not release the funds to the
                          project if reimbursement by the donors has not been made to the treasury for the previ-
                          ous fiscal year’s expenditures. Donors reimburse the expenditures only on the premise
                          that financial transactions have been accounted for. At the local levels, frequent transfers
                          of officials and inadequate attention could lead to delays in funding allocations. At the
                          level of communities, if the financial transactions and reporting do not comply with the
                          set standard, then a further delay of fund flows could occur. The more layers of approval
                          within the government, the more delays in the funding flow. Projects like SHD suffered
                          such setbacks due to funding delays.

                          Nutrition projects that do not use the government financial system did not suffer fund-
                          ing delays.
                                                   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   23




Recommendations
•	 It is essential to minimize the layers of funding flow for a project or any activity
   within the system. Financial accountability should be the responsibility of the units
   that receive the spending authorization.
•	 It is essential that timely financial compliance is maintained by the implementing
   agencies to get reimbursement of expenditures committed by donors.
•	 For a community-driven project, it is essential that a central unit approves the pro-
   posals and releases funds directly to the communities. Communities have very
   minimal capacity to follow bureaucratic processes of documenting technical and
   financial reports. Such processes at the community level generate exhaustion and
   disinterest for the project. Communities need to be made accountable for the money
   they receive but not at the cost of complying with complex bureaucratic processes.

3.3.2 Financing Modalities
The nutrition and food security projects in Nepal employ a range of financing modali-
ties to carry out activities and achieve the stated objectives. The modalities can be cat-
egorized in three broad domains, namely input-based financing, safety-net financing,
and results-based financing. The chart below illustrates each modality, with descrip-
tions, assessments, and learning based on experiences in Nepal.


Input-based financing
Under this modality, the assumption is that the desired outcomes will automatically follow from providing
better inputs and processes. How results are achieved depends on the correct sequence of activities elaborat-
ed in the logical framework from inputs to outcomes, and provided no external unfortunate events occur that
would negatively affect the results. Implementers are accountable for inputs but not results. For reporting,
implementers use indicators such as coverage of inputs, e.g., households reached, mothers counseled on
exclusive breastfeeding, number of children suffering from severe acute malnutrition receiving treatment.
Examples: The funds have mainly financed           Learnings:
specific inputs to implement nutrition-specific •	 This modality is more suitable to finance interventions
and nutrition-sensitive interventions, including      with reliable assumptions of theory of change, i.e., spec-
communications strategy, and monitoring and           ified activities will result in certain outcomes.
evaluation. Some examples include:                 •	 Since the fund is not contingent on the outcomes, the
•	 Purchase micronutrients, complementary             modality is less suitable for more complex implementa-
   food, supplementary and therapeutic food           tion interventions or a change process.
•	 Support homestead gardens to grow vita-
   min-rich food
•	 Invest in health infrastructure to increase ac-
   cess to quality health services
•	 Support initiatives in Water, Sanitation and
   Hygiene (WASH), reproductive health, and
   women’s empowerment
24   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




 Results-based financing
 In this modality, the financing decision is made based on the anticipated results or outcomes of the activities
 in a logical framework. Several types of this financing modality are implemented in Nepal. They can be cate-
 gorized as (a) conditional grants (b) semi-conditional grants, and (c) performance-based incentives. Some of
 the common conditions with results-based financing elements in Nepal are cited below.

 Conditional grants
 •	 Food / Cash for Work: The Additional Fi-              Learnings:
    nancing of Social Safety Nets Project (SSNP)          •	 There were recurring delays in the MOFALD’s funds
    implemented by the MOFALD sought (as                     release for the Social Safety Nets Project (SSNP). How-
    one of its objectives) to improve the pop-               ever, in food/cash for work, such delays were not seen
    ulation’s access to nutritious food in food              due to direct transfers to a WFP subsidiary to deliver
    insecure districts.  The main activity con-              foods, thereby increasing efficiency. Similarly, in re-
    ducted to meet this objective was engaging               mote areas, switching from food delivery to providing
    the community in infrastructure works such               cash grants for labor work was easier to manage and
    as construction of rural roads, irrigation               reduced logistics (World Bank, 2015).
    systems, flood control, soil conservation,            •	 Globally, Conditional Cash transfers given to house-
    and by providing livelihoods and agricul-                holds for adopting certain health care practices and
    ture-focused activities. Given the difficulty            nutrition behaviour have generally shown good results
    of delivering food to remote areas, and the              but are usually contingent upon the nature of “condi-
    recognition that in some food insecure dis-              tioning” and the quality of services (Marie M. Gaarder,
    tricts, food was available in the market, the            2010) (Jef L. Leroy, 2009).
    modality switched from in-kind to a cash              •	 Conditional grants provide a “check” on the quality
    grants modality (World Bank, 2010).                      and results of activities, which can have a positive effect
                                                             when they incentivize a community to perform.
                                                          •	 Strong monitoring and accountability mechanisms
                                                             must be established to assess whether the conditions
                                                             have been adequately met to approve grants.
 Semi-conditional grants for beneficiaries (demand-side)
 •	 Grants for awareness event attendance: Learnings:
    The World Bank’s pilot project Community •	 A randomized evaluation found that providing cash
    Challenge Fund provides cash transfers to       grants to mothers who participated in nutrition infor-
    mothers for attending nutrition awareness       mation sessions had substantially improved knowl-
    programs. The cash transfers are intended       edge about practices to improve maternal and nutri-
    for the mothers to put into practice their      tional health and resulted in small gains in children’s
    new knowledge about nutrition. The only         cognitive development (Levere, 2016).
    condition for receiving the transfer is for the
    mother to attend the information session
    and not based on the actual result of change
    in nutrition practices or behaviors.
 •	 Small grants for agriculture: The AFSP pro-
    vided small grants to farmer groups with
    the goal of the farmers increasing their pro-
    duction of nutritious foods, such as by con-
    structing better irrigation systems.
                                                   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   25




Performance-based incentives for health service providers (supply side)
•	 Health facility incentives: Maternity incen- Learnings:
   tive Aama Program has provided perfor- •	 The lessons from the Aama Program can be used for
   mance-based incentives to health workers.      nutrition-focused programs, with possible application
   Such incentives have been gaining popular-     in malnutrition surveillance, treatment, raising aware-
   ity to improve access to health services, par- ness, and incentivizing agriculture and veterinary ser-
   ticularly by providing payments to health      vice providers at the local level.
   facility workers for conducting institutional
   deliveries.
•	 Community worker incentives: Instead of
   receiving a direct salary, FCHVs are often in-
   centivized to carry out their activities based
   on the number of referrals or by partici-
   pating in community health campaigns or
   learning events.
Welfare Financing
The modality seeks to provide welfare support to those most vulnerable to malnutrition.
•	 Cash transfer: Since fiscal year 2010, MO- Learnings:
   FALD has been providing cash transfers to •	 An increase in the cash grant benefit would lead to de-
   children under five in the districts of Karnali cline in the prevalence of underweight and severe wast-
   zone and to poor Dalits all over the country.   ing.
   Children under five—up to a maximum of •	 There are constraints and challenges to this modality,
   two per household—receive NPR 200 per           such as the low level of benefit, low coverage among un-
   child per month. Although the cash grant is     der-two children, and delay in cash delivery (UNICEF,
   unconditional, the objective of this program    2016).
   was specifically related to improving nutri-
   tion.
•	 Unconditional in-kind transfer: Some com-
   munities vulnerable to food insecurity and
   malnutrition are provided with in-kind
   goods, such as agricultural tools, seeds, and
   fertilizers, to help grow vegetables to im-
   prove their dietary intake.


Recommendations
•	 While there is no one best modality, due consideration should be given to the capacity of the implementing
   agency and the existing accountability mechanism for the modalities to ensure that money is used for the
   purpose intended.

3.4 Institutional Modality

3.4.1 Institutional Arrangements in Government-Implemented Projects
Even among Government-run projects, the institutional arrangements vary. The institutional modality to de-
liver nutrition programs is contingent on the prior institutional structure and the additional infrastructure and
human resources needed to implement certain activities.
26   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                          Some sectoral ministries may have the correct institutional structure from the central to
                          the community levels to deliver nutrition-related interventions. For example, in Nepal,
                          the MOH implements nutrition-specific interventions through its Department of Health
                          Services and its divisions (CHD and FHD). The nutrition-specific services are delivered
                          through the MOH’s health facilities, including hospitals, primary health care centers,
                          and health posts. Female Community Health Volunteers (FCHVs) are also actively in-
                          volved in the delivery process in the communities. Although the MOH’s health system
                          is fairly equipped to deliver such services, donors like UNICEF, USAID, UNFPA, and
                          WFP with their technical and financial support enhance its capacity.

                          The MOAD operates agricultural programs through its various agencies, including the
                          Department of Agriculture, the Department of Food Technology and Quality Control,
                          the Nepal Agriculture and Research Council, and local structures, including the District
                          Agricultural Development Office. There are also community extension workers called
                          Junior Technical Assistants (JTAs). Other agencies, external to the Government’s struc-
                          ture, like FAO, have also been involved in providing technical backstopping to imple-
                          ment agriculture projects like the AFSP.

                          The Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development implements its programs
                          through District Development Committees (DDCs) and Village Development Commit-
                          tees (VDCs). Under its Local Governance and Community Development Program, the
                          ministry also has social mobilizers working in the communities to create awareness of
                          civic rights and duties, to inform people about government services and facilities, and
                          to help communities with economic development opportunities.

                          In the following section, different institutional modalities are examined which are used
                          across central, district, and local levels by three World Bank funded projects that use the
                          Government’s structure. The chart below provides the general types of modalities in the
                          Government system.


                            Central                               District/Village/Municipality   Local

                              l	 Shared management unit            District Offices                 Extension Workers
                                                                   l	 MOFALD: LDO,                  l	 Social mobilizers, Coaches
                              l	 Dedicated management unit         l	 MOAD: DADO, DLSO              l	 JTA / JT
                                                                   l	 MOH: DHO / DPHO,              l	FCHV

                                                                   District Committees              Community Groups
                                                                   l	DDC                            l	 Mothers’ Group
                                                                   l	DADC                           l	Community-based
                                                                   l	NFSSC                             organizations
                                                                                                    l	 Farmers’ Groups
                                                                   Village Committees               l	 User Groups
                                                                   l	VDC
                                                                   l	VNFSSC
                                                     STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   27




Central-Level Management Arrangement
The institutional arrangements for a project management unit (PMU) at the central level
can be classified into two categories: (1) shared implementation unit, in which PMU
staff are engaged in multiple projects; and (2) dedicated implementation unit, in which
PMU staff are engaged full-time in the project. The chart below compares the two cate-
gories in more detail:


Shared management unit The project is led by a PMU consisting of ministry staff, who share their time
e.g., SHD Project, MSNP with other tasks. The SHD Project was implemented by staff from the Local
                        Body Support Section of the MOFALD, which was also involved in imple-
                        menting the MSNP. The Local Body Support Section has other responsibilities
                        besides implementing nutrition projects.

                              Points to consider:
                              •	 PMU staff are often overburdened by their other shared responsibilities
                                 and may not provide the time required for the concerned project.
                              •	 Such an arrangement in the PMU calls for hiring dedicated staff to oversee
                                 the project early during project implementation. To support MSNP imple-
                                 mentation, the MOFALD has recently been hiring technical expertise for
                                 the central government as well as in the districts, with UNICEF’s support.
Dedicated management          The project is led by a PMU or a section consisting of ministry staff who either
unit or section, e.g.,        are hired full-time or are present full-time to oversee projects. In AFSP, the
AFSP, Nutrition Section       Joint Secretary led the project with officers supporting various project func-
of Child Health Division      tions, such as administration, M&E, finance, and so on. Another example is
                              the dedicated staff of the Nutrition Section of the Child Health Division in the
                              Ministry of Health, which has the sole responsibility of executing the nutri-
                              tion-specific interventions per their mandate.

                              Points to consider:
                              •	 This allows the team to function with fewer interruptions, and they can
                                 therefore dedicate their time fully to the assigned project or activities.


District and Local Implementation Arrangement
It is essential that the central ministries have adequate infrastructure and human re-
sources to implement their respective activities at the district and local levels, including
among villages and the communities. In this section, different management arrange-
ments are reviewed at the district and local levels for key government ministries in-
volved in nutrition and food security interventions.

The following chart assesses necessary capabilities for project implementation or Tri-
ple-As, that is Ability, Authority, and Acceptance at various levels.
28   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                   Ability
 District level For new projects, the project implementers must receive proper orientation and institute a
                   mechanism to transfer knowledge for new staff because district officials share responsibili-
                   ties across multiple tasks.

                   If districts have platforms working on similar issues, it is essential to use that platform for
                   program implementation. AFSP used the collaborative platform of the District Agriculture
                   Development Committee. The SHD Project utilized a newly created structure for implemen-
                   tation, the District Nutrition and Food Security Committee, which was mandated by the
                   NPC. The new structure created confusion primarily because of a lack of orientation, and
                   secondly, due to the sheer number of members on the committee, it was difficult to convene.

                   “…if there is a gap in the veterinary, then there is lack in one part. And if there is a gap in agriculture,
                   then we will not have the expected outcome in nutrition; or if the health lags behind, then the outcome
                   will not be as expected.” District Official, SHD project

                   Dedicating time for project monitoring is a major challenge. Some of the reasons given
                   include having limited time for field visits due to multiple meetings at headquarters, the
                   remoteness and difficulty of reaching villages, and logistical and accommodation challenges
                   in villages.

                   Providing dedicated human resources helps to relieve the workload from existing district
                   officials and allows for focused and efficient project implementation. In the AFSP project,
                   such provisions were built into the project early by outsourcing to FAO. Whereas for the
                   SHD Project, district coordinators and assistants were hired very late after the project was
                   implemented.
 Village level     Thoroughly assess the capacity and time availability of VDC staff to take on the project
                   activities. Given the human resource constraints, members of one VDC are responsible for
                   overseeing the work of multiple nearby VDCs. VDC secretaries are often absent from the
                   village, thereby hampering the project implementation. In such cases, outsourcing the super-
                   visory and monitoring functions would be essential from the start.

                   Points to consider while outsourcing: The government should ensure outsourced firms/NGOs
                   are accountable to contractual obligations and paid for verified results.
                                               STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   29




Community Community workers, social mobilizers, and community groups act as a bridge between the
level     communities and the service providers. Their strong development capabilities are critical
              for the smooth operation of projects. The following points should be emphasized: (a) the
              initial training should be in a language familiar to the community groups, that is Nepali or
              local dialects should be used for instructions or discussions. And the training should engage
              participants in practical situations, for example demonstrations, group work, and expert
              observations; (b) inception field training should involve close observation and support by
              supervisors to ensure acceptable performance as the community groups begin to work in the
              field; (c) routine quality monitoring and refreshers should review the quality of proposals,
              reports, and process-level outputs of the individual workers; and (d) peer-to-peer learning
              between high-performing and low-performing workers can also help to boost practical skills
              and the confidence of the workers to improve their performance.

              If communities must follow strict government rules to spend their grant money, the com-
              munity members’ capacity should be built so they clearly understand the regulations. Com-
              munities were frustrated when they were unable to receive subsequent installments because
              they failed to follow government financial transaction rules. In SHD Project, accounting and
              record-keeping were insufficient, resulting in inefficient processing of proposals.

              Using existing community structures like farmers’ groups, mothers’ groups, FCHVs, and
              JTAs simplifies implementation. Although additional human resources may be necessary
              at times to supplement their activities. SHD project and AFSP hired coaches and JTAs re-
              spectively at some cost. There was some turnover of coaches in SHD project. In AFSP, a high
              turnover of JT / JTAs resulted in the project losing trained labor and therefore, additional
              time was devoted to re-recruitment of staff. A major reason for the high turnover of staff is
              the low salary paid to coaches or JTAs by the firms that selected them. The firms are selected
              by a competitive bidding process, which usually awards the contract to the firm with the
              lowest bid. With a low working budget, the firms pay low salaries to JT / JTAs to fulfill the
              terms of the contract. To resolve this problem, the contracting process should specify, and if
              possible enforce, a competitive salary for field staff.
30   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                     Authority
 District Level      If the district officials are responsible for oversight and accountability, the project or program
 / Central level     needs to dedicate more authority to the districts for decision-making and problem-solving. In
                     AFSP, such provisions helped to resolve implementation issues and challenges more effective-
                     ly. Even though such mechanisms were ensured in the SHD project, the ability of the authori-
                     ties to make decisions were lacking.

                     There are allegations at times of abuse of authority which might be difficult to prove but project
                     should have some mechanism to address those risks.

                     “When we went to collect money, officials at the DDC deducted 20 percent of the allocated fund and….”
                     – RRNI Team Member, SHD

                     If cross-sectoral collaboration is necessary, then a clear plan for cross-sectorial collaboration by
                     the different line agencies needs to be established to increase ownership of the activities and
                     shared objectives. The SHD Project had clearly missed it as at the level of communities, a com-
                     prehensive plan for collaboration was not there. In AFSP, the MOAD had to collaborate with
                     the MOH to deliver nutrition-specific programs. The MOH was clearly given authority and
                     resources to provide such support throughout the project.
 Village level       At the village level, issues of oversight and accountability are the same, but depends on what
                     functions can be delegated to the village level based on the existing capacity.

                     If the village level acts only as a “post-office” to channel funds to the communities, then there
                     might be rent-seeking behavior as observed in the study. For instance, in some cases, govern-
                     ment agencies allegedly sought a commission for approving proposals, advised against certain
                     types of projects, or suggested adjusting the beneficiary selection.

                     “Officials coming to the VDC said that they would not put any stamps on the paper if that 2 percent is
                     not given to them.” – RRNI Team member, SHD
 Community           For community-driven activities, it is essential that communities receive adequate resources
 level               through direct channels and are given the authority to make course corrections in their work
                     plan and to counteract unforeseen circumstances. People appreciate when the majority of re-
                     sources goes directly the community’s bank accounts. They are given full authority to mobilize
                     their funds based on project agreements.

                     Local political parties sometimes interfere with communities’ authority to implement projects,
                     but the interference can often be countered through broad-based community discussions and
                     transparency in the decision-making process.

                     “Local political parties demanded [money] from us, saying they want a share of the project fund.”– Com-
                     munity member, AFSP
                                         STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   31




                  Acceptance
District level    Acceptance is increased if district implementers are involved in project prepa-
                  ration, planning, and implementation. It seems that officials are comfortable
                  working with existing structures, rather than creating a new one.

                  The collaborative platform of the District Agriculture Development Committee
                  (DADC) was valued by district stakeholders in the AFSP. DADC had repre-
                  sentation from agriculture, forestry, irrigation, and livestock agencies, which
                  collaborated to improve the planning and decision-making process.

                  Acceptance is also enhanced if local level cross-sectoral agencies are engaged
                  early in the project for effective collaboration and cooperation. The SHD Project
                  suffered initial setbacks because sectoral agencies at the local levels were not
                  accepting of the project.
Village level /   Proper orientation and explanations are required to counter initial skepti-
Community level   cism and reluctance by communities to participate. The sensitization session
                  must clearly explain the benefits of the program and emphasize that the project
                  is for the people from the GON.

                  Incentives for participation must be balanced with objectives of participa-
                  tion. In agricultural training programs, implementers indicated that farmers
                  are often motivated by allowances and food, rather than the information that
                  the project provides. They also emphasized the importance of considering the
                  contextual differences to determine the amount of incentives, such as cost of
                  food in remote versus urban areas.

                  Most FCHVs expect to receive incentives for their support to health programs
                  and for attending trainings and seminars. However, they also seem to value the
                  learning opportunity and chance to help people in villages.

                  “It would be great if they could provide one or two thousand rupees a month. It would
                  be very helpful. We cannot ask for a 20,000 salary. It’s not easy for us. If the government
                  could assist us a bit. We must roam around on an empty stomach. It would be really
                  helpful if the government could provide us with lunch, at least.” – FCHV, Jumla

                  “Even though there was no money in it, it was an opportunity to travel around my
                  village, to serve the people and children, and learn new things. I thought this was more
                  important than money. I learned so many things, new skills.” – FCHV, Dadeldhura
32   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                          3.4.2 Nongovernment Partnerships
                          Partnerships with nongovernment entities, such as INGOs, NGOs or private firms, are
                          crucial for procuring services and support in implementing nutrition interventions. This
                          study shows that nongovernment partnerships can be procured through the govern-
                          ment system, from outside the government system, or with external resources.

                          The World Bank funded projects, such as SHD and AFSP utilize the government pro-
                          curement process to select NGOs and firms for delivering specific services during imple-
                          mentation. SHD, for instance, partnered with three National Service Providers (NSPs)
                          or NGOs, which were responsible for hiring coaches and district-level supervisors to
                          support the project. AFSP also partnered with FAO to implement food security and
                          nutrition interventions. The USAID funded Suaahara Project and SABAL Project sup-
                          ported many nutrition interventions. Funding agencies’ systems were used to procure
                          such services. The NGO selection process faced hurdles from political pressures, and
                          the resulting delay in selection was more prominent when the government selected the
                          services. The performance of some of the selected NGOs hired through the government
                          system and partners’ systems was not acceptable since they were not paying their staff
                          salaries and performing their required duties. It appeared that the NGOs had bid quite
                          low to win the contracts and later they could not perform very well.

                          USAID-financed nutrition projects, which are aligned to the government’s MSNP, are
                          mainly delivered through various partner organizations that were competitively hired
                          through a bidding process by consortiums of competitively selected international orga-
                          nizations. A mix of local and national NGOs engaged for different purposes and exper-
                          tise enhanced Suaahara’s implementation of activities.

                          Although the MOH has an institutional structure to deliver nutrition-specific interven-
                          tions, technical agencies like UNICEF and UNFPA support the MOH with budgetary
                          and extra-budgetary allocations for human resources and with technical inputs for
                          quality implementation. Partners like HKI and Save the Children receive funding from
                          USAID for nutrition-related programs to support the MOH by strengthening the in-
                          stitutional capacity of the ministry to execute nutrition programs with technical sup-
                          port. Suaahara II nutrition and health related activities are also reflected in the red book
                          (on-budget) of the MOF.

                          3.4.3 Cooperation, coordination, collaboration, and partnerships
                          Successfully achieving multisectoral nutrition results depends on the effectiveness of
                          cooperation, coordination, and collaboration of different line agencies working togeth-
                          er towards a common goal. Ensuring mutual accountability for a multisector outcome
                          depends on how responsibilities are shared and whether individual agencies have the
                          authority and resources to execute their assigned tasks. The following research findings
                          well illustrate this concept.

                          The MOFALD implemented the SHD Project with the expectation that other line agen-
                          cies would be coordinating and cooperating during the implementation of community
                                                           STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   33




projects. While cooperation and coordination was deemed necessary for the success of
the project, the communities could not garner the necessary support in the manner en-
visaged. Firstly, the different implementing line agencies did not have the authority and
resources to oversee the project. Secondly, many communities chose sub-projects related
to small household constructions like latrines, chicken coops, bio-sand filters, improved
cooking stoves, and handwashing and sanitation stations, which communities felt they
could construct without consultations.

Soliciting coordination for activities was left to the community level. At some places,
the communities did consult local line agencies, such as the livestock office for vaccina-
tion-related matters, and the FCHVs and local health workers for health-related matters.
However, activities requiring innovative mechanisms from relevant line agencies con-
cerning behavior changes related to breastfeeding and complementary feeding practic-
es, adolescent and sexual reproductive health, early marriage, and delayed pregnancy
were not effectively implemented.

The SHD project incorporated a user group mechanism similar to the one used by the
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (RWSS) Project funded by World Bank and imple-
mented by the Water Fund Board. The RWSS project community (users’ committees)
participated in selecting and managing projects, and the Fund Board financed suitable
projects. The SHD Project formed a new kind of user group known as the RRNI team,
which dissolved after each subproject implementation. Intra-community coordination
depended on social structure and social cohesiveness. In the terai, the level of trust
among the communities was much lower than in the hills. As a result, more conflicts
occurred in terai communities during project implementation. RRNI teams were new to
the communities. The inhabitants viewed them with suspicion and feared they would
steal the money that was allocated to the communities. The conflicts revolved around
the targeting mechanisms and were also due to interference by the political parties.

    “There was some conflict, like why is it only focused on the poor people and not on the
    rich people. They are also pregnant, they are also the lactating mothers, but we tried and
    convinced them. The people from the party also created the conflict. They complained of
    selecting only some people; then we held a meeting calling the party representatives and
    ward citizen forum and convinced them that the program is for the targeted people, and
    the targeted people are not only the poor people.” – Coach, SHD

    “Objections do arise as there are several political parties involved. The parties complain
    that their people are not selected. The selection process is satisfactory; however, the polit-
    ical parties create problems if their people are not selected, which leads to shortcomings.”
    – VDC Official, SHD

    “It was difficult to convince the target group. This problem was much created by local
    political leaders. They have such a mentality that it [selection process] should be in their
    hands rather than in women’s. They were against this program because women were
    involved in it. Time and again they used to pressure the VDC.” – RRNI Team member,
    SHD
34   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                          In contrast, the MOAD, which implemented the AFSP, received cooperation and coordi-
                          nation from the MOH, and the relevant nutrition section of the MOH had the authority
                          and resources to implement their share of activities. The MOH used its health facilities
                          and human resources, including the FCHV, to implement nutrition-specific activities.
                          The AFSP uses mothers groups’ forums and farmers groups’ forums to implement such
                          activities at the community level. Those forums have existed for some time. The coordi-
                          nation among the members of the groups was highly effective.

                          Recommendations
                          •	 To ensure effective collaboration with various sectors, a project or program should
                             define upfront the shared responsibilities with clear provisions for authority and
                             resources to execute those responsibilities. It is essential to give adequate authority
                             and resources to different sectors if their input is required in certain nutrition in-
                             terventions. Collaboration between sectors without empowering them with proper
                             authority and the required resources does not produce the desired results. Results
                             are better if sectors are tasked with responsibilities related to their own sectors and
                             not otherwise, meaning nutrition interventions should be planned multisectorally
                             but implemented sectorally.

                          3.4.4 Monitoring and Evaluation
                          Monitoring nutrition interventions can be difficult without adequate human resource
                          with optimal capacity. This study shows that various nutrition programs in Nepal have
                          addressed human resources differently, indicating that monitoring in some programs
                          was better than in others.

                          Donor-financed and managed INGOs hired local NGOs to implement nutrition in-
                          terventions for their programs. The Suaahara Project partnered with four INGOs and
                          worked with 45 local NGOs. The project had a detailed annual implementation plan
                          with fund flows and work plans that facilitated effective self-monitoring and reporting
                          of the activities. Regular implementation support visits, including joint visits with gov-
                          ernment’s relevant persons and feedback, also helped to solve problems. The project
                          has a database of reporting mechanisms from the periphery to the center. The Suaahara
                          Project manager hired International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) to conduct
                          baseline and end-line evaluations of the program.

                          The MOAD implemented the AFSP and had active District Supporting Units as well as
                          technical specialists. The ministry also contracted JTAs hired by NGOs, which were con-
                          tracted by FAO, to monitor their project activities. Other supporting government agen-
                          cies involved in AFSP, like the DFTQC and Nepal Agriculture Research Council, mon-
                          itored their own activities and reported to the MOAD’s central project implementation
                          unit. Approximately 450 additional staff were contracted for project implementation.
                          In addition, Government staff were also involved in implementation. Joint supervision
                          visits to the sites by the ministry were done together with the World Bank at least twice
                          a year. AFSP staff worked on digitizing monitoring tools, but they are not yet quite oper-
                          ational. The contracted NGOs paid lower level project staff inadequate salaries, leading
                          to high staff turnover, which affected project implementation and monitoring.
                                                          STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   35




The World Bank is conducting a rigorous impact evaluation of the AFSP with a phased-
in approach. Late starter VDCs waited two and a half years to participate in the project,
which only lasted five years. The late starting VDCs acted as counterfactuals for the
impact evaluation. There were field-level concerns as to why some VDCs were not in-
cluded in the project. A midline survey had to be done before the late starter VDCs could
be included in the project. Nonetheless, a delay in the MOH’s implementation of its
nutrition component further delayed the project implementation with the late starting
VDCs. The Government complained that the phased-in evaluation modality hampered
disbursements and raised conflicts in the field since the beneficiaries were unaware of
the evaluation design.

Monitoring of The SHD Project appeared weak until the last year of the project. The
project management team was composed of 4–5 government staff and three contracted
staff at the central level, one of which one was a procurement specialist. The govern-
ment staff was also involved in managing other projects. A civil servant in each district
was designated as a focal person to help implement and monitor the project. However,
the district focal person had many other responsibilities beside the SHD Project. Three
NGOs hired to implement and monitor the project did not perform their duties as ex-
pected. The project tried to digitize monitoring software, but it was not functional due
to the lack of human resources. During the last year of the project, the ministry had an
additional 35 contractual project staff, which strengthened the field-level monitoring
and reporting.

    “...the structure in the district needs to look after a lot of projects simultaneously, moni-
    toring cannot be done, which you know. It is also weak from the monitoring aspect. We ex-
    pected the NSP to see all these [weaknesses] but the performance of the NSP wasn’t good.”

The SHD Project also received a rigorous impact evaluation designed by the World
Bank. It also had a phased-in approach with half of the project VDCs receiving benefits
earlier (“early starters”) than the other half (“late starters”). The “late starters” VDCs
were acting as counterfactuals for two and half years without the project. The concerns
were similar to those of the AFSP as explained above.

This research study shows that unless everyone involved in implementing the project is
accountable for their areas of responsibilities and systematically monitoring outcomes,
the project may not achieve its intended objectives. The Suaahara Project has established
a dashboard to monitor every activity based on the annual work plan, and supervisors
are actively engaged in monitoring. This monitoring system seems to work very well for
timely implementation and response to issues.

While rigorous impact evaluation is necessary to generate data, this should be done
without compromising project implementation and making beneficiaries wait for ex-
tended periods to be included during a five-year project while data is gathered. Project
implementers and beneficiaries complained about the implementation delays for the
SHD Project and the AFSP.
36   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                          Recommendations
                          •	 Each sector should have adequate human resources and relevant technical expertise
                             to design and implement effective monitoring and evaluation systems. If the neces-
                             sary capacity does not exist, adequate services should be procured as soon as possi-
                             ble. Annual work plans should be detailed and implementation should be regularly
                             monitored to reflect progress and achievements on a dashboard for everyone to see.
                             This ensures transparency, accountability, and early identification of issues for the
                             management team to act on in a timely manner.
                          •	 If implementation and monitoring functions are outsourced to nongovernment part-
                             ners, whether NGOs or private firms, their accountability can be ensured by paying
                             for verified results.
                          •	 While rigorous impact evaluation is necessary to generate evidence, this should be
                             done without compromising project implementation and making beneficiaries wait
                             to be included in the project while data is gathered.

                          3.4.5 Institutional Arrangement Framework
                          The table below provides an assessment of four different types of possible institutional
                          arrangements, combining the operational aspects of implementing and financing nutri-
                          tion interventions.


        Technical                  Financing             Implementation
        Interventions              Management            Arrangement
 1      One Project,               Single Agency,        Single Agency  Pros                   Cons
        Multiple                   centrally             (with local    Financial              Coordination
        Interventions              financed              coordination)  management             difficulty with
                                   project                               and reporting is      different local-
        Example:                                                         less dependent        line agencies at
        •	 MOFALD implemented SHD Project with 15 different              on efficiency of      the community
           interventions.                                                other actors since    level due to
        •	 MOFALD received budget from MOF and was                       accountability        low incentives
           responsible for project’s technical and financial             rests with            including lack
           management.                                                   one single            of authority
        •	 MOFALD implemented the project through its own                implementing          for resource
           local bodies, DDCs and VDCs, with the help of its             agency. However,      management
           grassroots’ platforms like ward citizen’s forums and          the local bodies of
           citizen awareness centers. New community groups               the implementing      Technical quality
           were created to do projects around 15 areas. Funds were       agency have to        of interventions
           made available to the community groups.                       cooperate in the      is compromised
        •	 Technical coordination anticipated with other line-           entire process.       due to lack of
           agencies. Locally, other agencies are consulted or sought                           cooperation
           as per need, e.g., coach and community groups seek                                  from local line
           support from agriculture and livestock JTA or FCHV,                                 agencies
           DHO, DADO, DLO.
                                               STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   37




2   One Project,            Multiple,          Multiple              Pros                    Cons
    Multiple                centrally          Agencies           Individual line            Financial
    Interventions           financed           (through local-    agencies should            management can
                            project            level units)       supposedly be              be challenging
    Example:                                                      well equipped              when transfers
    •	 MOFALD and MOH implements Multi Sector Nutrition to implement                         happen to
       Plan, which has different sectoral interventions.          activities related to      different local
    •	 MOFALD and MOH receive budget from MOF and                 their own sector.          agencies.
       are responsible for project’s technical and financial
       management.                                                Technical quality          Harmonization of
    •	 MOFALD transfers funds to its local bodies (DDCs)          may be better              activities might
       to use for their own local plans and through its local     as individual              be difficult at
       bodies to other local line agencies, except health sector, ministries and             the community
       and helps to implement the district nutrition plans.       agencies are doing         level if one
    •	 MOH implements district plans through its local health what they are                  agency’s activity
       facilities.                                                supposed to do             is dependent on
                                                                                             the other
3   One Project,            Single Central     Multiple              Pros                    Cons
    Multiple                agency,            Agencies
                                                                     •	 Project man-         One agency
    Interventions           centrally          (through local-
                                                                        agement              which is
                            financed,          level units)
                                                                        accountability       responsible
                            but does
                                                                        rests on one         for overall
                            MOU with
                                                                        single agency        management
                            other central
                                                                     •	 Individual           is always at
                            agencies for
                                                                        line agencies        risk if the other
                            fund transfers
                                                                        should sup-          agencies do
    Example:
                                                                        posedly be           not cooperate
    •	 MOAD implements AFSP, which has both nutrition
                                                                        well equipped        and coordinate
       specific and nutrition sensitive interventions.
                                                                        to implement         properly
    •	 MOAD receives budget from MOF and is responsible
                                                                        activities relat-
       for entire project’s financial and technical management.
                                                                        ed to their own
    •	 MOAD does MOU with MOH for certain nutrition-spe-
                                                                        sector
       cific interventions and correspondingly transfers funds.
                                                                     •	 Technical
    •	 MOAD and MOH through their local units implement
                                                                        quality may
       their activities as laid down in the project.
                                                                        be better as
                                                                        individual
                                                                        ministries and
                                                                        agencies are
                                                                        doing what
                                                                        they are sup-
                                                                        posed to do
38   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




 4      Multiple Projects,         Multiple              Multiple          Pros               Cons
        Multiple                   Agencies,             Agencies                      Advantages of
                                                                           Easier to manage
        Interventions              centrally             (through local-   individual  complementarity
                                   financed              level units)      activities  brought in by
        •	   MOH runs community management of Acute Malnu-                             package of
             trition; MOAD runs village model farm and homestead Technical             interventions
             garden for diet diversity, or livelihood program.      quality is better  during the same
        •	   MOWSS runs a rural water supply program.               as individual      time frame in a
        •	   MOWCSW runs women’s empowerment and child              ministries and     locality is lost
             protection program.                                    agencies are doing as different
        •	   MOE runs parental education and the school’s nutrition what they are      interventions
             curriculum program, and the mid-day meal.              supposed to do     might come at
        •	   MOFALD runs cash or food transfer.                                        different times of
                                                                                       the year
4. Conclusion




M
          alnutrition has multiple causes and requires multisectoral efforts to reduce it.
          To achieve the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) of ending all forms of
          malnutrition by 2030—and in the context of scarce resources—due consider-
ation should be given to the following:

•	 Designing contextual interventions with matched supply-side and demand-side
   activities: It is important to thoroughly assess the demand-side considering com-
   munities’ level of awareness of food and nutrition situation and the cultural context.
   This might entail formative research in the geographical area of intervention. Sec-
   ond, the constraints and prospects also need be assessed from the perspective of sys-
   tems, markets and political environment to understand the supply-side readiness.
   Then one should design the best possible intervention which adequately matches
   the nutrition response to the demand of the communities.

•	 Targeting methods: For geographical targeting, one should use all the available in-
   formation to select appropriate locations. For the ease of administration and avoiding
   conflicts, one needs to consider adopting a district-wide (or local government-wide)
   approach rather than only selecting some villages/areas within those administrative
   units. In the communities, to avoid resistance from rich and high caste people, espe-
   cially if there are in-kind or cash transfers, one might consider providing benefits to
   all beneficiaries irrespective of their economic or caste status.

•	 Ensuring adequate financial compliance: One should consider minimizing the
   layers of approval mechanisms and fund flow to avoid rent seeking behavior. For
   community-driven projects, maintaining accounts with receipts and vouchers by the
   communities as per government norms might not be feasible given their limited
   capacity. However, communities can be made accountable by paying for verified
   results.

•	 Financing modalities: One should consider various options-input versus re-
   sults-based, conditional versus unconditional transfers and in-kind transfers-de-
   pending on the type of interventions and the target groups. Due consideration



                                                   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   39
40   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                              should be given to the capacity of the implementing agency and the existing ac-
                              countability mechanism when selecting a financial modality to ensure that money is
                              used for the purpose intended.

                          •	 Capacity and resource needs of the implementing agencies: It is important to pro-
                             vide adequate authority and resources to the sectoral agencies to implement activi-
                             ties. If adequate resources are given to all the sectoral agencies as well as the author-
                             ity, they are likely to cooperate and collaborate for producing a convergence effect
                             (i.e. concentrating different kinds of support in a particular area). Nongovernment
                             partners play an invaluable role by supporting the Government in program imple-
                             mentation, supervision, and monitoring, and by bringing in the technical knowl-
                             edge to reduce malnutrition in the country. Accountability for the proper use of
                             funds can be ensured by having a system to design and track work plans with a mix
                             of input-based and performance-based (results-based) financing.

                          •	 Sectoral implementation: One should ensure that the sectors implement activities
                             only for which they have a comparative advantage. By being engaged in such activ-
                             ities in the past, respective sectors would have the required capacity to implement
                             the interventions. For instance, the Ministry of Health is best at promoting breast-
                             feeding and complementary feeding, and the Ministry of Agriculture has an ad-
                             vantage in promoting homestead kitchen gardens. Whereas the Ministry of Federal
                             Affairs and Local Development could best implement cash and in-kind transfers for
                             food security and nutrition improvement.
5. Bibliography




Adhikari, J. (2008). Food Crisis in Karnali. A Historical and Political-economic Perspective.
    Martin Chautari.
Alderman, Harold; Behrman, Jere R.. 2006. “Reducing the incidence of low birth weight
    in low-income countries has substantial economic benefits”. The World Bank re-
    search observer. -- Vol. 21, no. 1 (Spring 2006), pp. 25-48. http://documents.world-
    bank.org/curated/en/348621468154166798/Reducing-the-incidence-of-low-birth-
    weight-in-low-income-countries-has-substantial-economic-benefits
Caulfield, Laura E., Victoria Elliot, Program in Human Nutrition, the Johns Hopkins
    Bloomberg School of Public Health, for SPRING. 2015. Nutrition of Adolescent Girls
    and Women of Reproductive Age in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: Current Context
    and Scientific Basis for Moving Forward. Arlington, VA: Strengthening Partnerships,
    Results, and Innovations in Nutrition Globally (SPRING) project.
Central Bureau of Statistics, National Planning Commission, World Food Program,
    World Bank, AusAID and UNICEF, Nepal. (2013). Thematic Report Food Security and
    Nutrition. Nepal Living Standard Survey III.
Jef L. Leroy , Marie Ruel & Ellen Verhofstadt (2009). The impact of conditional cash
    transfer programmes on child nutrition: a review of evidence using a programme
    theory framework, Journal of Development Effectiveness, 1:2, 103-129, DOI:
    10.1080/19439340902924043
Levere, Michael Benjamin; Acharya, Gayatri; Bharadwaj, Prashant. 2016. The role of
    information and cash transfers on early childhood development : evidence from Nepal.
    Policy Research working paper; no. WPS 7931; Impact Evaluation series. Wash-
    ington, D.C. : World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
    en/788751483028902307/The-role-of-information-and-cash-transfers-on-early-
    childhood-development-evidence-from-Nepal
Levinson, F. James, and Yarlini Balarajan, ‘Addressing Malnutrition Multisectorally:
    What have we learned from recent international experience?’, UNICEF Nutrition
    Working Paper, UNICEF and MDG Achievement Fund, New York, August 2013.
Marie M. Gaarder, Amanda Glassman and Jessica E. Todd (2010). Conditional cash
    transfers and health: unpacking the casual chain. Journal of Development Effectiveness,
    2(1), 6-50.



                                                     STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   41
42   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




                          Ministry of Health and Population (MOHP) [Nepal], New ERA, and ICF International
                             Inc. (2012). Nepal Demographic and Health Survey 2011. Kathmandu, Nepal: Minis-
                             try of Health and Population, New ERA, and ICF International, Calverton, Mary-
                             land. Retrieved March 13, 2017, from http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR257/
                             FR257[13April2012].pdf
                          Ministry of Health and Population (MOHP) [Nepal], New ERA, and Macro Internation-
                             al Inc. (2007). Nepal Demographic and Health Survey 2006. Kathmandu, Nepal: Min-
                             istry of Health and Population, New ERA, and Macro International Inc. Retrieved
                             March 13, 2017, from http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR191/FR191.pdf
                          Ministry of Health, Nepal; New ERA; and ICF. (2017). Nepal Demographic and Health Sur-
                             vey 2016: Key Indicators. Kathmandu, Nepal: Ministry of Health. Retrieved July 10,
                             2017, from http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PBAAF667.pdf
                          UNICEF. (2013). Country Program Action Plan 2013–2017. Nepal.
                          UNICEF. (2016). Policy Brief. Benefits of Nepal’s Child Grant for current and future generations.
                          World Bank. (2010). Project Appraisal Document. The Social Safety Nets Project, Nepal (Ad-
                             ditional Financing).
                          World Bank. (2011). Nutrition in Nepal: A National Development Priority. The World
                             Bank. Retrieved July 10, 2017, from http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
                             en/635951468124159285/pdf/683780WP0P1235000Nutrition0in0Nepal.pdf
                          World Bank. (2012). Project Appraisal Document. Sunaula Hazar Din – Community Action
                             for Nutrition Project Nepal.
                          World Bank. (2013). Project Appraisal Document. Nepal Agriculture and Food Security Project.
                          World Bank. (2014). Project Appraisal Document. Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project.
                          World Bank. (2015). Implementation Completion and Results Report. Social Safety Nets Proj-
                             ect, Nepal.
                          World Health Organization Regional Office for South-East Asia. (2016). Strategic Action
                             Plan To Reduce The Double Burden Of Malnutrition in the South-East Asia Region 2016-
                             2025. World Health Organization.
6. Annexes




Annex 1- Tables

Table 1: Nutritional Status and Poverty in Different Regions of Nepal 2001, 2006, and 2011 and 2016
                                   Stunting (percent) of            Underweight (percent)             Wasting (percent) of              Poverty
 Group/Region
                                   under 5 children                 of under 5 children               under 5 children                  rate 2011
                                   2001 2006 2011 2016 2001                  2006 2011 2016 2001 2006 2011                       2016
 Nepal                             57         49.3   40.5   35.8    43       38.6    31.1    27       11      12.6    13.7       10     25.16
 Urban                             36.8       36.1   28     32      33.5     23.1    18.9    23       7.8     7.5     11.0       9      15.46
 Rural                             52.2       51.1   44     40      46.7     40.7    33.1    31       9.8     13.3    14.2       10     27.43
 Ecological Regions
 Mountain                          61.4       62.3   56     47      45.1     42.4    37.3    28       5.3     9.4     9.0        6      42.27
 Hill                              52.4       50.3   42     32      41.4     33.2    25.2    18       5.9     8.4     6.9        6      24.32
 Terai                             47.3       46.3   39     37      48.4     42.3    35.2    32       13.3    16.6    20.4       12     23.44
 Development Regions
 Eastern                           47.6       40.3   40     33      43.4     32.9    26.9    26       9.1     10.1    13.1       13     21.44
 Central                           50.0       50.0   38     35      44.7     38.2    33.3    28       10.8    13.8    16.8       10     21.69
 Western                           50.1       50.4   40     37      43.4     38.5    27.2    23       8.9     10.9    10.9       6      22.25
 Mid-western                       53.9       57.9   51     42      49.0     43.3    36.3    29       8.8     11.6    12.0       9      31.68
 Far-western                       54.0       52.5   41     36      48.9     43.7    30.5    28       8.8     16.7    12.2       9      45.61
Source: CBS, WFP, WB. 2006. Small Area Estimates of Poverty, Calorie Intake and Malnutrition in Nepal. Kathmandu: CBS/WFP/WB. USAID, New Era, MoHP,
2007. Nepal. Demographic and Health Survey, 2006. Kathmandu. CBS, 2012. NLSS III Survey Report. Kathmandu. CBS, 2012 Poverty in Nepal.


Table 2: Food Shortages Reported by Households in Nepal Living Standard Survey 2010
                                                                                                              1995-96       2003-04     2010-11
 percent households reporting less than adequate consumption of food                                          50.9          31.2        15.7
 percent households reporting food shortages at any time during the last 30 days                              NA            NA          7.5
 met the food shortages by ( percent household reporting)
 Borrowing food or money                                                                                                                68.4
 Purchase food on credit                                                                                                                57.1
 Eating less expensive food                                                                                                             50.9
 Eating less for each meal                                                                                                              41.5
 Skipping meals                                                                                                                         33.4
Source: CBS. 2012. NLSS III. Kathmandu 100.
                                                                         STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL          43
44   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




Table 3: Sampled Projects and Sample Size by Study Instruments Used for Data Collection
 Project                            Associated Agency                  Sample size by Study Instruments
                                                                       National   District   VDC IDI Comm
                                                                       IDI        IDI                FGD
 Sunaula Hazar Din or               World Bank; Ministry of Federal    3          3          6      6
 Golden Thousand Days               Affairs and Local Development
 Project
 Nepal Agriculture and Food World Bank; Ministry of                    3          3          4      6
 Security Project (NAFSP)   Agriculture Development
 UNICEF support (MSNP –             UNICEF                             1          1          4      2
 nutrition interventions)
 Feed the Future KISAN              USAID, Winrock International       1          1          2      1
 Suaahara Project                   USAID, HKI                         2          3          4      2
 SABAL Project                      USAID                              1          -          -      -
 Nutrition-focused                  National Planning Commission       1          -          -      -
 secretariat                        (NPC)
 Nutrition policy and               Child Health Division              2          -          -      -
 programs of Ministry of
 Health
 Total                                                                 14         11         20     17
                                                      STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   45




Annex 2- Technical Approaches

Step 1: Identify key risk factors and interventions
Identify Key Risk Factors of Malnutrition to be Addressed

To address key risk factors associated with malnutrition, Nepal has implemented a range of technical interven-
tions in its nutrition and food security (NFS) programs. While there is limited evidence to rank risk factors based
on their causal links to malnutrition, a comprehensive strategy against malnutrition must consider all risk factors
and employ interventions to reduce some of the fundamental issues affecting malnutrition in Nepal.

Fundamental Issues and Risk Factors              Menu of Standard Interventions
Inadequate diet of women and children            •	 Improve dietary intake, 4–5 meals per day with protein
during the “golden 1,000 days.”                     for pregnant and lactating mothers.
The first set of challenges in reducing          •	 Encourage exclusive and proper breastfeeding
malnutrition is ensuring an adequate diet for    •	 Maintain adequate weight of pregnant women and moth-
pregnant women, and children under two              ers
and their mothers, which requires that the       •	 Reduce excessive energy expenditure and workload of
standard interventions are incorporated in          pregnant women
the activities.                                  •	 Homestead food production of vegetables and fruits in
                                                    kitchen gardens
Early pregnancy and low empowerment of           •	    Delay marriage and pregnancy of adolescent girls
women.                                           •	    Increase years of schooling for girls
Some traditional beliefs and practices           •	    Raise awareness about number and spacing of children
in Nepal promote early marriage and              •	    Empower women economically and in intra-household
pregnancy, which can increase the risks                decision-making
for mother and child. To discourage
household or societal-level risk factors, some
technical interventions targeted towards
empowerment of women are listed.
Lack of clean, sanitary and hygienic             •	    Use of safe and clean water
environment.                                     •	    End open defecation
The third set of issues consist of community-    •	    Handwashing practices and habits
level risk factors, which can only be            •	    Sanitation in schools and other public spaces
addressed through community-wide                 •	    Reducing indoor smoke and air pollution
interventions, such as those listed.
Limited availability and utilization of          •	 Vaccination of children
preventive and curative health services.         •	 Use of contraception
The fourth set of issues must be addressed       •	 Intake of micronutrients, including iron-folic acid (IFA)
in collaboration with existing health               and deworming medicines
infrastructure and services, particularly        •	 Timely seeking of health services
to ensure health services that promote the       •	 Service provision for and timely treatment of acute malnutri-
following.                                          tion
46   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




Identify Interventions

Nutrition-Specific and Nutrition-Sensitive Interventions
To address the above-mentioned risk factors for malnutrition, various projects have applied a range of interven-
tions, which are either nutrition specific or nutrition sensitive as presented in the table below.


 Nutrition Specific                                         Nutrition Sensitive
 •	 Micronutrient supplementation, i.e., vita-              •	 Boost agriculture production by using improved
    mins, iron-folic acid tablets for mothers                  seeds and other technology
 •	 Therapeutic / supplementary feeding, i.e.,              •	 Bio-fortification of staple food such as wheat and
    ready-to-use therapeutic food                              rice
 •	 Optimum breastfeeding and responsive                    •	 Market-side interventions to lower prices
    feeding practices and simulation                        •	 Support livelihoods to increase income and
 •	 School meals, i.e., nutrition-enriched school              purchasing power
    lunch                                                   •	 Cash or food transfers to support adequate dietary
 •	 Food fortification, e.g., addition of calcium              intake—conditional or unconditional
    and vitamin in generally consumed food,                 •	 Support diet diversity
    such as biscuits; home fortification of food            •	 Proper schooling, nutrition curriculum, early
    with multiple micronutrient powder                         childhood development
 •	 Provision of food and nutrition during                  •	 Timely treatment seeking and provision of
    emergency, e.g., in-kind distribution of                   services for adolescent and reproductive health
    food during periods of food insecurity                  •	 Women’s empowerment
                                                            •	 WASH—provision of safe water, sanitation, and
                                                               hygiene of households and communities
STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL   47
48   STUDY OF OPERATIONAL STRATEGIES TO REDUCE MALNUTRITION IN NEPAL




       The World Bank Group
       Nepal Office
       P.O. Box 798
       Yak and Yeti Hotel Complex
       Durbar Marg, Kathmandu, Nepal
       Tel.: 4236000
       Fax: 4225112
       Email: infonepal@worldbank.org

       www.worldbank.org/np
       www.facebook.com/WorldBankNepal
