 TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




TDRP Quarterly
Report
                FY17: APRIL- JUNE 2017




                                          1	
TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




Table of Contents

ACRONYMS	                                                                             3	

1.	 SUMMARY	                                                                          4	

2.	 THE	AFRICAN	UNION	AND	DDR	FEATURED	ACTIVITIES	                                    4	
2.1	 TDRP	AND	NORDIC	TRUST	FUND	MISSION	TO	ADDIS	ABABA	                               4	
2.2					FORWARD	PLANS	                                                                5	

3.	 SUPPORT	PROVIDED	TO	REINSERTION	AND	REINTEGRATION	OPERATIONS	AT	COUNTRY	LEVEL	    6	
3.1		    THE	CENTRAL	AFRICAN	REPUBLIC	                                                6	
3.2	     DEMOCRATIC	REPUBLIC	OF	CONGO	                                                7	
3.3	     REPUBLIC	OF	MALI	                                                            9	
3.4	     REPUBLIC	OF	SOUTH	SUDAN	                                                    10	
3.3.		   REPUBLIC	OF	YEMEN	                                                          11	

4.		PROGRAM	MANAGEMENT	AND	STATUS	OF	TRUST	FUND	                                     12	

5.	FORTHCOMING	EVENTS	                                                               13	
5.1		 TDRP	ROUND	TABLE	MEETING,	WORLD	BANK,	PARIS	OFFICE,	FRANCE	                    13	




                                                  2	
TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




ACRONYMS
 ACFPE           Agence Centrafricaine pour la Formation Professionnelle et l’Emploi
 APSA            African Peace and Security Architecture
 AU              African Union
 AUDDRCP         African Union DDR Capacity Program
 BETF            Bank Executed Trust Fund
 BICC            Bonn International Center for Conversion
 CAR             Central African Republic
 CEMAC           Central African Economic and Monetary Community
 CMU             Country Management Unit
 CoE             Center of Excellence
 DDR             Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
 DDRR            Disarmament, Demobilization, Reinsertion and Reintegration
 DPKO            UN Department of Peace Keeping Operations
 ECCAS           Economic Community of Central African States
 DRC             Democratic Republic of Congo
 FAO             Food and Agriculture Organization
 FCV             Fragility, Conflict and Violence
 ICRS            Information, Counselling and Referral System
 IPs             Implementing Partners
 INPP            Institut National de Préparation Professionnelle
 JMEC            Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
 LRA             Lord Resistance Army
 MDTF            Multi Donor Trust Fund
                 United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
 MINUSCA
                 Republic
 MINUSMA         United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
 MIS             Management Information Systems
                 United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
 MONUSCO
                 Congo
 MNJTF           Multinational Joint Task Force to Fight Boko Haram
 NDDRC           National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission
 NTF             Nordic Trust Fund
 OGN             Operational Guidance Note
 OMC             Operational Mechanism for Coordination
 OSESGY          Office of the Special Envoy for the Secretary General Yemen
 PAD             Project Appraisal Document
 PIU             Project Implementation Unit
 PSD             Peace and Security Department
 PSO             Peace Support Operation
 RECs            Regional Economic Community
 RMs             Regional Mechanisms
 ToR             Terms of Reference
                 Unité d’Exécution du Programme National de Désarmement, Démobilisation et
 UEPNDDR
                 Réintégration
 UNMISS          United Nations Mission in South Sudan
 UNOAU           United Nations Office to the African Union




                                                     3	
TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




1. SUMMARY

During this quarter, the TDRP made progress in supporting implementation for the next phase of
the African Union DDR Program (DDRCP), maintains its technical and financial assistance
provided at the country level in CAR, Mali, DRC, Yemen and continues to monitor events in South
Sudan. This report contains brief updates of work undertaken at country level over this second
quarter and covers progress made and the key partnership agreements reached with the African
Union (AU).

Whilst all activities noted below are associated with the TDRP portfolio, not all the deliverables
or outputs were directly funded by the TDRP trust fund. There are pre-existing World Bank and
other trust fund allocations channeled through other projects, outside of TDRP that support
engagement with the African Union, CAR, DRC, Mali and South Sudan. Similarly, consultants
and staff working with TDRP are not paid entirely by the TDRP Trust Fund, but also through
World Bank’s own budget for DDR operations across and through other trust funds, such as the
United Nations – World Bank Partnership Trust Funds, and World Bank budgets made available
to support implementation of activities in CAR, DRC, Mali, and South Sudan.

2. THE AFRICAN UNION AND DDR FEATURED ACTIVITIES
2.1 TDRP And Nordic Trust Fund Mission To Addis Ababa

The TDRP and Nordic Trust Fund (NTF) undertook a technical support mission to AU Head
Quarters in Addis between May 31 and June 13, 2017. The objectives of the mission were to;

        (i) To discuss the updating of Operational Guidance Notes, including integration of Human
             Rights Approaches, and establishing next steps for operationalization of the OGNs;
        (ii) To discuss the development of training materials and agreement on next steps, based
             on the finalized OGNs and harmonized DDR training standards;
        (iii)To provide an update on knowledge management and efforts relating to the
             dissemination of knowledge management products to key target audiences.
        (iv) Identification, together with the AU, of concrete steps towards supporting the AU in
             providing operational support to the Multi-National Joint Task Force (MNJTF) in Boko
             Haram affected areas.
        (v) To discuss future work related to operational support for the AU’s five focus areas
             (Somalia, CAR, DRC, South Sudan, Mali, Lake Chad Basin) with a focus on DDR
             activities within a wider interlinked stabilization context.


The mission held a series of successful meetings focused around a workshop led by the AU
Defense and Security Division within the Peace & Security Department (PSD). The workshop
reflected a growing focus within the AU PSD on information exchange and joint programming

                                                4	
TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




and thus provided an important opportunity for the various units within the PSD to meet together
to present their work and discuss synergies with DSD DDR activities. Discussions held during the
mission are being used to further develop the activities highlighted in the table below.

2.2 Forward plans


                Human Rights compliant OGN: Three of the five finalized OGNs have been assessed to be human
                rights compliant: Detention, Children and Women. These can be rapidly adapted to inform
 Operational    operations by AU/APSA and partners in AU priority areas (LRA Affected triangle, Mali, CAR,
                Guinea Bissau, Gambia, Somalia, MNJTF affected areas/Chad Basin Area).
 Guidance
                Remaining OGN: The remaining OGNS (Reintegration, National Frameworks) along with
 Notes          Foreign Fighters and CVE/PVE will be updated to be human rights compliant using external
                human rights expertise. Draft OGNs, on Foreign Fighters and CVE/PVE is currently being
                reviewed and updated. The AU scheduled to convene a validation workshop in late November
                2017. .
                Piloting of OGN based training materials in Priority Contexts: Human Rights Compliant OGN
                will be operationalized in selected contexts where the WB, UN and AU member states are involved
                in DDR and/or stabilization activities. Likely locations are DRC, the CAR and the Lake Chad
                basin region (MNJTF operational areas). The WB will explore options with African training
                centres to operationalize human rights compliant OGNs. The AU Training and Rostering Unit will
                be involved.
 Training
                Scoping of Existing DDR Training and development of OGN related training products: The
                African Peace Support Training Association (APSTA) have submitted a draft plan and budget to
                undertake a mapping and scoping exercise of existing DDR training on the continent. Their draft
                is to be discussed amongst the Core Team and subject to the outcome APSTA or another provider
                will be asked to conduct this exercise. The outcome of the scoping and mapping exercise may be
                used to inform the development of materials for remaining OGN and engagement with training
                providers.
                Within the AU there is recognition of the importance of Knowledge Management at both Division,
                Departmental and Commission levels and this creates significant opportunities and momentum to
                build on work already begun under Phase I of the AU DDRP. An outline Knowledge Management
                Strategy was presented and discussed during May TDRP/NTF Mission.
                Areas of focus include; (a) updating and refreshing of existing KM products based on user
                feedback and requirements, (b) support to the migration of the existing online Compendium to the
 Knowledge
                software platform now being recommended by the Knowledge Management Division, (c) the
 Management
                identification of and establishment of links and contacts with other relevant platforms.
                One of the key KM products undertaken with TDRP support has been the production of a regular
                DDR Newsletter. The eighth issue is now finalized and is awaiting publication. This edition
                includes an Editorial on Institutional Strengthening and Partnerships on DDR and features / news
                items on; Agenda 2020 on Silencing the Guns Program, an AU-UN Strategic Review of UNAMID
                Program, details of a PSD Assessment Mission to the Republic of Gambia and news on a planned
                Regional Stabilization Conference for the MNJTF.
                The AU will submit a formal request to the WB requesting support for the development of regional
                stabilization strategy in the Lake Chad Basin. This will include an overview of the possible scope
 Operational    of work
 Support        Support to the MNJTF to help consider information management requirements MNJTF have
                requested advice on how to manage information issues related to Boko Haram fighters and persons
                associated with the group. Based on previous experience the WB Team have agreed to produce a
                short technical note on issues to consider in relation to this.




                                                       5	
TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




                Data collection methods and Human Rights: WB to work together with Early Warning, Human
                Rights, and Early Warning in identifying how existing assessment methodologies and data
                collection can be strengthened with a focus on Human Rights.



3. SUPPORT PROVIDED TO REINSERTION AND REINTEGRATION OPERATIONS
   AT COUNTRY LEVEL


3.1 The Central African Republic


During this quarter, the World Bank/TDRP team conducted two technical missions in preparation
of the CAR Reintegration of Ex-combatants Project [P160272] and in support of the National
Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation (DDRR) Program. Subsequent to
the World Bank Board’s approval of the above mentioned project grant worth USD 30 M on April
13, the first mission was conducted from April 15-30, while the second mission was held from
June 5-17. The focus of activities is highlighted in the table below;

 FOCUS AREA             KEY ACTIVITIES
                        The team initiated technical sessions comprised of the Government – DDRR Project
                        Implementation Unit and Security Sector Reform (SSR) Unit both housed at the CAR
                        Presidency – and MINUSCA, to develop a detailed action plan. The objective of the plan
                        is to help facilitate the immediate launch and execution of the Pilot Phase of DDRR so as
                        to trigger the launch of the National DDRR Program. This action plan sets out a set of
                        priorities and actions that have to be implemented by certain deadlines, along with
 Development of a       assigned responsibilities. All stakeholders agreed that the DDR Pilot Project will offer an
 DDRR action plan       opportunity to experiment the National DDR Program activities on a smaller scale,
                        therefore allowing flexibility for implementation methods, and adjustment of the plan as
                        appropriate. All parties recognized that the first and foremost step to progress towards
                        implementation is to obtain lists of combatants for the pilot phase, combined with an
                        immediate and progressive strong communication strategy and campaign. The parties
                        agreed to meet regularly in order to verify timely implementation of the action plan, or
                        failing that, to identify reasons for the delay, and take appropriate steps to alleviate them
                        The World Bank/TDRP team participated to the 4th an 5th Comité Consultatif et de Suivi
                        (CCS) meeting, organized on a monthly basis by the CAR Government with the aim of
                        facilitating dialogue on DDR process with the armed groups, and with the participation of
                        key stakeholders from the international community including the United Nations
                        Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in CAR (MINUSCA), World Bank,
 Support to the         African Union, European Union (Training Mission – EUTM), France and United States
 Government in          of America (USA). The 4th CCS meeting was attended for the first time by the 14
 monthly discussions    identified armed groups. The mission actively took part in the discussions to ensure a
 with the potential     common understanding of socio-economic reintegration activities and support to host
 beneficiaries          communities as envisaged under the Bank-financed Reintegration Project. During the 5th
                        CCS, and in the following days, a total of nine armed groups provided respective lists of
                        40 combatants each, identified to take part in Pilot DDR. During the pilot phase, 600 ex-
                        combatants are expected to be demobilized including 300 to be supported by the Bank-
                        financed socio-economic reintegration activities, and the remaining referred to integration
                        into the Central African armed forces, subject to eligibility.
 Technical Assistance   The mission held joint technical sessions with the DDRR-PIU and the Cellule de Suivi de
 to the Project         Réforme Economiques et Financières (CS-REF), the latter having the capacity to carry out

                                                        6	
TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




 Implementation Units   the Project fiduciary activities outsourced by DDRR-PIU. The mission provided technical
 on fiduciary aspects   assistance to both teams in recruiting key staff as well as the firm in charge of developing
                        the Project Implementation Manual, in accordance with the World Bank applicable rules.
                        The task team also recommended both PIUs to take appropriate steps to ensure the
                        effective use of the XAF 2 billion (approximately USD 3.5 M) fund offered by the Central
                        African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) on DDRR, in compliance with
                        World Bank fiduciary rules. The use of CEMAC fund was pending administrative
                        requirements with respect to the opening and management of accounts, which were
                        resolved at the end of the last mission.
 Support to the         The mission joined the DDRR-PIU in a consultation meeting with an implementing
 Government in          partner, aimed at analyzing their preliminary non-binding proposal for implementing
 contracting with       socio-economic reintegration activities during the DDR pilot phase. The Government is
 implementing           awaiting a refined proposal prior to proceed with the appropriate selection method, subject
 partners               to the International Development Association (IDA) no objection.



3.2 Democratic Republic of Congo

DRC Reinsertion and Reintegration Project (P152903)
The World Bank DRC technical team continues to support the UEPNDDR through dedicated
technical assistance and theme-based trainings to improve the implementation of Reinsertion and
Reintegration Project. In this quarter, the UEPNDDR and their Implementing Partners focused
actions on implementation of recommendations from the World Bank field mission conducted
during the first quarter. Of particular note is that:

    §   Implementing Partners (FAO, Caritas and INPP) are currently progressing relatively well.
        The demobilized have started receiving follow-up and advisory services on their economic
        activities in their respective reintegration communities.
    §   The World Bank, the UEPN-DDR and UNICEF are collaborating to develop a suitable
        project for the support of children associated with armed forces and armed groups in DDR
        III.
    §   Technical assistance to the project’s procurement and financial management teams is quite
        effective and has aided in strengthening and bringing efficiency to procurement processes.
    §   UEPNDDR is currently reviewing a training manual that was developed by the World Bank
        psychosocial specialist which contains a curriculum of psychosocial life skills to be
        delivered to former combatants to support them through their transition.
    §   The World Bank and UEPNDDR teams are in the process of preparation of the project’s
        communications and awareness activities action plan.
    §   UEPNDDR is working to improve Monitoring and Evaluation structures as well as quality
        assurance through continuous trainings to relevant personnel and speeding up of the
        reintegration management system (ASR) deployment and trainings at all levels of
        operations.
    §   An update of the mapping of armed groups is in progress in partnership with the FARDC
        and the MONUSCO in order to have a better idea of potential candidates to the
        demobilization moving forward.



                                                        7	
TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




In the reported quarter, the table below highlights progress and achievements attained per project
component:

 COMPONENTS             KEY ACTIVITIES
 Demobilization (Not    To date the project has received and demobilized a total of 4656 ex-combatants in the two
 funded by the          CPRs as shown in the table below and the demand for DDR services continues to grow.
 World Bank)
                        There are currently 879 total demobilized (471 in Kitona and 408 in Kamina) at the
                        Reinsertion phase at the CPRs. General and vocational trainings are underway, with an
                        average participation rate of 85%.
                        Reintegration Preparation:

                            •     Distribution of Reintegration kits is underway at 3076 successful distributions
                                  out of the total 3777.
 Reinsertion
                             • The selection process of the demobilized nominated household members as well
                                  as the selection of the community members of specific host communities is
                                  underway.
                             • Procurement process for the Implementing Firms to offer services to the
                                  demobilized households is in progress.
                             • Technical support and advisory follow-up services of the reintegrated
                                  demobilized by the IPs are also in progress.
                        3777 demobilized are currently involved at various stages of reintegration activities. IPs
                        have begun technical support and follow-up for their caseloads that have already received
                        their reintegration kits.
                        Access to reintegration communities is a major challenge. However, UEPNDDR and IPs
 Reintegration          are coordinating efforts to explore various methods that can help to reach remote areas.
                        IPs are sharing knowledge as some have a wide network across the country and utilize in
                        some cases relevant focal points identified from their past projects to assist in operations
                        in the very remote areas. The teams are also partnering with MONUSCO and the
                        government, who have the equipment and capability to reach remote areas.
                        The procurement modalities for the implementation of this component have been finalized
                        and determined and the recruitment process for Implementing Partners is now underway.
                        The Bank has given a go-ahead for the recruitment of more than 2 local firms in
                        consideration of the nature of activities and the numerous implementation zones in DRC.

                        The process of Identification and Registration of Nominated Household Members is
 Family Livelihoods
                        underway by trained UEPNDDR field officers. The targets include the families of ex-
 Support
                        combatants, vulnerable single-parent family and child-headed households, through a
                        comprehensive database system that was developed and deployed to the Reintegration
                        centers. This ensures the prompt registration of NHM beneficiaries, their locations are
                        known and updated and their economic aspirations are known in preparation for the
                        implementation of services. The number of ex-combatants physically reintegrated to date
                        amounts to 3,777 of which 94 are women.
                        Day to day medical services are being delivered at the CPRs while severe and complicated
                        emergencies are referred to the national hospital in Kinshasa. Cases include about 977 ex-
                        combatants with 548 from Kitona and at least 429 from Kamina who had been diagnosed
 Support to             and received treatment and follow-up for various ailments until their exit from the CPRs.
 Vulnerable Groups      After their exit from CPRs, these patients were referred to various medical health facilities
                        convenient to their areas of reintegration.
                        A new caseload of 10 children have been received at Kamina CPR and are awaiting
                        processing and possible transfer to UNICEF.



                                                        8	
TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




                        The bank is in the process of hiring an organization to conduct a multi-level training for
                        staff of implementing agencies and implementing partners. Proposals have been reviewed
                        and a decision to hire one organization has been reached. Next steps include negotiating
                        the terms of the service, curriculum, dates and locations of training.
 Psychosocial           A training manual was developed by the WB psychosocial consultant with a curriculum
 Support                of psychosocial life skills to be delivered to former combatants to support them through
                        their transition. Currently, the document is being reviewed by technical staff at
                        UEPNDDR in order to make it culturally sensitive and to better adapt the activities to
                        particular contextual characteristics of the population. This training manual will be part of
                        the staff training curriculum to be used by the hired organization.
                        The projected DDR activities would have moderate environmental and social risks, and
 Environmental and
                        an Environmental Social Management Framework has been prepared. The findings of the
 Social Safeguards
                        assessment conducted at the CPRs and selected regions of reintegration will facilitate the
 Framework
                        management and mitigation of any risks arising from the activities of the project.
                        The UEPNDDR continues to strengthen the existing monitoring system of the status of
                        demobilized beneficiaries, as well as the activities in which they engage both for those at
                        the CPRs and at reintegration communities. For the CPRs, UEPNDDR developed a
 Monitoring and         software application which it deployed to the two centers to track the process including
 Evaluation             trainings delivered and the demobilized participation in vocational trainings.
                        They are also in the process of deploying and training personnel from its offices and IPs
                        on the reintegration management system (ASR) to enable systematic tracking of the
                        project beneficiaries and activities at their communities.
                        Sensitization and project awareness campaign activities are ongoing as well as other
                        communication activities including the production and dissemination of a documentary on
                        the activities of the first phase of RRP in the CPR (trainings) and the early stages of
                        reintegration; the publication of periodic newsletter documenting project activities; the
                        production of photo albums on the RRP activities; and the production of quarterly report.
 Communication and
 Sensitization          The World bank team is providing technical support to the UEPNDDR team to reinforce
                        their communication to stakeholders both internally and externally through various wide-
                        reaching available medium in DRC such as community radios such as Radio Okapi; IPs
                        networks; as well as provincial and local governance structures to pass their messages
                        especially on tolerance, cooperation, patience and available support services to the
                        beneficiaries.



3.3 Republic of Mali

During this quarter, the World Bank/TDRP team conducted one mission in Bamako, Mali, during
June 18-24 for the Mali Reinsertion of Ex-combatants Project [P157233].

Audience with the Minister of Defense and Veterans for technical briefing on the Project

The mission was received in an audience with the Minister of Defense and Veterans to discuss
progress in the DDR and Reinsertion Project, and to agree on practical steps for progressing in the
implementation. The mission advised that DDR should be part of an integrated recovery and
stabilization program, including economic and social development on a larger scale. In addition,
the mission emphasized the need for a strong synergy between DDR and SSR. Furthermore, the
mission encouraged the Government to strengthen coordination among departments with regard
to project implementation, initiatives, and fund mobilization to improve synergies among existing
or future initiatives and avoid duplication.

                                                        9	
TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




Mobilizing of additional resources to finance the Reinsertion component of DDR

As a follow-up to previous discussions, including as part of the 2016 DDR roundtable organized
by the Government with support of the World Bank, the mission separately met with the German
and Sweden embassies, who have been identified as potential donors for the Reinsertion
component of DDR. Both have previously demonstrated a potential interest in contributing to a
trust fund that would be administered by the World Bank for this purpose. Subsequent to these
meetings, the German embassy has requested further information from the task team, with regard
to the trust fund activation and management, prior to shortly make a final decision. The Swedish
embassy is awaiting progress in the DDR implementation before to make any decision.

To date, the costs of the Reinsertion component of DDR is estimated to be approximately USD 50
million. With 15 M USD financed by the World Bank, and USD 10 M committed by the
Government taken into account the financing gap for reinsertion is estimated to be 25 M USD.

3.4 Republic of South Sudan

The Bank continues to monitor engagement with stakeholders on feasible means of providing
technical assistance to the government in preparing for a new DDR program. The most recent work
program focused on technical assistance to the National DDR Commission on updating the
existing Information, Counselling and Referral System (ICRS). However, ongoing political and
security context, lack of comprehensive consensus on DDR, technical readiness or operational
plan, and donor commitment have not been conducive to operational support.

The task team published a closing report denoting current circumstances and requirements for
successful DDR programming in South Sudan. Armed groups still remain at large and the payroll
for SPLA and organized forces continue to drain the government’s annual budget. Going forward,
the task team recommends revitalizing and building capacity of the NDDRC to manage future
DDR programming, and continuing strategic communication with all stakeholders across the board
to obtain their buy-in, enable national ownership and mobilize adequate financing to reduce lags
in project implementation. In initiating a future DDR program, it also proposes establishing a dual
arms control process for troops in cantonment and civilians, improving the registration and
verification process for combatants, and devising a tailored and phased non-traditional
reintegration programming for ex-combatants and other beneficiaries alike.

If security and political the conditions on the ground permit, TDRP may collaborate with the Bonn
International Center for Conversion (BICC) to develop a paper on community-based reintegration
in South Sudan and participate in technical meetings on DDR. Additional activities may later
extend to technical and advisory support to the National DDR Commission in South Sudan in
drafting a common DDR strategic plan in coordination with UN Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS) and other partners.




                                                  10	
TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




3.3. Republic Of Yemen

Based on past experiences on DDR in Sub-Saharan Africa, in large part through TDRP, the Bank
has been providing technical assistance across similar thematic areas, mostly recently in Yemen.
Following a request from the Secretariat of the Cooperation Council of the Arab States of the Gulf
(GCC) and the Office of Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen (OSESGY), the World
Bank conducted a technical mission to Riyadh, Saudi Arabia during April 1-7, 2017. This was
primarily to both attend and support preparations for a workshop on Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration (DDR) in Yemen with the GCC held on April 4, 2017. During this mission, it
also sought to convene with co-facilitators OSESGY, UNDP and UN Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) to finalize preparation for the workshop and coordinate further with GCC
Secretariat and other participants afterwards; and finalize list of pre-DDR assessments for Yemen
in partnership with DPKO and OSESGY.

Participants at the workshop included key staff within Ministries of Finance and/or Foreign Affairs
or their equivalent from all GCC member countries— United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Oman,
Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Kuwait. It also included delegates from the King Salman Humanitarian
Aid and Relief Center, British Embassy and Department of International Development, and the
Islamic Development Bank.

The Bank led and participated in the panels and sessions on DDR Concepts and Definitions, DDR
Assessment and Resources, DDR in Political Processes and Partnerships in DDR. The workshop
was marked by high levels of participation and focused particularly on Arabic translations for DDR
terminologies, lessons learnt from other contexts, need for specific assessments, linkages between
DDR and other development programming and potential mechanisms for addressing recruitment
into armed groups.

As an outcome of the workshop, the GCC Secretariat, UN and the Bank agreed to urgently develop
proposals on pre-DDR activities, along with financing needs, for Yemen and another on violence
prevention and pre-DDR programming in already secure and accessible areas. The Secretariat also
suggested that they reconvene with the team by October latest to discuss the way forward.

In addition, the task team, in coordination, with OSESGY, DPKO and UNDP developed a proposal
to undertake pre-DDR assessments for Yemen. Pending the resumption of the peace process in
Yemen, analytical work and technical aspect will be vital to engagement on DDR, familiarizing
stakeholders with best practices and informing negotiations surrounding ceasefire and eventual
demobilization. It is also intended to support detailed discussions with potential donors and
mobilization of resources for future country-wide program. While there is some more progress on
certain elements of the peace process, timely research on relevant thematic areas ensures required
preparedness to initiate DDR when a peace settlement is secured. Further, as current statistics
relevant to planning of DDR remain sparse, further knowledge management and evidence-based

                                                11	
TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




research will be critical to defining policy and programming interventions. As such, the proposed
analytical work aims to establish technical foundation for integrating DDR into peace processes,
planning, design and implementation of DDR programming in Yemen.

The proposal includes studies to map armed groups, combatants, and areas affected by recruitment;
analysis of local and institutional capacities; linkages between conflict and recruitment; and DDR
best practices in the Yemeni context. These studies are currently partially funded, by the State and
Peacebuilding Fund (SPF) and the Humanitarian Development Peace Initiative (HDP). In this
capacity, the task team continues to engage with the DDR Working Group for Yemen, and based
on ongoing discussions with partners and management, it expects to begin these studies shortly.



4. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT AND STATUS OF TRUST FUND

During this quarter, contributions to TDRP Trust Fund remained at US$ 42,583,887.89, with
disbursement reaching 99.51% at US$ 42,378,760.16 by June, 30th 2017. The remaining balance
of US$ 205,127.73 includes the Government of Sweden’s contribution to co-finance the DRC
Reinsertion and Reintegration Project activities.



 $42,000,000
 $40,000,000
 $38,000,000
 $36,000,000
 $34,000,000
 $32,000,000
 $30,000,000
 $28,000,000
 $26,000,000
 $24,000,000
 $22,000,000
 $20,000,000
 $18,000,000
 $16,000,000
 $14,000,000
 $12,000,000
 $10,000,000
  $8,000,000
  $6,000,000
  $4,000,000
  $2,000,000
          $0
                                 Nov-10




                                                            Nov-11




                                                                                       Nov-12




                                                                                                                  Nov-13




                                                                                                                                             Nov-14




                                                                                                                                                                        Nov-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Nov-16
                        Jul-10




                                                   Jul-11




                                                                              Jul-12




                                                                                                         Jul-13




                                                                                                                                    Jul-14




                                                                                                                                                               Jul-15




                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul-16
               Mar-10




                                          Mar-11




                                                                     Mar-12




                                                                                                Mar-13




                                                                                                                           Mar-14




                                                                                                                                                      Mar-15




                                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-16




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mar-17




                                                                                                     12	
TDRP	Quarterly	Report	April-June	2017	




A supplemental grant from the Nordic Trust Fund to further mainstreaming of Human Rights in
DDR programming has been secured. This grant will complement the TDRP’s ongoing NTF
funded project promoting Human Rights Based Approaches in DDR strategies of the AU and its
partners within the wider African Peace and Security Architecture and will support: (i)
development and implementation of an Operational Guidance Note on M&E within DDR
programs that mainstreams human rights principles; (ii) strengthened HRBA of national DDR
institutions in selected pilot countries to enhance the DDR commission’s policies, procedures and
practice, and; (iii) improved data collection, identification of proxy indicators and monitoring on
human rights linked to Continental Early Warning Instruments so as to strengthen existing
assessment methodologies and data collection by integrating a human rights focus.



5. FORTHCOMING EVENTS

5.1 TDRP Round Table Meeting, World Bank, Paris office, France

The World Bank has planned a round table meeting on the 19 of September 2017, at the World
Bank office in Paris. With the pending closure of the TDRP in December 2017, a series of fora
are being convened with partners to discuss emerging issues and lessons learned from
implementation experience on DDR and stabilization initiatives and the critical contextual
changes underpinning the spaces within which DDR and broader stabilization activities are
taking place. This first roundtable will provide an opportunity for partners to brainstorm on
DDR approaches and the critical elements of future programming.




                                                13	
