                   RESETTLEMENT AND MASS TRANSIT IN COLOMBIA
                                          LESSONS LEARNED
                                                               Authors:           Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto
                                                                          Senior Social Development Specialist
                                                                                    Mauricio Cuellar Montoya
                                                                                   Senior Transport Specialist
                                                                                             October 12, 2017

1. Background.
In response to the poor quality of the transport service and after the initial success of Bogota’s
BRT system (Transmilenio), the Government of Colombia structured the National Urban
Transport Program (NTUP) through the implementation of transport systems in the main cities of
the country. The program scope contemplated: i) support for the construction of BRT
infrastructure, including stations, portals, pedestrian bridges and the generation and adaptation of
public space, and (ii) transformation of the relationship between the Government and the transport
companies, including the remodeling of their business structure from affiliate companies into
concessionaries that would provide a service, in order to eliminate the so called “penny war”.




         BRT station and articulated bus                                Interior view of the station



The proposed scheme defined that the infrastructure would be financed with public resources, with
a contribution from the National Government up to 70%, given that fleet and operation expenses
were borne by private operators. For the development of the projects, each participating city
created an entity in charge of the planning, construction, contracting and control of the operation 1
(Implementing Agency). The entities created are presented in the following table:


1
 In Bogotá the Urban Development Institute (IDU) has been in charge of the construction of infrastructure, and in
Medellín, Metro Company has been in charge of the acquisition of vehicles and their operation.

                                                       1
                                         Table 1
                               Implementing Agencies– Cities
                    Impementing Entinty                     City
                Metroplús                    Medellín, Metropolitan Area
                Transmetro                   Barranquilla, Metropolitan Area
                Transcaribe                  Cartagena
                Megabús                      Pereira, Metropolitan Area
                Metrolinea                   Bucaramanga, Metropolitan Area
                Metrocali                    Cali
                TRANSMILENIO                 Bogotá
                                      Source: own elaboration.


In 2003, the Government of Colombia requested the Bank's technical and financial support to carry
out this program. To date, four Bank loans have been provided in the amount of US$ 1 trillion.
Other multilateral organizations such as IADB and CAF have also participated with different
loans. Subsequently, additional seven medium-sized cities were included in the program, spanning
between 300,000 and 600,000 inhabitants, in which infrastructure investments of smaller scale
were projected and where segregated BRT systems are not yet required.

This document aims to show the development of social and resettlement policies implemented
under this program. Big challenges were overcome, given the urban interventions in consolidated
areas with great impact in economic activities and private properties. The document focuses on the
consultation process and grievance redress mechanism established in the program; implementation
of the resettlement safeguards and its impact; and lessons learned and conclusions.



2. The consultation process and grievance redress mechanism
The first contact of the project with the community is through the consultation and socialization
process, which for NUTP was carried out at different levels and at different times.

At the city level, the preparation of a Municipal Development Plan is included in the constitution
of the National Policy (Article 339). The Article also includes citizen engagement and
accountability as the basis for the participation process. This first and more general consultation
was on the BRT projects in which civil society participated in the formulation and socialization
through the Territorial Planning Councils (CTP). The identification of land properties affectations
and the preparation of resettlement plans, which were formulated through consultation and and
participation processes emerged at the second level.

During the formulation phase of the resettlement plans, meetings were held with the affected
parties – owners, landlords, tenants, etc.— socializing in each case a differentiated solution
according to the situation. Meetings with the stakeholders also took place to inform and present
the different programs that are part of the resettlement plans (chambers of commerce, guilds,
universities, community and civil society organizations also participated in these meetings). The

                                                 2
result of this dialogue was reflected in the adjustments made to the different plans, and, when
necessary, in the creation of new programs.

On the other hand, from the formulation to the culmination of the resettlement, a grievance redress
mechanism (GRM) was implemented in order to manage petitions, queries, complaints and
suggestions that was based on the Right of Petition, harnessed in the Constitutional normative. The
regulation stipulates a maximum of 10 days as a deadlines for the management of community
requests. This GRM is based on instruments including: i) field service office, to approach the
citizen, ii) reception of queries and complaints through the webpage of the Implementing Entities,
by telephone or directly at their office, and iii) periodic home visits (at least twice a month) to
maintain fluid communication and resolve concerns before they become a formal grievance.

This mechanism, which extends to all the population located within the area of influence during
the construction period, enabled management of queries and complaints in its initial stage. The
mechanism fostered a climate of trust and an effective communication channel throughout the
process. Finally, for each of the resettlement plans, a completion document of the process was
prepared, in which all the queries and complaints were verified, checking that all were responded
and ensuring compliance.
                                             Table 2
                                Implementing Agencies – GRM

                                                 Megabús                538
        Number of queries and complaints         Metroplus              6242
        received during the construction         Transmetro             1368
        period (Accumulated)                     Transcaribe            3032
                                                 Metrolinea             795
                                                 TOTAL                  11975
                                                100% of those received in the works were
        Number of queries and complaints
                                                solved.
        successfully solved (Accumulated)
                                                11975 grievance attended and solved.
                                                Closing records for each of the sections and
        Verification method
                                                acts of receipt of work to the satisfaction of
                                                the community.
                                                • Closing of streets or accesses,
                                                • Damage or affectation of properties by the
                                                works,
        Main reason (s) for complaints
                                                • Nonconformities for road contingency
        received during project execution
                                                plans,
                                                • Procedures for payment of compensations,
                                                purchase of properties.


The table shows a high number of queries and complaints received and processed. The scheme of
linking the construction contractor in this activity shows positive results and allows for rigorous
                                                3
monitoring. To date, none of the Implementing Agencies have had legal processes opened related
to the GRM, indicating a complete and satisfactory management.



3. Safeguards and Instruments
Since the preparation of the first loan, the WB triggered the involuntary resettlement safeguard
(OP 4.12), envisioning that major land acquisition, resettlement of population and relocation of
public space occupants (PSO) was likely.

The instruments built for the project included both the World Bank’s and local regulations, and
the different institutional actors had active participation in their formulation. All documents were
published and consulted, especially resettlement plans with the affected population.
                                                Table 3
                       Policy Instruments – from international to local management
      World Bank                      Operational Policy OP 4.12 Resettlement Safeguard
      National Planning               Resettlement Policy Framework for BRT - Colombia
      Department – DNP
      Ministry of Transport –         Guidelines for the implementation of Land Acquisition and
      MoT                             Resettlement Plans
                                      Guidelines for the preparation of Public Space Occupants
                                      Plan (PSOP)
                                      Guidelines for the calculation of economic reimbursement
                                      in land acquisition and resettlement processes
      Implementing Agencies           Resettlement Plans with No Objection from the WB
                                      Management Resolution of economic reimbursements
                                      Resettlement Committee
      Municipalities                  Legal framework
                                      Source: own elaboration


In general, the layout of works for the BRT projects pass through the cities’ historic centers,
affecting established businesses, families with vulnerable elderly adults, properties in rent, public
space occupants (PSO), among others. In addition, they cross urban areas, including vulnerable
populations and, in some cases, formal and informal housing and businesses, with a heterogeneous
and complex effect that can lead to: ruptures in the social fabric, internal family conflicts,
affectations and changes to existing uses, interruption of revenue from economic activities,
uncertainty, and initial rejection. All this identifies the need to create spaces for dialogue and
participation, creation of channels and spaces for conflict resolution, and interdisciplinary view on
involuntary resettlement.




                                                    4
This complexity involved the preparation of different resettlement plans for homogeneous sections
according to the schedule of works, which multiplied the number of plans as seen in the following
table.
                                               Table 4
                           Resettlement Plans (RP) by Implementing Agency
                       Implementing Entity Number                Status
                                               of RP
                                                        Finished      Execution
                       Metroplus                  9          6            3
                       Transcaribe                3          3            0
                       Transmetro                 3          3            0
                       Megabús                    3          3            0
                       Metrolinea                 7          7            0
                       Metrosabanas               2          0            2
                       SIVA                       2          1            1
                       TOTAL                     29         23            6
                                             Source: own elaboration

             Note: Two additional Resettlement Plans for Neiva (Transfederal) / Sincelejo (Metrosabanas)
             and Valledupar (SIVA) are expected.



4. Resettlement
As a public work, resettlement for BRT projects is involuntary and forced, and unlike other forms
of resettlement, such as high risk or armed conflict, it can be planned and managed. Given that the
Government is causing the resettlement, the possibility of participation, planning and discussion
is high. In addition, it does not generate the overwhelming feelings of a natural disaster or an armed
conflict situation, where the dialog with the "guilty party" is usually tough.

                                                  Table 5
                                   Modalities of involuntary resettlement
                                Forced                 Natural disasters
                                                       Armed conflict
                                Compulsory             Public work
                                             Source: own elaboration.

The number of properties to be acquired versus the number of social units (SU) 2 identified are
basic indicators for the planning, follow-up and monitoring of the process. The acquisition of
properties will be more complex depending on whether the property is affected partially or totally.
The first is more demanding in terms of impact assessment, functional reconstruction of the

2
 Social Unit: "people or group of people, with or without consanguinity links, that have been associated to meet
their needs on a permanent basis. They may be natural or legal persons" Guidelines of the Ministry of Transport -
MT (2005, p. 4)

                                                        5
property and professional accompaniment needed. For instance, Metroplús (Medellin)
implemented a mixed mode for specific cases, acquiring all the construction but only the affected
part of the property, an approach that allowed the owners to benefit directly from the urban
transformation and the transportation system.

In terms of Social Units, Households SU (owners and possessors), economic SU (formal and
informal), socioeconomic SU (the sum of the two previous ones), landlord SU and tenant SU were
typified. The total number of properties acquired for the BRT projects (first three loans) was 2,799
and the number of identified SU (excluding landlords and tenants) amounted to 4,187.
Resettlement progress for these SU is 100%.
                                                 Table 6
                       Total or partial land acquisition by Implementing Agency
                        Implementing                Private properties
                             Entity
                                             TOTAL        PARTIAL MIXED
                        Metroplús              1074           415        64
                        Transcaribe             98            334        NA
                        Transmetro              115           404        NA
                        Megabús                 153            52        NA
                        Metrolinea              65             25        NA
                        TOTAL                  1505          1230        64
                             Source: own elaboration (data till December 2013)

                   Note: it does not include the properties acquired with the fourth loan, under
                                                  implementation.




    Vulnerable works and housing (before                          Finished resettlement and construction
               construction)



   4.1. Public space occupants (PSO)


                                                       6
Public space occupants (PSO) are a special chapter since, except for Bogota and Medellin, the
cities did not have public policies in this regard. Guidelines for this type of resettlement were
developed together with the Ministry of Transport, emphasizing in the formalization, economic
reconversion, training and financing of their transition to formality. The process was especially
instructive in Cartagena (Transcaribe), the city with the highest number of PSO, but also the one
that deployed greater efforts and finally left greater lessons learned. In all cases, people have been
successfully transferred and without conflict.

                                                Tabla 7
           PSO identification and progress of the solution provided by Implementing Agency
                         Implementing       PSO          Estado del traslado
                              Entity
                                                       Temporal Definitive
                         Metroplús           294           49           245
                         Transcaribe        1260          620           640
                         Transmetro          459          169           290
                         Megabús              46            0            46
                         Metrolinea          142          142             0
                         TOTAL              2201          980          1221
                            Source: own elaboration (data till December 2013)




        Public space occupied and public space recovered in Cartagena (Basurto and Av. Venezuela)


5. Safeguards Pedagogy
When implementing projects with safeguards, one of the initial difficulties is the search for
experienced social professionals. This was the case of the BRT projects in Colombia, where except
for Bogota and Medellín, the cities were unaware of this issue and the social staff hired by the
Implementing Entities did not have the specific experience in safeguards. The strategy adopted

                                                   7
during the first NUTP loan was an intensive process of training in safeguards, resettlement and
dissemination of project instruments through local and, in some cases, regional workshops.


Subsequently, annual workshops were held with all NUTP participating cities, to share
experiences, lessons learned and unresolved challenges, which allowed to strengthen links and
cross-cutting networks among social, legal and technical professionals. This strategy became so
strong that nowadays, in the execution of the fourth loan and with the inclusion of the intermediate
cities in the program, these workshops are scheduled twice a year and they allow the sharing of
experiences and learning not only with those cities with WB financing, but also with the five cities
financed by IADB and CAF.

Sharing these achievements and difficulties among the 15 cities participating in the Colombia
NUTP can be one of the most enriching experiences for the professionals involved and for the
communities, that receive a more accurate assistance in resolving resettlement problems.



6. Results of Resettlement Plans
As a tool for the verification and evaluation of the resettlement process, closing documents for the
resettlement plans were implemented, corresponding to post-resettlement or land acquisition
monitoring. To date there are 23 closing documents for the same number of completed resettlement
plans. For the preparation of these documents, which were reviewed by the Ministry of Transport,
the following topics were considered, among others: i) updated situation of all social units
registered; ii) monitoring of the differentiated solution applied and verification of its
implementation, iii) monitoring of the payment system to establish that all payments for land,
constructions or any type of compensation have been made, iv) monitoring of the scope and
progress of each program in each resettlement plan. In cases of vulnerable social units, visit to the
new location were also carried out to verify compliance with the agreement.

These closing documents, as the name implies, helped to identify the completion of the plans or
the situations to be resolved. However, since the BRT program is still being implemented, there is
no final evaluation of the results. Some indicators of success are the absence of lawsuits filed by
those affected, the timely progress of works, and the absence of social conflicts around
resettlement. In addition, in many of the cities where transportation systems are implemented,
municipalities have observed resettlement as a good practice and have involved, to a greater or
lesser extent, programs and methodologies used in this project.



7. The Social Cost




                                                 8
One of the most frequent discussions when it comes to implementing resettlement is the cost or
overburden of social teams and the compensation values to be paid. The following tables show,
first, the cost of the project vs. cost of land acquisition, and second, a breakdown of the
compensation value. Compensations are a marginal cost and the value of the properties, although
very important in the project, do not exceed 10% in most cases.

                                          Table 9
  Percentage ratio between compensation, properties acquired and total value of works by city
                                                           Total value of
                          Total value of
                                                              land and                  Total value of the
Implementing agencies       economic            %                                %
                                                              property                       project
                          compensations
                                                             acquisition
Metroplus – Medellín     3,734,441,827      0.997         33,642,412,866       8.98     374,621,765,954
Metroplus – Envigado     1,112,992,872      0.666         15,470,315,821       9.25     167,226,392,535
Metroplus -Itagüí        1,392,280,030      0.768         16,386,411,372       9.04     181,217,900,000
Transcaribe              2,911,808,662      0.748         74,611,418,607       19.15    389,519,460,772
Transmetro               2,294,836,400      0.492         32,933,202,814       7.05     466,881,038,603
Megabús                  2,119,401,112      0.985         17,435,475,041       8.11     215,059,439,795
Metrolinea               1,111,088,681      0.217         30,285,437,016       5.90     513,070,057,000
TOTAL                    14,676,849,584     0.636         20,764,673,537       9.57     2,307,596,054,659
                           Source: own elaboration (data till December 2013)

                                           Table 10
                   Percentage ratio between types of economic compensation
                                               Transfer of
                                                                     Housing            Additional
   Procedures      Transfer         Rent        economic
                                                                   replacement       acknowledgements
                                                 activity
  3,479,973,000   548,171,000   1,645,273,000 5,914,419,000        762,721,000         1,891,178,000
                           Source: own elaboration (data till December 2013)
                                  Note: some values are approximate.



8. Conclusions
   • The role of the WB and the activation of safeguards is decisive for adequate social
     interventions regarding resettlement. Considering that Colombia does not have explicit
     rules on resettlement, only projects financed by multilateral banks internalize resettlement
     within projects.
   •   The Resettlement Policy Framework has been adopted by the Ministry of Transport for all
       multilateral-funded projects, a decision that is on the right track to implement a public
       policy.
   •   The interdisciplinary approach is key for resettlement. It is still necessary to intensify the
       search for methodologies that allow a better articulation between disciplines, treated with
       equal hierarchy, and a horizontal dialogue with the communities.


                                                  9
•   Economic compensations are correlated with "the involuntary", key issue in a resettlement
    policy. It is required that the projects contemplate these items in their execution.
•   Valuation methods of the goods to be acquired, even if they are in line with the WB policy,
    still depart from a dominant position of the State, where the citizen –turned into a "seller"—
    is a passive subject with few opportunities to discuss transaction values.
•   Impact mitigation has spread to the reestablishment of law, an approach that may allow a
    better understanding of resettlement, beyond a mere commercial transaction.




                                             10
