 Sahel Refugees:
 HUMAN FACE
  of a
         REGIONAL CRISIS




COUNTRY FOCUS: NIGER
FALL 2017
FALL   2017
       Sahel Refugees:
      HUMAN FACE
       of a
                                    REGIONAL CRISIS

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS................................................................................................................. 3
FOREWORD......................................................................................................................................... 4
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS............................................................................................ 7
SPECIAL TOPICS................................................................................................................................8
Refugees: The Human Face of a Regional Crisis................................................................................ 8
Country Focus: Niger........................................................................................................................................... 31
REGIONAL ECONOMIC FOCUS................................................................................................. 50
Macroeconomic indicators of AFCW3 countries
at a glance, 2012-2017.................................................................................................................. 50
     CHAD........................................................................................................................................................................ 51
    GUINEA................................................................................................................................................................... 55
    MALI......................................................................................................................................................................... 59
    NIGER...................................................................................................................................................................... 63




              											                                                                                                                                               	              5   2
Acknowledgements

This report was a collective effort prepared under the direction of José López-Calix and
Christophe Lemiere with the contributions of an interdisciplinary Bank team composed
of Michel Rogy, Emilie Jourdan, Mona Louise Niebuhr, Johannes Hoogeveen,
Luc Razafimandimby, Aly Sanoh, Olivier Béguy, Ali Zafar, Yele Batana,
Markus Kitzmuller, Abdoul G. Mijiyawa, Marcel Nshimiyimana, Irum Touqeer,
Susana Sanchez, and Emilia Skrok. Lars C. Moller, Andrew Dabalen, Giuseppe Zampaglione,
Jean Baptiste Migraine, Boubacar Sidiki Walbani, Paola Ridolfi, Michael Hamaide,
Francois Nankobogo, Siaka Bakayoko and Rachidi B. Radji provided helpful guidance,
information and comments.

Compiling the report would not have been possible without the editorial assistance of
Maude Jean-Baptiste, Fatimata K. Sy, and administrative support from Micky Ananth and
Edmond Bagde Dingamhoudou.

Precious editorial and composing work was timely executed by Valérie Bennett,
Maria Deverna, Pia Decarsin and their design, translation and editing colleagues at
JPD systems.




                                                                                           3
Fo re w o rd

I am pleased to introduce the fourth edition of a series of reports dealing with key development
issues in Chad, Guinea, Mali, and Niger. This series is intended to foster public debates about key
macroeconomic and fiscal policy options in support of poverty reduction. It disseminates the findings
of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about major development issues. More
specifically, the series is devoted to most critical issues affecting the Sahel region. It provides a deeper
iterative country focus as well as a glimpse of the regional macro trends. The series includes analysis,
even if the findings are preliminary and less than fully polished. In short, this new series has become
an innovative vehicle for the World Bank to propose some priority policy reforms not yet properly
tackled or even debated in these countries.


The present volume is devoted to sounding the alarm about one of the most dramatic faces of
the regional crisis: the refugees in the Sahel, with a special focus on Chad and Niger. The Sahel
is experiencing political upheaval and insecurity due to the conflict in Libya, the crises in Mali and
Nigeria, as well as the spread of violent extremism across the region. This instability – taking place
in a context of deep poverty and vulnerability – has had dramatic consequences for the countries
involved and the population living in these areas. Conflict has impacted agro-pastoral activities, and
trade and food supplies have been disrupted. New routes have opened for the trafficking of people,
drugs and arms. The state and traditional authorities have been challenged by armed groups, and
thousands of people have sought refuge in neighboring countries, in particular from Mali and Nigeria
to Chad and Niger.


The refugee crisis is quickly worsening. Chad already is the fifth largest refugee host country per
1,000 inhabitants, hosting around 391,000 refugees, including 310,000 Sudanese, 73,000 Central
Africans, and around 9,000 Nigerians. For its part, Niger hosts 166,093 refugees, 121,391 internally
displaced persons (IDPs), and 136,069 returnees. By June 2017, about 62,000 Malians had sought




                                                                                                               4
refuge in Niger, with a little over half of the refugees consisting of women, and almost two-thirds
under the age of 18. To make matters worse, by the end of June 2017, the Boko Haram insurgency
has led 248,000 displaced people to the Diffa Region, including 105,000 Nigerian refugees, 15,000
Nigerien returnees and 128,000 IDPs.


The article explores the impact that the hosting of refugees has had on Chad and Niger, as well as the
existing governmental and humanitarian responses. In doing so, it presents the World Bank Group’s
new innovative International Development Association (IDA) 18 window introducing the design of a
developmental response to forced displacement. We underscore that the presence of refugees in
the region is not new. What is new is the increasing scale and complexity of the crisis and the growing
recognition that it is both a humanitarian and a development challenge. Therefore, responding to
the refugee situations in a sustainable manner now involves improving the living conditions of host
communities while also addressing the specific vulnerabilities faced by refugees. In this context, it
entails helping institutions to be better prepared to handle potential new refugee inflows.


The report also focuses on Niger’s development needs, summarizing the findings of the Systematic
Country Diagnostic (SCD). The SCD is a diagnostic exercise conducted by World Bank staff to identify
priority areas for World Bank Group engagement. The document was informed by the Renaissance
Program of the Government of Niger. It was developed in close consultation with national authorities,
the private sector, civil society and other stakeholders. It presents a systematic assessment of
the constraints that will need to be addressed as well as the opportunities available to accelerate
progress toward achieving the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity
in a sustainable way.


In terms of the economic outlook, I am especially pleased to report that growth recovery is
consolidating. All countries, with the exception of Chad, are looking at positive growth rates of around
5–6 percent in 2017 and onwards; and with the exception of Guinea, this is happening in a context
of downward-trending inflation rates well below the 3 percent targeted by their respective regional
monetary institutions.




                                                                                                           5
This performance deserves to be highlighted because, despite their common characteristics
and ongoing external shocks, all countries continue to be handicapped by their slow economic
diversification, low productive agriculture and stagnating manufacturing sector. Cumbersome
regulations, heavy taxation by international standards and poor access to finance continue to
be major obstacles to fostering growth and competitiveness in these countries. As such, these
constraints will need to be removed. Indeed, for the first time in many years, these countries are
moving from concentrating their efforts at stabilizing their economies to regaining momentum in the
implementation of deeper structural reforms.


Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to our governments and technical and financial partners
for their cooperation and many joint contributions over the past few months. Their encouragement,
inputs and technical advice have made it possible to create an environment particularly well suited
to a rich and regular exchange of views on development policy. I hope that this series will make
it possible to deepen these discussions and move them into the public space in order to inform
and enable citizens and to express their own views. In any case, the findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this report are entirely those of the World Bank staff and do not necessarily
represent the views of the World Bank Group and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive
Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.




                                                       Soukeyna Kane
                                                       Director of Operations
                                                       Chad, Guinea, Mali, and Niger




                                                                                                          6
A c ro n y m s a n d a b b re v i a t i o n s
AFCW3	          Central and West Africa
BCEAO	          Central Bank of West African States
BEAC	           Banque des États de l’Afrique centrale (Bank of Central African States)
CEMAC	          Communauté économique et monétaire de l’Afrique centrale (Central African 	
	               Economic and Monetary Community)
CGE	            Computable General Equilibrium
CPF	            Country Partnership Framework
CRRF	           Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework
CSOs	           Civil society organizations
FAO	            Food and Agriculture Organization
FDI	            Foreign direct investment
GCFF	           Global Concessional Financing Facility
GCMP	           Global Crisis Risk Management Platform
ICT	            Information and communication technologies
IDA	            International Development Association
IDPs	           Internally displaced persons
IMF	            International Monetary Fund
IPL	            International poverty line
LSMS-ISA	       Education Living Standards Measurement Study - Integrated Surveys on Agriculture
NGOs	           Non-governmental organizations
PFM	            Public Financial Management
SCD	            Systematic Country Diagnostic
SDGs	           Sustainable Development Goals
SGBV	           Sexual and Gender-Based Violence
TFP	            Total Factor Productivity
UNHCR	          United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
WAEMU	          West African Economic and Monetary Union
WBG	            World Bank Group
WDI	            World Development Indicators
WEO	            World Economic Outlook
WFP	        	   World Food Program
 

                                                                                                   7
Special topics :

Refugees:
The Human Face of a Regional Crisis                                                        1




n	    The Sahel region, especially around the Lake Chad basin, is facing unprecedented
      conditions of forced displacement taking place in an already fragile and impoverished
      environment.

n	    The presence of refugees in the region is not new. What is new is the dramatic increase
      in the scale and complexity of the crisis and the growing recognition that it is both a
      humanitarian and a development challenge, not only for the host countries but for their
      neighbors also.

n	    No reliable figures on the fiscal cost created by having to deal with Sahel refugees are
      available worldwide, but host governments acknowledge that outlays are becoming
      unbearable in the highly constrained fiscal space in which they operate.

n	    Today, responding to this refugee crisis requires a holistic approach, including improving
      the living conditions of host communities, addressing the specific vulnerabilities faced by
      refugees, and helping institutions better prepare for potential new refugee inflows. This is
      the approach proposed by the new IDA18 window on refugees.




1 This Note was prepared by Émilie Jourdan and Mona Luisa Niebuhr.




                                                                                                     8
I n t ro d u c t i o n

Forced displacement is emerging as a major development challenge in the Sahel region, and
especially around the Lake Chad basin. The Sahel has recently experienced political upheaval
and insecurity due to the conflict in Libya, the crises in Mali and in Nigeria, and the spread of
violent extremism across the region. This instability, which is taking place in a context of deep
poverty and vulnerability, has had severe consequences for the countries involved and the
populations living in the area: agro-pastoral activities, trade, and food supplies have been
disrupted, new routes for the trafficking of people, drugs, and arms have opened up, state and
traditional authorities have been challenged by armed groups, and thousands of people have
sought refuge in neighboring countries, in particular from Mali and Nigeria to Chad and Niger.

A mix of protracted and ongoing displacement situations is playing out, putting additional
strain on an already volatile area. People who had to flee in the face of conflict and violence
are among the most vulnerable, and their presence affects development prospects in the
overwhelmingly poor communities that host them. Furthermore, displacement intersects
economic migration patterns across the Sahel toward Europe, leading to a complex picture of
mixed migratory flows.

This note explains the multidimensional nature of the refugee crises in the Sahel. After
describing the profound implications the hosting of refugees has had in Chad and Niger,21it
presents an overview of inadequate governmental and humanitarian responses. The sharp rise
in these challenges since 2015, which reversed several years of steady decline, has motivated
the World Bank Group (WBG) to urgently introduce a new developmental response to forced
displacement, and in particular to the issue of refugees (Boxes 1 and 2).




2	 Burkina Faso, Cameroon, and Mauritania also host refugees who fled the Malian and Boko Haram crises.




                                                                                                          9
a
Box 1: A new development approach to                         Box 2: Distinguishing between forcibly
              forced displacement                                          displaced and economic migrants


    The new development approach to forced                   A refugee is a person “who is outside his or her
    displacement is complementary to—but distinct            country of nationality or habitual residence, has a
    from—the exclusive humanitarian focus on short-          well-founded fear of being persecuted because of
    term crisis responses and the so-called “rights-         his or her race, religion, nationality, membership of
    based protection agenda.” Its overall objective is to    a particular social group, or political opinions, and is
    help reduce poverty among the forcibly displaced         unable or unwilling to avail himself or herself of the
    and their host communities as part of a broader          protection of that country or to return there for fear of
    effort to achieve the Sustainable Development            persecution” (UN Convention Relating to the Status
    Goals (SDGs). Thus, its focus is on tackling the         of Refugees).
    medium-term socioeconomic dimensions of forced
    displacement.                                            Forced displacement has three distinct components:
                                                             refugees, who have crossed an international border
    To support the forcibly displaced, development           and are protected by the United Nations (UN) 1951
    actors should help reduce or even eliminate              Refugee Convention; internally displaced persons
    vulnerabilities. These vulnerabilities are specific to   (IDPs), who have been displaced by conflict and
    the forcibly displaced, including catastrophic losses    violence within their own country; and returnees,
    of assets or trauma. This affects their ability to       who returned to their own country due to violence
    seize economic opportunities and may trap them in        or conflict in their hosting country. The differences
    poverty. Because such vulnerabilities set them apart     between these three groups, especially their legal
    from other poor populations in the communities           status, are significant. Yet, they often endure similar
    where they live, broad-based development                 hardships, and they all need protection.
    programs may not suffice to relieve their plight, and
    special interventions are needed.                        Forcibly displaced persons are distinct from
                                                             economic migrants, who move in search of economic
    To support host communities, development                 opportunities. This is not only a matter of legal
    actors should help manage the shock caused by            status: there are also empirical differences, including
    inflows of forcibly displaced persons. The arrival       demographics (about three quarters of economic
    of large numbers of people in localities creates         migrants are working-age adults, while about half
    both risks and opportunities because it transforms       of refugees are children), patterns of movement
    the environment for designing and implementing           (close to 90 percent of refugees have crossed only
    poverty reduction programs. Development actors           one border, moving to the nearest place where they
    should therefore help host communities manage            can find safety, while about two-thirds of economic
    these new circumstances.                                 migrants have crossed several borders in search of
                                                             better opportunities in faraway lands), and integration
                                                             prospects (in the European Union, it takes over 20
    Source: World Bank 2016. “Forcibly Displaced: Toward     years for refugees to reach the level of employment
    a Development Approach Supporting Refugees, the          achieved by economic migrants).
    Internationally Displaced, and Their Hosts.”
                                                             Displacement induced by natural disaster differs
                                                             from that caused by violence and conflict, even if its
                                                             impact is just as catastrophic. For example, the
                                                             political dimension of the crisis and its resolution is
                                                             often less pronounced, and the social fabric is not
                                                             affected in the same way. Population movements
                                                             prompted by climate change include a mix of
                                                             disaster displacement and economic migration. With
                                                             extreme and sudden climate events, people may
                                                             have to leave because of natural disasters.




                                                                                                                    10
Contextual Elements:
W h a t M a d e P e o p l e G o?

Two refugee situations coexist in the region: some refugees coming from Darfur or the Central
African Republic (CAR) are in situations of protracted displacement with low prospects of
return, while other situations (Lake Chad area, Malian border in Niger) are linked to acute
conflicts. The situation in Lake Chad is particularly dramatic (see Map 1).

                                         MAP 1: Nigeria situation, UNHCR 201731




Refugees in Chad

Chad is the twelfth largest host country for refugees in the world and the sixth largest in the
Africa region after Uganda, Ethiopia, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Kenya, and
Sudan. It is the fifth largest host per 1,000 inhabitants. Chad hosts around 391,000 refugees,
including 310,000 Sudanese, 73,000 Central Africans, and, around 9,000 Nigerians, the
majority of whom live in situations of protracted displacement. These refugees live mainly

3	 Unless otherwise indicated, forced displacement figures are based on the latest UNHCR data, available at https://data2.unhcr.org.




                                                                                                                                       11
near borders, in the East (Ouaddai, Sila, Wadi Fira, and Ennedi Est), South (Logone Oriental,
Logone Occidental, Mandoul, Moyen-Chari, Salamat), West (Lac Region), and N’Djamena, the
country’s capital. After a modest decline between 2009 and 2014, their numbers have started
to increase again since 2015 (Chart 1). 42



             CHART 1: Chad forced displacement time series 1990–2016, UNHCR 2017


                                       Chad	Forced	Displacement	Time	Series
                   600000
                   500000
                   400000
                   300000
                   200000
                   100000
                          0
                              1990
                              1991
                              1992
                              1993
                              1994
                              1995
                              1996
                              1997
                              1998
                              1999
                              2000
                              2001
                              2002
                              2003
                              2004
                              2005
                              2006
                              2007
                              2008
                              2009
                              2010
                              2011
                              2012
                              2013
                              2014
                              2015
                              2016
                              Asylum-seekers                                Internally	 displaced	persons

                              Refugees	 (incl.	refugee-like	 situations)




Refugee situations in Chad result from three major conflicts in neighboring countries: the
Darfur violence, the crisis in the Central African Republic (CAR), and the Boko Haram-related
regional crisis (Chart 2):

     ·	 Due to the violence in the Darfur region of Sudan’s far west, some 450,000 persons
           were displaced in 2014 and another 100,000 in January 2015 alone, adding to some two
           million long-term internally displaced persons (IDPs) since fighting erupted in 2003.

     ·	 The Central African Republic (CAR) has been confronted for several decades with a
           cycle of conflicts and violence that accelerated from the end of the 1990s. In addition
           to existing inflows of refugees, since 2013, the CAR has experienced severe political
           and security disruptions, which have caused an unprecedented humanitarian crisis and
           forced a quarter of the population to leave its region of origin (Map 2). Today, despite
           modest progress in the area of reconciliation and disarmament, demobilization, and
           reintegration (DDR), tensions between armed groups and communities remain high,
           and armed clashes are frequent.



4	 By the end of 2015, there were also up to 108,000 IDPs within Chad. The figure includes approximately 95,000 persons displaced by recent Boko
   Haram attacks. Additionally, there are an estimated 83,000 Chadian nationals who have returned from the Central African Republic (CAR) since
   late 2013, and up to 8,500 Chadian nationals who returned from Nigeria.




                                                                                                                                                   12
·	 The Boko Haram insurgency, which began in 2009 in Nigeria, spread to neighboring
   countries (Cameroon, Chad, and Niger) in 2014, thus becoming a major regional conflict
   and the greatest single cause of displacement in the Lake Chad basin, with profound
   implications for peace and stability in the entire area. While Boko Haram was forced to
   retreat into the Sambisa Forest of Nigeria in 2015 under attacks from the Multinational
   Joint Task Force made up of soldiers from Nigeria, Niger, Chad, and Cameroon, it
   remains the world’s deadliest terrorist group in terms of the number of casualties.

            CHART 2: Chad refugees by origin 1990–2016, UNHCR 2017


                       Chad	Refugee	Time	Series	by	Origin
         500000
         450000
         400000
         350000
         300000
         250000
         200000
         150000
         100000
          50000
              0
                  1995




                  2005




                  2015
                  1990
                  1991
                  1992
                  1993
                  1994

                  1996
                  1997
                  1998
                  1999
                  2000
                  2001
                  2002
                  2003
                  2004

                  2006
                  2007
                  2008
                  2009
                  2010
                  2011
                  2012
                  2013
                  2014

                  2016
                        CAR    Nigeria   Sudan   Other	Origin	 Countries



     MAP 2: Central African Republic regional refugee situation, UNHCR 2017




                                                                                             13
Refugees in Niger
Niger hosted 166,093 refugees as of end-2016. In addition, there were 121,391 internally
displaced people (IDPs) and 136,069 returnees. By June 2017, about 62,000 Malians had
sought refuge in Niger. A little over half of the refugees are women, and almost two thirds
are under 18 years of age (Chart 3). By the end of June 2017, the Boko Haram insurgency had
driven 248,000 displaced people into the Diffa Region, including 105,000 Nigerian refugees,
15,000 Nigerien returnees, and 128,000 IDPs.



        CHART 3: Niger forced displacement time series 1990–2016, UNHCR 2017


                             Niger	Forced	Displacement	Time	Series
            350000
            300000
            250000
            200000
            150000
            100000
            50000
                0
                     1990
                     1991
                     1992
                     1993
                     1994
                     1995
                     1996
                     1997
                     1998
                     1999
                     2000
                     2001
                     2002
                     2003
                     2004
                     2005
                     2006
                     2007
                     2008
                     2009
                     2010
                     2011
                     2012
                     2013
                     2014
                     2015
                     2016
                     Asylum-seekers                               Internally	 displaced	persons

                     Refugees	 (incl.	refugee-like	 situations)




Broadly speaking, the crisis in Mali accounts for 22 percent of the total number of displaced
persons in Niger, while the Boko Haram regional crisis accounts for the remaining 78 percent
(Chart 4):

   ·	 Niger is strongly affected by the Malian conflict that erupted in 2011. Since the beginning
       of this crisis, regional instability has taken on a new dimension, with an increasing
       number of attacks on Niger’s territory, which have an enormous humanitarian impact,
       threaten the economy, and place a severe strain on the public finances due to increased
       military spending. Malian refugees are mostly settled in the two border regions of
       Tillabéri (with three refugee camps) and Tahoua (with two refugee-hosting zones for
       nomadic refugees) as well as in Niamey, the country’s capital. Already involved in the
       UN peacekeeping mission in Mali, Niger is also part of the G5 Sahel joint force created
       in July 2017 and comprised of Mauritania, Mali, Chad, and Burkina Faso.

   ·	 The Boko Haram Regional Crisis has also had a significant spillover effect on Niger. Since
       early 2013, the Diffa region has accommodated thousands of displaced people from


                                                                                                    14
       northern Nigeria. Most forcibly displaced live in spontaneous temporary settlements
       along National Highway 1, with the Sayam-Forage refugee and Kablewa IDP camps
       hosting less than 10 percent of the total displaced population. Over 170 villages near
       the Komadougou River and Lake Chad have been abandoned because of violence and
       attacks. This is in addition to displacements resulting from flooding in the Komadougou
       River and Lake Chad areas since 2012.



                CHART 4: Niger refugees by origin 1990–2016, UNHCR 2017


                            Niger	Refugee	Time	Series	by	Origin
              180000
              160000
              140000
              120000
              100000
               80000
               60000
               40000
               20000
                   0
                       1995




                       2005




                       2015
                       1990
                       1991
                       1992
                       1993
                       1994

                       1996
                       1997
                       1998
                       1999
                       2000
                       2001
                       2002
                       2003
                       2004

                       2006
                       2007
                       2008
                       2009
                       2010
                       2011
                       2012
                       2013
                       2014

                       2016
                                  Nigeria   Mali   Other	Origin	 Countries




Key Issues for Refugees and Their Hosts

Overall and despite a very strong welcoming culture toward refugees and returnees across
the entire region, refugee situations are emerging in already extremely poor and fragile
borderland areas, on which the inflow of forcibly displaced people (refugees, returnees, IDPs)
puts additional stress.




                                                                                                 15
Poverty and Livelihoods

Chad and Niger are among the countries with the poorest populations in the world, and
the ongoing conflicts severely affect cross-border trade, food security, and agricultural
productivity across the region, leading to a worsening of the economic situation of
households. Most employment is informal and consists of agriculture, pastoralism, small
and micro-enterprises, and cross-border trading. Moreover, climate change is worsening
and intensifies the frequency and magnitude of droughts and floods, impacting negatively
on efforts to increase agricultural productivity and reduce food insecurity.



     ·	 In Chad, over a third of the population lives below the poverty line. In 2015, Chad was
           ranked second last out of 117 countries on the Global Hunger Index. The oil price
           collapse and the rainfall deficit have had a dramatic impact on the economy.51The
           deterioration of the security situation and consequent disruptions to cross–border trade
           flows with Cameroon and Nigeria have magnified the country’s economic downturn.
           Environmental degradation (e.g., wood, water) is accelerating in every region hosting
           refugees.

     ·	 Almost half of the population in Niger lives below the poverty line. Human
           development indicators are among the lowest in the world, with the average level of
           education being 1.4 years and only 52 percent of children having received a complete
           set of vaccinations. Food insecurity is exacerbated by political instability across the
           region. In addition, access to fertile land (Lake Chad, Komadougou River) is limited
           because of insecurity. Coupled with restrictions put in place in the context of the
           State of Emergency in 2015 (prohibition or limitations on the production of red pepper,
           fishing, the use of motorcycles, markets, or livestock migration), this has impacted the
           livelihoods of thousands of people.




5	 Regional data in Chad show that conflicts and refugees are concentrated in the regions of the country that recorded the greatest poverty and food
   insecurity, namely Wadi Fira, Sila, Ouaddai, Logone Oriental, and Moyen Chari, which all host refugee settlements. Among these regions, Logone
   Oriental and Moyen Chari have the highest food poverty rates, while food insecurity data collected between 2011 and 2014 indicate that Wadi Fira,
   Sila, and Ouaddai have a particularly high incidence of food insecurity. Logone Oriental has also been hit by a prolonged downturn in the cotton
   sector, once a major source of jobs and incomes. After having benefitted from the oil revenue distribution law for several years, the region saw
   these transfers stop recently due to the oil price shock.




                                                                                                                                                       16
The presence of refugees is causing additional strain on these already fragile communities.
It puts pressure on natural resources (land, firewood, pasture), and it can potentially distort
markets as the displaced trade part of the food rations they receive from humanitarian
agencies (hence the price volatility seen for specific goods, particularly food and water).
However, the influx of refugees can also have positive impacts on the host communities: for
example, landowners can benefit from leasing their land to refugees, and host communities
in the vicinity often benefit from the use of camp infrastructures. However, these impacts are
not felt equally across population groups: clearly, there are both winners and losers. While
landowners are likely to enjoy gains, those to whom refugees present direct competition in the
labor market are likely to incur losses.



Service Delivery and Institutions

Lack of access to basic services across the region worsens in remote border areas, where
refugees often settle when they flee their own country. Harsh climatic conditions, frequent
epidemic outbreaks (e.g., cholera, measles), and high demographic growth together with the
presence of displaced populations puts heavy pressure on weak infrastructures and services
and on the already scarce (and decreasing) resources of vulnerable communities (e.g., land,


                                                                                                  17
wood). Humanitarian assistance to refugees can lead to paradoxical situations where local
communities receive substantially less assistance and have lower access to services, which
are often of lower quality. Consequently, host communities are often more vulnerable than
the refugees themselves. In Chad, for instance, institutional capacities and state presence are
limited in border areas, seriously impeding service delivery to local communities. Health and
education indicators are extremely low (high infant mortality, HIV prevalence, illiteracy) and
basic services (healthcare, water and sanitation, education) are scarce. The situation of women
and girls is a particular concern in this context.



Increased Insecurity

Overall, heightened insecurity in refugee-hosting areas is linked to a spillover effect of the
conflict in neighboring countries rather than to the presence of refugees. Recently, for instance,
the security situation substantially deteriorated in Tillabéri and Tahoua regions in Niger,
where terrorist armed groups operating from Mali have carried out a number of operations.
Transnational criminal activities such as road banditry, cattle theft, and armed robberies have
also been reported in the tri-border area between Niger, Mali, and Burkina Faso. In Chad, the
continued medium-intensity conflict in the CAR has created a general state of insecurity that
regularly spills over the border with Chad, involving incursions by bands of zaraguina highway
bandits, road attacks, and kidnappings (particularly in refugee and returnee camps).

In both countries, the regions surrounding Lake Chad have been affected by an increasing
number of terrorist attacks and by rapid deterioration in the daily security of people trying to
maintain an economic activity (agriculture, fishing) along Lake Chad and the Komadougou
River in Niger. In both countries, some local populations are arming themselves to protect their
communities and goods against Boko Haram attacks.



The Fiscal Cost: A Rapidly Rising but Still Barely Known Burden

The forced displacement situations in Chad and Niger take place against the backdrop of
a profound fiscal crisis in the former and severe budget constraints in the latter. Part of this
situation is explained by the global drop in commodity prices, the economic downturn in
Nigeria, and the cost of conflict and insecurity.




                                                                                                     18
Since June 2014, oil prices have fallen by about 70 percent. The oil price shock has had
particularly severe consequences in Chad as oil accounts for 63 percent of fiscal revenues.
Between 2014 and 2016, oil-related fiscal revenues declined from 11.7 percent to 0.5 percent
of non-oil GDP, and as a result, expenditures fell from 29.4 percent of non-oil GDP in 2014 to
16.6 percent in 2016. The economic crisis in Nigeria also had negative effects on the Nigerien
economy. Spillovers from that downturn have led to lower demand from Nigeria, especially for
fresh produce and livestock. Moreover, trade activities at the Nigeria border in the agriculture
and livestock sectors have largely halted following the devaluation of the naira, with the
reduced volume of trade transactions with Nigeria lowering import tax revenues. World Bank
estimates calculate that in value terms, Niger’s average exports to Nigeria fell 16 percent
in 2015.

Little is known about the exact fiscal cost of refugee-related programs as it is difficult to
evaluate separately from the overall cost of dealing with conflict and insecurity. Studies in
similar contexts have shown that hosting refugees increases the aggregate income of the
host community but imposes direct fiscal costs on the host government. These costs arise
from different forms of public good provision, including security and military services. Security
challenges negatively impact livestock, commerce, communications, and cross-border trade
and cause a rapid increase in military spending. Both Niger and Chad had to step up their
military presence in conflict-affected areas and are militarily engaged in both Mali through
the UN peacekeeping mission MINUSMA and in the Lake Chad basin since the creation of
the Multinational Joint Task Force. In Niger, security-related spending rose to 5.2 percent in
2015 from an average of 3 percent of GDP between 2013 and 2014. Apart from these security-
related costs for which it is difficult to disentangle the cost of conflicts themselves and that
of hosting refugees, governments face additional costs deriving from making other public
services available to refugees (e.g., healthcare, education).



Specific Vulnerabilities of Refugees
Limited Access to Services and Economic Opportunities

As country systems are often weak and unable to respond to the needs of refugees,
additional services facilities (hospitals, health clinics, schools) are set up in refugee camps or
in improvised settlements. Due to their limited access to economic opportunities in an often-
fragile economic context, refugees also benefit from food assistance or cash distribution.
These services aim to protect refugees in the face of immediate crisis and undoubtedly save
lives. However, when crises persist over the medium term, this level of service may create
dependency behaviors among refugees, which may affect their ability to seize economic
opportunities, leaving them trapped in poverty as they face little or no access to land tenure,
jobs, credit, or socioeconomic networks.




                                                                                                     19
The bulk of the humanitarian support for refugees is provided by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the World Food Program (WFP).
UNHCR and WFP assistance is highly dependent on donor funding, which varies considerably
depending on the level of media coverage or public attention and on competing refugee crises
in other parts of the world. For example, humanitarian agencies have had to cut down their
aid in Eastern Chad. In early 2014, WFP cut food rations by 50 percent despite the country’s
persistent food insecurity. Consequently, refugees, particularly women and children, were
forced to adopt negative coping strategies (e.g., children being taken out of school to work
or look after younger siblings, increases in sexual exploitation and petty crime). In Niger, aid
distribution in regions that host refugees targets the population affected by the Boko Haram
crisis as a priority. This is due to the magnitude of the displacement crisis, where the current
level of external aid is far from adequate to responding to the basic needs of forcibly displaced
populations, and by the high level of international attention and media focus on the Lake Chad
basin. In contrast, following keen interest on the part of donors at the peak of the crisis, very
few interventions are dedicated to the Malian refugee crisis, which over the years is at risk of
sliding into oblivion.


Gender-Based Violence and Psychosocial Trauma

Across all groups, women and girls often face great difficulties, including highly limited
economic opportunities and access to education. Gender-based violence and sex offered for
survival purposes are relatively prevalent in the context of forced displacement. Early marriages
are often the norm, including within host communities. Furthermore, the Boko Haram conflict,
which is characterized by extreme levels of violence and destruction, has significantly impacted
social relations. Displaced populations suffer from high levels of psychosocial trauma due to
the violence they witnessed or were victims of, lack of opportunities to engage in economic
activity of any kind, loss of dignity, and shame. As the conflict has intensified, the prevalence of
sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) has escalated dramatically in the entire Lake Chad
area. Unless the gender dimension of the situation is effectively dealt with, progress on both
dimensions is likely to remain elusive.




                                                                                                       20
Tensions with Host Communities

Large movements of forcibly displaced people put social cohesion at risk due to competition
over natural resources and economic opportunities or suspicion of collusion with foreign
armed groups, which often creates mistrust and resentment toward the refugee population. In
the Lake Chad basin on both the Niger and Chad sides, despite strong historical links between
populations surrounding the lake, the integration of the displaced has been mixed. Stigma
toward the displaced who share characteristics with Boko Haram (e.g., ethnicity and area
of origin) has led to an overall perception of increased insecurity among host communities
(e.g., fear of infiltration or association with militant groups). Consequently, Nigerian refugees
are often not fully integrated into these communities, particularly in their economies (access
to credit, land, cooperatives or credit, tontines61  ) and decision-making structures. The fact that
many of the displaced are English speakers complicates integration even further. Young
people, who account for a significant share of the population, are at risk of adopting negative
strategies in order to cope with the lack of economic opportunities (e.g., banditry, recruitment
into armed groups, trafficking). Education is thus critical.




6	 Community micro-credit scheme in which subscribers (most often women) pay an agreed sum into the fund and receive loans in rotation.




                                                                                                                                          21
In Southern Chad, the arrival of new waves of refugees and returnees, who now account for
50 percent of the population in the Nya-Pendé district, place serious strain on natural resources
(land, wood, water) and disrupts cattle movements. The influx of refugees from the CAR to
Chad combined with the arrival of Chadian pastoralists from the north moving south to the
CAR creates significant traffic jams of about two million animals and serves as a source of
conflict between herders and farmers. In response, Chad closed its border in early 2014.




C u r re n t R e s p o n s e

Government Approach and Policies

The two countries of the region hosting the overwhelming majority of refugees – Chad and
Niger – have adopted a progressive approach to managing the overall forced displacement
situation. Both governments have legal and protection environments that are conducive to the
socioeconomic inclusion of refugees, with a strong consensus among governing elites. Chad
and Niger are party to applicable international conventions on refugees, IDPs, and stateless
persons, and have domesticated some of these instruments. In both countries, efforts are
underway to strengthen the legal framework applicable to IDPs in light of Boko Haram-related
displacement.


In Niger, refugees are to be treated equally under the law with respect to key socioeconomic
rights: property ownership, security, access to the courts, access to basic services, and
freedom of expression and movement. Chad, on the other hand, lacks specific legislation on
refugees and IDPs. Provisions for the development-related rights of refugees and IDPs can
be found in various items of domestic legislation, but this approach leaves significant gaps in
terms of property rights (e.g., land rights) and dispute-resolution mechanisms. Refugees are
also required to obtain a special permit to move within Chad.

The Government of Chad is engaged in implementing measures designed to improve the le-
gal framework for refugees by tabling a new law before Parliament – the Law on the Right of
Asylum – on the status of refugees in Chad. The law aims to address all aspects relating to the
situation of refugees and will include provisions governing property rights, access to land, the
right to work, freedom of movement, and the right to public services such as healthcare, ed-
ucation, housing, and justice. Moving forward, Chadian President Deby committed to a series
of policy actions during the Leaders’ Summit held in New-York on September 21, 2016. In par-
ticular, he pledged to improve access to education for refugee children, especially secondary
and higher education, provide access to arable land and strengthen corresponding extension



                                                                                                    22
services, issue official documents (e.g., birth certificates for refugee children), adopt a law gov-
erning the status of refugees and asylum seekers, and ensure that Chadian law incorporates
United Nations and African Union refugee convention protections.

On the practical side, both governments rely heavily on external partners, including UNHCR,
to manage the situation and provide assistance to refugees. This largely reflects the lack of
resources as well as the limited administrative capacity available in remote border regions. This
approach focuses on short-term crisis management, with the priority placed on the security
and humanitarian aspects of the crisis.




Ongoing Assistance Programs

Humanitarian actors led by UNHCR, WFP, and ECHO have traditionally provided the bulk of
assistance to refugees, IDPs and, to a lesser extent, host communities. Such assistance has
been delivered mostly in kind, with minimal needs-based targeting. Only in the Diffa region of
Niger is aid distributed on the basis of vulnerability criteria rather than displacement status and
hence benefits refugees, IDPs, and host communities equally. This positive approach exists
because the displaced are scattered across host communities and because about 80 percent
of the population has no identification documents. A shift is emerging among humanitarian
actors toward cash assistance and a number of programs aimed at providing basic social
services primarily to refugees through NGOs.

A number of development actors are engaged in forced displacement issues, including the
African Development Bank, the European Union (ECHO, European Development Fund, the
Instrument Contributing to Stability and Peace, EU trust fund), the United Nations Development
Program, and Agence Française de Développement and Gesellschaft für internationale
Zusammenarbeit, among others. Most programs aim to foster resilience among host
communities, reinforce service delivery through decentralized institutions, and prepare
for an eventual economic recovery. However, such efforts are limited by the prevailing
insecurity and constraints on absorption capacity in the remote areas where refugees are
located. Development and humanitarian actors work side by side and aim to adopt aid
delivery approaches that support the gradual strengthening of local institutions and build
capacities for the durable management of displacement situations regardless of the
humanitarian presence.




                                                                                                       23
Donors involved in affected regions, including state institutions and implementation partners,
all deal with a lack of capacity at the local level and report insufficient coordination among
external partners and with the government. National and international NGOs are not numerous
and are mainly involved in humanitarian and emergency activities. For their part, humanitarian
actors are increasingly targeting their assistance and gradually shifting to an approach that
aims to build self-reliance and promote integration within host communities. This process
involves increased dialogue with and involvement of decentralized authorities. However, they
often face issues of mandate and capacity limitations with regard to economic and social
development programs.




W B G ’ s I n n o v a t i v e A p p ro a c h

The response to the forced displacement situation in Niger and Chad must be conceived in
a regional context and needs to be complemented by a process of regional dialogue and
activities in neighboring countries such as Mali, Nigeria, and to the extent possible the CAR
and Sudan. An upstream approach to cross-border collaboration will be critical to ensuring
the success and sustainability of returns under a scenario where either of the two conflicts
subsides to a level that facilitates voluntary return. This scope is a particularly important one
for the governments of countries surrounding Lake Chad to adopt since this is where the WBG
in partnership with UNHCR has initiated a study designed to assess the impact of the Boko
Haram crisis on forced displacement in the Lake Chad basin. The potential next step will be
operational engagement at the regional level to stabilize this difficult and still volatile region
through activities aiming to revive economic activity around Lake Chad and promote effective
and sustainable management of water resources. This is part of the Bank’s new developmental
approach to dealing with refugees.



Policy Shift and Developmental Approach

Governments from both origin and host countries are at the center of a worsening crisis.
Humanitarian agencies have been calling for development institutions to support new
approaches that can produce sustainable solutions. Development activities are part of a
broader international effort that has many dimensions: political, security, humanitarian, and
diplomatic. Each dimension must be adequately resourced to deliver a comprehensive
and effective response, and the engagement of development actors should be seen as a
complementary set of interventions.




                                                                                                     24
In supporting the governments of Niger and Chad in their response to forced displacement,
the WBG’s comparative advantages are three-fold:

    (i)	 It offers solutions that integrate policy dialogue, technical assistance, and investment
       finance;

    (ii)	 It designs and implements development responses to a broad range of problems
       with a focus on government ownership and medium-term sustainability; and

    (iii)	It promotes policy dialogue that encourages actors that have not been engaged in
       forced displacement to do so.




A New Development Approach to Forced Displacement
in Chad and Niger

The Bank is proposing a significant policy change from restrictive to progressive approaches
that will allow refugees to move toward self-reliance and support host communities. This
window of opportunity opened with the September 20, 2016 New York Declaration for
Refugees and Migrants (see Box 3). In partnership with UNHCR, the International Development
Association (IDA) 18 resources can provide what is needed to follow up on these commitments
and to ensure that the host governments’ good intentions translate into actual programs that
will make a difference on the ground (see Box 4).




                                                                                                    25
a
Box 3: The global level –                                    Box 4: The UNHCR-WBG partnership and
             New York Declaration for Refugees                              related financing solutions
             and Migrants & Leaders’ Summit


    The New York Declaration for Refugees and Mi-            The WBG is working closely with UNHCR at the global,
    grants is a milestone for global solidarity and refu-    regional, and country level to support the roll-out of the
    gee protection at a time of unprecedented displace-      CRRF in pilot countries. Lessons and experience from
    ment across the world. Adopted by all 193 Member         this work will feed into the development of the Global
    States of the United Nations in September 2016, it       Compact on Refugees. Among first steps, the WBG
    contains historic and wide-ranging commitments           launched new financial modalities for both low- and
    that reaffirm the commitment by Member States to         middle-income countries. Moreover, the Global Crisis
                                                             Risk Management Platform (GCMP) addresses a range
    respect the human rights of refugees and migrants
                                                             of crises, including by helping low- and middle-income
    and to support the countries that welcome them.
                                                             countries cope with refugee shocks and protracted
    The New York Declaration spells out UNHCR’s role         refugee crises. At the heart of these efforts is action
    in this process, which is to develop and initiate com-   aiming to incentivize countries to design refugee policies
    prehensive responses in various countries and re-        that facilitate access to employment, education, and
    gions where refugees are hosted. Djibouti, Ethiopia,     healthcare. This provides a major opportunity to scale
    Uganda, and the United Republic of Tanzania have         up technical and financial support to client governments,
    all agreed to apply this Comprehensive Refugee           strengthen the policy environment, address the
    Response Framework (CRRF). It will also be applied       socioeconomic impacts of forced displacement, and
    to the Somalia situation as well as to countries in      ensure greater collaboration among key stakeholders,
    Central America, namely Costa Rica, Guatemala,           including the private sector.
    Honduras, and Mexico, which are also applying a
    comprehensive regional protection and solutions          For low-income countries, the WBG’s fund for the
    framework to address forced displacement issues          poorest countries—IDA—has strengthened the ability
    in the region.                                           for the poorest member countries to respond to refugee
                                                             crises. The IDA18 replenishment project has created a
    At the Leaders’ Summit on Refugees, which took           USD2 billion sub-window to finance projects for refugees
    place the day after the New York Declaration was         and host communities.
    adopted, 47 States committed to delivering con-
    crete changes to help refugees thrive. Some of           For middle-income countries, which host roughly six
    these commitments include legal and policy chang-        million refugees worldwide, access to concessional
                                                             financing is critical. The WBG has worked with partners
    es such as providing refugees with enhanced ac-
                                                             to expand the Global Concessional Financing Facility
    cess to education, lawful employment, and existing
                                                             (GCFF), which was initially set up to respond to refugee
    social services in the countries in which they live.     situations in Jordan and Lebanon, to the global level.
    Other commitments consist of increased multilater-
    al humanitarian assistance and development aid as
                                                             The WBG is also collecting data and promoting
    well as expanded access to resettlement and com-         evidence building on forced displacement in close
    plementary migration pathways. At the end of 2017,       collaboration with UNHCR and other development
    UNHCR and its partners will assess the application of    partners. Impact evaluations of policies and programs
    the CRRF in these varied contexts. Lessons learned       supporting refugees, IDPs, and host communities will
    will inform the preparation of the Global Compact        be undertaken to advance our understanding of such
    on Refugees, which the High Commissioner will in-        policies and programs. Forcibly displaced persons will
    clude in his report to the UN General Assembly in        now be included in national household surveys, and to
    2018.                                                    this end, the capacity of national statistical agencies will
                                                             be enhanced. The WBG also supports the UNHCR’s data
                                                             updating process, which aims to improve data collection,
                                                             management, and analytics.


In this context, the WBG recently undertook a series of missions jointly with UNHCR to help
identify possible investments under the IDA18 sub-window for refugees and host communities.
The programs developed in consultation with governments rest on a combination of policy
dialogue, projects, and knowledge-related products. Proposed activities largely complement
each other and are expected to be implemented in parallel.


                                                                                                                       26
Chad

In the case of Chad, the WBG is engaged in a response to forced displacement as part of its
Country Partnership Framework (CPF). The Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Response
Project was launched in partnership with FAO and WFP to provide financial and technical
assistance to the Government at the height of refugee and returnee inflows following the
2013 CAR crisis. The WBG is also engaged in a partnership with UNHCR to initiate two pilot
villagization projects in Chad aiming at ending the camp mentality by establishing integrated
villages where refugees and host communities can benefit from the needed infrastructure,
basic services, and opportunities that promote livelihood and socioeconomic activities to
help them take care of themselves in a more secure environment. Such initiatives have been
limited in scope compared to the much larger size of the refugee and forcibly displaced
populations that have been scattered across Chad for years. This is so in large part because
of the lack of sufficient funding and dedicated instruments designed to tackle the issue
nationwide and in a sustainable manner.

Interestingly, the Government of Chad has committed to a number of gradual reforms aiming
to better integrate refugees into Chadian society, strengthen the rights of refugees and
displaced persons, facilitate access to basic services by refugees and host communities,
improve the effectiveness of refugee management structures, and strengthen coordination
among humanitarian and development actors under the auspices of the State.

Looking forward, as part of its development approach to forced displacement, the WBG is also
adopting a programmatic approach to support the government’s policy commitments. The
overall objective of the program is to help the Chadian Government create the conditions for
more effective and sustainable management of refugee situations through efforts that aim to
boost economic opportunities and social service delivery in host communities and increase
self-reliance among refugees who find themselves in protracted situations. The objective is
not only to deal with existing situations but also to strengthen country capacity in terms of
approaches, policies, government systems, and institutions in order to manage refugee crises
in the present and in the future. This is critical as there is a risk that Chad may face further
refugee flows, including in regions not currently severely affected. The proposed program
aims to address the situation of both host communities, including IDPs and returnees as well
as refugees, with the focus on sustainability. The response will need to be adapted to the
specifics of each refugee situation based on the specific and distinct needs of communities
in the East, South, and West of the country. To achieve these ambitious objectives, support
is needed in three areas: (i) strengthening government capacity in terms of both policies
and institutions; (ii) enhancing economic opportunities in refugee-hosting regions for both
refugees and host communities; and (iii) enhancing service delivery (especially education,
healthcare, and water) in refugee-hosting regions for both refugees and host communities.
Overall, interventions should be adjusted to the specifics of each situation. In the East and
South of the country, the focus should be on moving toward a degree of socioeconomic




                                                                                                   27
inclusion with a medium-term horizon, while around Lake Chad, interventions will need to
remain centered on rapid impact activities as a way to help cope with a fluid situation.



Niger

The Government of Niger has committed to a number of gradual reforms aiming to develop a
strategic approach to strengthening the resilience of refugee and host populations, enhance
cooperation among humanitarian organizations and government authorities, strengthen the
protection of refugees, support the return of IDPs when the security situation allows, and
improve access to basic social services for refugees and host communities. To achieve these
objectives, the WBG aims to support the authorities in developing a strategic plan designed
to manage forced displacement over the medium-term. Forced displacement is currently
managed as part of a response to a security and humanitarian crisis, with the focus on short-
term activities. Yet, given the regional environment, Niger may have to manage large numbers
of forcibly displaced persons over a relatively extended period of time. This will require a more
strategic approach that will aim in particular to foster self-reliance and strengthen service
delivery in refugee-hosting areas.

However, the WBG has not had a dedicated engagement with forced displacement even
though its existing portfolio partly reaches refugees and their host communities. This reflects
the current context of high insecurity in refugee-hosting areas as well as uncertainty over
future prospects. The new approach will complement humanitarian efforts rather than add to
them by focusing on economic self-reliance and by working with local authorities rather than
external agencies to strengthen the provision of basic services. Given the uncertainty prevalent
in the Nigerien context, the overall objective of the programs will be to help the Government
of Niger manage forced displacement situations by combining humanitarian interventions
with the provision of short-term opportunities for self-reliance, decentralizing capacity for the
delivery of basic services, and stabilizing the security situation in hosting regions. Such scaling
up of IDA’s engagement would take place within the context of the new Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for Niger (2018–2023). Interventions are planned to focus on small-scale
economic and service delivery activities in the main refugee-hosting regions, namely Diffa,
Tillabéri, and Tahoua. This will include activities aimed at initiating the revitalization of the Diffa
region and equipping refugees along the Malian border with portable skills.




                                                                                                          28
Lo o k i n g Fo r w a rd

In many situations, forced displacement does not happen unexpectedly. Refugee and IDP
flows can often be planned for: this is because people try to stay at home and manage risks
for as long as they can and embark on a perilous journey into exile only once other means
of coping have been exhausted. On average, outflows of forcibly displaced persons peak
4.1 years after they start. Therefore, a development approach to forced displacement should
include helping host countries and host communities to prepare. Given a still highly volatile
security situation across the Sahel, future displacements are likely, and the preparedness
agenda should therefore play a role in how development actors support the governments
of the region in setting up systems designed to manage displacement. When displacement
is deemed likely to occur, there is time to prepare, for example with block grants that can be
rapidly deployed to affected municipalities when crisis hits. In this way, the authorities will be
ready with a response that can be swiftly implemented as soon as refugees or IDPs begin
to flow in. Advance warning systems can also be prepared, for example by using big data
technologies in partnership with the private sector and by supporting host governments in
preparing contingency plans.
Best results are likely to be achieved when humanitarian and development actors work
together. The humanitarian–development nexus has long been seen as sequential, with an
initial humanitarian response followed by a development effort when the situation becomes
protracted. In fact, rather than replacing or succeeding each other, both sets of actors should
engage in complementary efforts in order to achieve greater impact throughout the entire
period of forced displacement. Humanitarian and development agencies have different
objectives, counterparts, and instruments, and this can be a source of strength as both can
contribute to a comprehensive effort from the onset, learn from each other, and build synergies
based on their respective comparative advantages. A pragmatic approach is needed, and
identifying potential synergies in each situation should be part of a broader effort that should
also involve a wide range of government counterparts, the private sector, and civil society as
well as security and diplomatic actors. In particular, the private sector should play a key role
since it brings job opportunities, it has the capacity to train and equip workers with skills, and
it can bring efficiency to markets. If enabled by a proper environment for private companies to
operate, it can also play a crucial role in service delivery, especially in areas where the State’s
presence is too weak or when fiscal constraints do not allow governments to reach isolated
borderland areas.




                                                                                                      30
Country Focus: Niger71
This note summarizes the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Niger. The SCD is
a diagnostic exercise conducted by World Bank staff and designed to inform the strategic
dialogue between the World Bank and the Government of Niger about priority areas for World
Bank engagement. It was informed by the Renaissance Program of the Government of Niger
and developed in close consultation with national authorities, the private sector, civil society,
and other stakeholders. It presents a systematic assessment of constraints that should be
addressed and the opportunities that should be embraced in order to accelerate progress
toward the goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity in a sustainable
way. The assessment is not limited to areas or sectors where the World Bank is currently active
or where it expects immediate country demand. The SCD identifies a selected set of priorities
and serves as the reference point for consultations when developing the Country Partnership
Framework.




C o u n t r y B a c kg ro u n d
Located in the Sahel, landlocked Niger (the closest port, Cotonou, is over 1,000 km away)
finds itself at the heart of a turbulent region marked by political and religious violence in
northern Nigeria, separatist and armed movements in northern Mali, and intercommunal
violence and state collapse in southern Libya. This has affected Niger in important ways,
including a state of emergency in the southeastern region of Diffa and in certain areas
in the regions of Tillabéry and Tahoua, resulting in an estimated 198,000 refugees and
137,000 internally displaced persons. With a population of 19.9 million in 2015 (World
Development Indicators) and a land area of 1.27 million km2, Niger is sparsely populated
overall. However, most people live in the south of the country (covering about 12 percent of
the land area) where most arable land is located. Niger’s significant mineral wealth deposits of
uranium, gold, coal, and petroleum generate up to a quarter of all government revenue and
10 percent of GDP.

With a per capita gross domestic product (GDP) of USD895 in 2015 (in constant 2011
US dollars), Niger is among the poorest nations in the world. The vast majority of Niger’s
8.2  million poor (2014 estimate) live in rural areas where food insecurity is high. Human
development indicators are low. The average level of education is 1.4 years; only 52 percent of
children have received a complete set of vaccinations, and 44 percent of children under five
years are stunted.

The economy is undiversified, with indications of slow structural transformation. Agriculture
is the dominant sector in the economy (40 percent of GDP), and sectors such as manufacturing


7	 This Note was prepared by Johannes G. Hoogeveen, Luc Razafimandimby, and Aly Sanoh.
                                                                                                    31
(6 percent of GDP), construction and public works (3 percent of GDP), and production of
electricity gas and water (1 percent of GDP) are relatively small and underdeveloped. Over
60 percent of GDP is generated in the informal sector. Although the share of the secondary
sector in GDP increased over the past 15 years, this is not due to growth in industrial production
but to expansion in the extractive sector. The tertiary sector generates around 40 percent of
GDP. The relatively high contribution of the tertiary sector is not so much the result of the
development of a more modern section of the economy as the reflection of the importance
of import and export trade and the cost of transportation. Commerce and transport and the
public sector represent the most important activities in the tertiary sector, with shares of
12 percent of GDP each.

The majority of the population generates its income from rain-fed agriculture and livestock
rearing. The Sahara Desert aside, people live in four agro-ecological zones. The first is the
pastoral zone, with rainfall of 100–300 mm per year and a sub-desert climate. It is home
primarily to transhumant cattle herders. The second is an agro-pastoral zone that receives
300–500 mm of rain per year and is suitable for extensive farming (mostly millet). Most
households in this zone do not produce enough food to feed themselves, and engage in goat
rearing, casual labor, small trade, and seasonal migration to make ends meet. The third zone
(the Maradi and Zinder regions) receives 500-600 mm of rain per year and is characterized
by semi-intensive, rain-fed agricultural practices and livestock rearing. Finally, irrigated cash
crops are grown in selected areas along the Niger River. Together, the agriculture and livestock
sectors engage over 80 percent of the workforce and account for 40 percent of GDP. Niger’s
subsistence agriculture is based on cereal crops (millet and sorghum) as well as cowpeas,
which between them constitute the staple diet.

                                                                 FIGURE 1: GDP growth and rainfall


   Niger’s economy has been characterized by booms and busts,                                                                 After a long period of gradual decline, per capita incomes
   due largely to the fact that the economy is not diversified and                                                            have stabilized and are on the increase, owing to a period of
   reliant on rainfall and the price of uranium.                                                                              relatively good rainfall and political stability.

                                                                                                                                           600
                                                                                                                                                                     Income per capita (constant 2005 dollar)
                               200                                                          15
                                             Rainfall and GDP growth
                               150                                                                                                         500
                                                                                                                    GDP per capita (2 005 coco nstant d ollar)




                                                                                            10

                               100
                                                                                            5                                              400
 Difference in rainfall (mm)




                                50
                                                                                                  GDP growth rate




                                0                                                           0
                                                                                                                                           300

                               -50                                                          -5
                                                                                                                                           200
                           -100
                                                                                            -10
                           -150
                                                                                                                                           100
                                                                                            -15
                           -200

                           -250      Rainfall                          GDP g rowth          -20                                                                  0
                                     Poly. (Rainfall)                  Poly. (GDP growth)
                                                                                                                                                                     19 60
                                                                                                                                                                     19 62
                                                                                                                                                                     19 64
                                                                                                                                                                     19 66
                                                                                                                                                                     19 68
                                                                                                                                                                     19 70
                                                                                                                                                                     19 72
                                                                                                                                                                     19 74
                                                                                                                                                                     19 76
                                                                                                                                                                     19 78
                                                                                                                                                                     19 80
                                                                                                                                                                     19 82
                                                                                                                                                                     19 84
                                                                                                                                                                     19 86
                                                                                                                                                                     19 88
                                                                                                                                                                     19 90
                                                                                                                                                                     19 92
                                                                                                                                                                     19 94
                                                                                                                                                                     19 96
                                                                                                                                                                     19 98
                                                                                                                                                                     20 00
                                                                                                                                                                     20 02
                                                                                                                                                                     20 04
                                                                                                                                                                     20 06
                                                                                                                                                                     20 08
                                                                                                                                                                     20 10
                                                                                                                                                                     20 12
                                                                                                                                                                     20 14




Source: National Advisory Committee on Environment and Sustainable Development (Comité National Consultatif
pour l’Environnement et le Développement Durable, CNCEDD) 2013 and WDI 2016.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                32
Despite opting for drought-resistant crops and transhumant herding practices, Niger’s
rural population is vulnerable to climatic hazards. Inadequate yields, poor diversification of
incomes, climate change, and increasing pressure on land due to population growth explain
why economic and food insecurity persist and levels of malnutrition are high. Niger is a net
importer of food (food is the second most important import category after capital goods).
Nigeriens regularly undertake seasonal migration to reduce the pressure for food at home
(one less mouth to feed) and to earn some income during the off-season.

Rapid population growth presents a major challenge. Population growth has reached
3.9 percent per year as a result of a high desire for children (7.6 children per woman in 2013)
and a rapid decline in child mortality. High fertility is associated with large families, high
dependency ratios, and low levels of education, factors that are all positively associated
with poverty. High dependency ratios reduce the ability to save and invest in human and
physical capital, thus perpetuating poverty as families opt to rely more on labor and invest
less in the education and health of their children. High fertility has negative consequences
for women’s health and their nutritional status as well as that of their offspring. It increases
pressure on limited resources (water, fertile land, and forests), and because the population is
relatively young, the State is burdened with much higher demand for investment in education
and health services than would be the case in a situation of lower population growth.




                                                                                                   33
                                                      FIGURE 2: Structural challenges to economic development



The majority of citizens depend on rain-fed agriculture in an                                                                                                      Human capital is low. The median adult has no education at
environment in which rains are unpredictable and growing                                                                                                           all and only slightly more than 2 percent of the population
seasons short.                                                                                                                                                     completed secondary education.

                                                                                                                                                                     100%     4 .3     1 .8                      0 .5            3 .5      3 .6      2 .3     2 .1      .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1 .7             3 .0
 200                                                                                                                                                                                                             5 .7                                5 .2     3 .2    2
                                   175                                                                                                                                                 6 .8             1 3 .0                             6 .1                       3 .2
                                                                                       168                                                                           90%                                                                                      8 .3                     9 .5
 180                                                                                                                                                                          1 2 .6                             1 1 .0          1 8 .6             1 0 .7
                                                                                                                                                                                       1 0 .6
                               149                                                                                                                                                                                                        1 3 .7
 160                                                                                                                                                                 80%                                                                                                              1 2 .9
                                                                                   129                                                       128                              1 5 .6                    2 4 .7
 140                                                                                                                                                                 70%                                                         1 7 .7
 120
                                                                                                                                        98                           60%
 100
                                     75                                                                                                                              50%                                2 0 .4
  80                          64                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      9 2 .6
                                                                                                                                   55              56
                                                                                           54
                                                                                                                                                                     40%               8 0 .8                    8 2 .7                             8 1 .8 8 6 .4
  60                                                                              39                                                                                                                                                      7 6 .6                                      7 4 .6
                                                                                                                                                                              6 7 .5
  40                     19                                                                                                                                          30%                                                         6 0 .2
                                                                             15                                              16
  20 0 0 0 4                                    7                                                  5 0 0 0 0 1 4                                        7
                                                    0 0 0 0 1 1                                                                                             0 0      20%                                4 2 .0
    0
                                                                                                                                                                     10%
            August




            August




            August
               April




          November




               April




          November




               April




          November
            January




            January




            January
               June




               June




               June
            October




            October




            October
           February




           February




           February
          December




          December




          December
                July




                July




                July
              March




          September




              March




          September




              March




          September
                May




                May




                May




                                                                                                                                                                      0%

                  Agricultural (Maradi)                              Agro-pastoral (Zinder)                             Pastoral (Tahoua)
                                                                                                                                                                            No n e     Primary          Seco n d ary - first cy cle         Seco n d ary - seco n d cy cle an d ab o ve


Niger is landlocked, transport costs are high, and access to                                                                                                       High cost of production due to poor initial conditions are
markets is limited to those in the region, particularly Nigeria.                                                                                                   made worse by an adverse business environment.
  $543




                                                            Cost of exporting
          $490

                    $486




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Doing business indicators, 2016

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Startin g a b u sin ess
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (1 3 4 )

                                                                                                                                                                                       Construction Permits                                        En fo rcin g co n tracts
                                                                                                                                                                                             (1 7 8 )                                                      (1 5 4 )
                                                                                   $204

                                                                                           $191

                                                                                                     $175
                              $163




                                                                                                                $155
                                     $144

                                                    $143

                                                            $111




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Trad in g acro ss b o rd ers
                                                                                                                         $96




                                                                                                                                                                          Getting electricity (16 9)
                                                                                                                                    $86




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (1 5 6 )
                                                                                                                                                   $33

                                                                                                                                                            $25
                                                                           $17




                                                                                                                                                                                 Reg isterin g p ro p erty
                                                                                                                                                                                         (1 2 6 )                                                       Pay in g tax es (1 5 8 )
                                     Ethiopia




                                                                                                     Ethiopia
          Ghana




                                                                                                                Ghana
                                                    Kenya




                                                                                           Kenya
                                                            Burkina	Faso

                                                                           Mali




                                                                                                                                    Burkina	Faso

                                                                                                                                                   Mali
                              Togo




                                                                                                                                                            Togo
  Niger




                                                                                   Niger
                    Senegal




                                                                                                                         Senegal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Protecting Minority
                                                                                                                                                                                                Gettin g Cred it (1 3 3 )                   In v esto rs (1 6 6 )

      Cost	to	export:	Border	compliance	(US$	per	                                 Cost	to	export:	Documentary	compliance	(US$	per	
                      shipment)                                                                      shipment)



 Rapid population growth puts a strain on (natural, public and                                                                                                     A decline in uranium prices puts pressure on state finances.
 private) resources.

                                                                           Population                                                                                                             Uranium price (US$ per pound)

    25,000,000                                                                                                                                                      140

                                                                                                                                                                    120
    20,000,000
                                                                                                                                                                    100
    15,000,000
                                                                                                                                                                     80

                                                                                                                                                                     60
    10,000,000

                                                                                                                                                                     40
        5,000,000
                                                                                                                                                                     20

                   0                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                          No v -9 0




                                                                                                                                                                          No v -9 7




                                                                                                                                                                          No v -0 4




                                                                                                                                                                          No v -1 1
                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-9 2




                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-9 9




                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-0 6




                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-1 3
                                                                                                                                                                          May-8 7




                                                                                                                                                                          May-9 4




                                                                                                                                                                          May-0 1




                                                                                                                                                                          May-0 8




                                                                                                                                                                          May-1 5
                                                                                                                                                                          Sep -8 9




                                                                                                                                                                          Sep -9 6




                                                                                                                                                                          Sep -0 3




                                                                                                                                                                          Sep -1 0
                                                                                                                                                                           Ju l-8 8




                                                                                                                                                                           Ju l-9 5




                                                                                                                                                                           Ju l-0 2




                                                                                                                                                                           Ju l-0 9
                                                                                                                                                                          Mar-8 6




                                                                                                                                                                          Mar-9 3




                                                                                                                                                                          Mar-0 0




                                                                                                                                                                          Mar-0 7




                                                                                                                                                                          Mar-1 4
                         1960
                         1962
                         1964
                         1966
                         1968
                         1970
                         1972
                         1974
                         1976
                         1978
                         1980
                         1982
                         1984
                         1986
                         1988
                         1990
                         1992
                         1994
                         1996
                         1998
                         2000
                         2002
                         2004
                         2006
                         2008
                         2010
                         2012
                         2014




                                                                                                    Source: Rainfall: http://www.cameroon.climatemps.com/; Education Living Standards
                                                                                                    Measurement Study - Integrated Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA) 2011; exports:
                                                                                                    Doing Business 2016; population: WDI 2016; uranium price: IMF 2016.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               34
                                                 FIGURE 3: Demographic challenges


 Even though under-five mortality has declined very rapidly, and much faster than in other countries in the region, population
 growth has increased as fertility remains very high and the crude birth rate has not declined as fast as the crude death rate.

                 Under-five mortality rate (per 1,000 live births),
                                1990 and 2015
 400             328
                           254         238         215          177
 200                         115                      139          130
                    96                    94

    0
                  Niger      Mali            Guinea         Chad          Central
                                                                         African
                                                                         Republic

                            1990            2015

 The scope for reducing fertility is limited as wanted and total fertility do not diverge much.
                                                                                                                        Observed and wanted
                          Total fertility rate (per woman)                                                                total fertility rate
  10.0             7.77.6      7.3 1990 and   2015
                                            7.2                                                                    by wealth quintiles (per woman)
                                  6.1          6.1     6.6                  5.8                          8.2                                 8.1
                                                          4.9                            10.0                          8.0        8.0
                                                                               4.2                                                                          6.1
    5.0
                                                                                                             7.9         7.8          7.8        7.8
                                                                                                                                                              5.9
    0.0
                   Niger          Mali          Guinea       Chad         Central
                                                                                          0.0
                                                                          African                       Lowest        Second       Middle     Fourth       Highest
                                                                          Republic
                                                                                                             Observed fertility         Wanted fertility
                                         1990       2015

 Rapid population growth leads to high dependency ratios, much higher than other countries in the region even.

                                       Niger 2015                  Male                                                                                   Male
                                                                                                                                Mali 2015
                 80+                                                                                   80+
                                                                   Female                                                                                 Female
               70-74                                                                                 70-74
               60-64                                                                                 60-64                                     dependency
                                                                                         Age group
   Age group




               50-54                                     dependeny                                   50-54                                         ratio
               40-44                                        ratio                                    40-44                                        100.2
               30-34                                       113.0                                     30-34
               20-24                                                                                 20-24
               10-14                                                                                 10-14
                                                                                                       0-4
                 0-4
                                                                                                             4            2             0           2                 4
                       8           4            0             4             8
                                                                                                                               Population (milllions)
                                       Population (milllions)


The scope for reducing Even if fertility is effectively adressed, the total population increase that Niger faces is dramatic, creating
an enormous urgency to increase productivity in agriculture in a setting where the the availability of fertile land is limited.

                              2050-Low variant                Male
                 80+                                                                                                    2050-High variant                   Male
                                                              Female                                   80+
               70-74                                                                                 70-74                                                  Female
               60-64                                                                                 60-64
   Age group




               50-54                                                                                 50-54
                                                          dependency                                                                              dependency
               40-44                                                                                 40-44
                                                             ratio                                                                                   ratio
               30-34                                         80.2                                    30-34                                           93.4
               20-24                                                                                 20-24
               10-14                                                                                 10-14
                 0-4                                                                                   0-4
                       8      4           0         4                8                                       8           4             0           4              8
                                   Population 66.7 millions                                                                    Population 78.0 millions



                                                                                 Source: World Bank. 2016. Demographic Challenges and
                                                                                 Opportunities in the Sahel and Central Africa.
                                                                                                                                                                          35
High levels of fertility largely reflect desired fertility. Unlike anywhere else in the world, the
desire for an additional child barely declines with the number of children. High desired fertility
may appear exceptional, but established correlates of decline in fertility have been found to
be valid for Niger also. For example, women in the highest wealth quintile tend to have fewer
children. Niger’s exceptionally high fertility can be explained by low levels of income, little
education, and limited access to information and health services. In addition, a number of
cultural aspects also explain a preference for children. Some of these may be associated
with religious conservatism, income risks in the face of poverty, and gender discrimination.
Without improvements in these general conditions (risk, human capital, access to health
services) and without active media engagement in discussing and challenging established
norms, population growth is likely to remain high. The consequences of this trend may be dire
because, depending on the scenario, the population of Niger is projected to increase to about
30–35 million by 2030 and to between 67 and 78 million by 2050 (see Figure 3).

A short rainy season and exposure to uninsured risk place an enormous burden on the
economy. Niger’s economy depends largely on rain-fed agriculture, natural resource exports,
and development aid. This leads to high levels of underemployment, particularly outside of
the rainy season, and makes the economy vulnerable to weather and price shocks as well as
changes in donor sentiment, which in turn leads to cycles of booms and busts. In an environment
where monetary policy is determined at the regional level (Niger is part of the CFA zone), limited
options exist for fiscal stabilization other than by revising the public investment budget. At the
household level, this contributes to risk aversion, slow adoption of new farming techniques,
huge investments in low-return savings in the form of livestock,81 and at times harmful, informal
insurance mechanisms such as pressing girls into early marriage (the median age of first marriage
for girls is 15) or unquestioned allegiance to powerful actors.



Poverty Reduction and Growth
Although poverty declines over the past decade, benefits from growth were largely captured by
better-off households. Poverty declined in all regions, but the reduction was more substantive in
the capital city and in other urban areas, where it declined from 29.6 in 2005 to 8.7 in 2014. In rural
areas, poverty declined from 58.3 percent to 51.4 percent. However, inequality increased during
the same period as consumption growth was much higher among better-off households than
it was among the poorest. This reduction in poverty was driven by GDP growth made possible
by favorable exogenous circumstances. Comparatively favorable rainfall in 2014 relative to 2005
explains much of the poverty reduction in rural areas, as does the fact that between 2005 and
2014, weather variability was limited and major weather shocks were absent. Poverty reduction
in urban areas came on the back of the natural resources boom. Uranium prices were favorable,
and oil production came onstream. This boosted the government’s budget and its ability to make
public investments (15 percent of GDP in 2016), including major infrastructure investments in the
capital city, which in turn helped reduce urban poverty.

8	 The value locked up in livestock savings is enormous. Niger’s National Statistical Institute (Tableau de Bord 2015) estimates that in 2013, there
   were 14.3 million goats, 10.7 million sheep, and 10.1 million cattle. Conservatively valued at USD70, USD70, and USD250, respectively, the value
   these animals represent the equivalent of 60 percent of GDP.                                                                                        36
                                        FIGURE 4: Poverty and characteristics of poor citizens


Between 2005 and 2014 there was a strong decline in poverty but an increase in the number of poor particularly in rural areas.

                    Poverty incidence (%, 2005-2014)                                                                                                     Number of poor (millions, 2005-2014)
 60                    5 8 .6                      58.3                                                                    9                                                                                                                 8 .1 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7.96               7.91
                       5 3 .7                                                     54.6                                                                                                                         7.45
                                                   52.6                                                   51.4             8
 50                                                                               48.2                                                                                                        7.04
                                                                                                                                                                 6.75                     6.59
                                                                                                          44.5             7                                 6.12
 40                                                                                                                        6

                                                                                                                           5
                       3 2 .0
 30
                                                   27.7                                                                    4
                       2 6 .0
                                                                                  22.0                                     3
 20
                                                   14.1                                                                    2
                                                                                  10.2                    10.8                                      0.220.40                                                0.41
 10                                                                                                                        1                                                     0.130.33               0.10                  0.060.20
                                                                                                            5.3
                                                                                                                           0
     0                                                                                                                                                   2005                         2008                   2011                  2014
                2005                        2008                      2011                         2014
                       Niamey                      Other Urban                             Rural                  Niger                                                          Niamey      Other Urban    Rural     Niger
Growth benefited most of the poor,                                                                                        Poverty incidence is highest in agricultural and agro-pastoral
but the better-off benefited more.                                                                                        zones,respectively 51 and 57 percent.


         Real cons. growth incidence curve (%, 2005–14)                                                                                                                     Agro-ecological zones

     60

     50

     40

     30

     20

     10

         0
              10
              13
              16
              19
              22
              25
              28
              31
              34
              37
              40
              43
              46
              49
              52
              55
              58
              61
              64
              67
              70
              73
              76
              79
              82
              85
              88
              91
              94
              97
             100
               1
               4
               7




     -10
                                2 0 0 5 -2 0 11                 2 0 1 1 -2 0 14                    2005-2014
     -20




The majority of the poor (65 percent of the poor or 5.3 million                                                           Poor citizens purchased more than 60 percent of the food
people) live in the southern agricultural zone where they are                                                             they consumed paying for it with cash earned through agri-
unable to feed themselves from the production of their farms.                                                             cultural wage and nonfarm income.


                                       Number of poor                                                                                                          Sources of food consumed, 2014
 6
                                                       5 .3 4                                                                                              Pastoral
                                                                                                                               Rich est quin tile




                                                                                                                                                     Ag ro -pastoral
 5
                                                                                                                                                      Ag ricu ltu ral

 4                                                                                                                                                    Other urban

                                                                                                                                                           Niamey

 3
                                                                                  2 .1 2                                                                   Pastoral
                                                                                                                               Poo rest quintile




 2                                                                                                                                                   Ag ro -pastoral

                                                                                                                                                      Ag ricu ltu ral
 1                                                                                                   0.46                                             Other urban
                                  0 .2 0
             0.06                                                                                                                                          Niamey
 0
                                                                                                                                                                    0%               20%             40%            60%         80%            100%
             Niamey         Oth er Urb an          Ag ricu ltu ral       Ag ro-p asto ral           Pastoral
                                                                                                                                                                        Bought              Produced on the farm          Donations




                                                          Source: Authors’ calculations using Unified Questionnaire of Basic Indicators of
                                                          Well-being (Questionnaire Unifié des Indicateurs de Base de Bien-être, QUIBB) 2005;
                                                          National Household Budget and Consumption Survey (Enquête Nationale sur le
                                                          Budget et la Consommation des Ménages, ENBC) 2008; LSMS-ISA 2011 and 2014.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      37
Multiple poverty traps make poverty reduction a challenge. The most destitute farmers own
too few assets (land and animal traction) or are too much in debt to earn incomes that can lift
them above the survival threshold, where they can save and invest themselves out of poverty.
Instead, poor citizens are often forced to work on other people’s land to repay outstanding
debts and are unable to bring sufficient land under cultivation to feed themselves through
own-account farming. This explains the important observation that only the less-poor farmers
are able to feed themselves from their own production, while the poorest are net buyers
of food and depend on income from casual labor and gifts to make ends meet. In addition,
numerous other traps are related to ill-health, low soil fertility, conflict, and cultural and gender
practices. These impoverishing factors lead to low incomes, which in turn prevent these factors
from being addressed, thus leading to self-perpetuating cycles of poverty. Evidence of the
prevalence of poverty traps can be inferred from references to increasing landlessness, the
formation of a class of medium-scale farmers who purchase land from distressed peasants,
and the prevalence of acute malnutrition (a sign of food shortages) among the poorest, even
during non-drought years.

While multiple poverty traps must be addressed simultaneously to lift households out of
poverty, certain measures address more than one trap. Irrigation offers significant promise.
By lengthening the growing season, increasing yields per acre, and reducing exposure to
weather risk, irrigation addresses multiple poverty traps associated with low labor productivity,
poor nutrition, inadequate assets, and weather-related risks. By increasing incomes through
irrigation, in combination with activities that induce behavioral change, including adult literacy
training, access to information, village health workers, and extension, we can also expect to
see positive spillover effects on fertility, hygiene, nutrition, and resilience to climate change
through the adoption of adapted farming techniques.

Options for industrialization are limited by the size of the domestic economy, an adverse
business environment, and low levels of embedded technological knowledge. Agriculture
is expected to remain the dominant sector in the economy even though the share of the
secondary sector in GDP is on the rise. The scope for rapid industrialization through import
substitution is limited by the small size of the domestic market, which reduces the scope
for specialization. The scope for industrialization through an export-led growth strategy is
reduced by high transaction costs as a result of an adverse business environment and the
lack of productive knowledge embedded in the economy. This can be inferred from the
products currently exported, which consist of unsophisticated products (mostly minerals)
that are unconnected to other products in the global product space.91This leaves open the
option of industrialization through the transformation of agricultural produce; yet, for this to be
successful, the cost of doing business will have to decline.




9	 See Hausmann and Klinger (2006). Structural Transformation and Patterns of Comparative Advantage in the Product Space; http://ksgnotes1.
  harvard.edu/Research/wpaper.nsf/rwp/RWP06-041, and Hidalgo et al. (2007) The Product Space: Conditions the Development of Nations.
  Science 317, 482 (2007); DOI: 10.1126/science.1144581




                                                                                                                                              38
The high cost of doing business obstructs Niger’s development prospects. Being landlocked
and far from the nearest seaport combined with low levels of human capital presents formidable
obstacles to developing a vibrant private sector. These disadvantages are made worse by
the high cost of doing business. Transport costs are unnecessarily high because roads are
not maintained, roadblocks are common, and competition in the trucking sector is limited.
Electricity is costly and unreliable. Cross-border trade is expensive and inefficient due to the
difficulty of obtaining import and export licenses. Meanwhile, high import tariffs and taxes
drive many toward informal trade. Telecom services are costly and grossly inadequate, as are
banking services. The regulatory burden is high, the tax system is complex, and the judicial
system is biased. Except for a few firms that exploit natural resources in enclave activities
and some large firms run by well-connected entrepreneurs, this makes for an unattractive
investment climate for domestic as well as foreign entrepreneurs and for a very large
informal sector.

Managing regional relations is an integral part of economic policy-making in Niger.
Being landlocked and located in a turbulent region makes good relations with the country’s
neighbors critical for Niger’s development prospects. There are many dimensions to this
situation: Niger’s exports are largely dependent on the efficiency of the transport system in
neighboring countries with access to the sea, while much of Niger’s informal trade in fuel and
foodstuffs depends on the economic policies of its northern neighbors, Algeria in particular.
Most of Niger’s electricity comes from Nigeria, while most of Niger’s livestock is exported
to that country. This trade as well as much of Niger’s re-exports to Nigeria and remittances
from Nigeria have been seriously affected by the devaluation of the naira and by the ban on
import of certain products (rice, meat), demonstrating on the one hand the symbiosis between
the two economies and on the other the difficulty of being part of a currency zone (the West
African Economic and Monetary Union – WAEMU), of which the country’s main trading partner
is not a member. Being downstream on the Niger River also implies dependence on Mali and
Guinea for the quantity of water that reaches the country as well as for its quality.

Rural-urban migration is potentially an important driver of growth and poverty reduction.
With high levels of seasonal underemployment, labor shifting from the relatively unproductive
agricultural sector to urban areas, where it is possible to be productive year-round, is a
potential source of growth. Moreover, increased urbanization is known to accelerate growth
because of the scope for specialization and to have positive spillover effects on rural growth
by increasing demand for agricultural produce and by providing cash and knowledge for
productive investments in rural areas. However, to date, this has not happened. Niger remains
barely urbanized, and as late as 2014, over 90 percent of the rural population lived in the village
where they were born. Instead, reductions in poverty have been driven by internal dynamics
in urban or rural areas. Between 2005 and 2011, of the total 5.5 percentage point decline in
poverty, only 0.14 percentage point was due to rural-urban migration.




                                                                                                      39
Niger’s development challenge can be illustrated by comparing the characteristics
of self-employment in agriculture (81 percent of all jobs) with paid jobs in the formal
sector (4 percent of all jobs). Jobs in agriculture tend to be “bad” jobs: returns are low, jobs
are rarely permanent, and underemployment is high, as is the proportion of people with a
secondary job. The reverse holds for those in wage employment. Though they are few
in number, these jobs are of much better quality, being mostly permanent, with limited
underemployment, and often formal. Those engaged in wage employment are also much
more likely to receive health benefits. Therefore, to reduce poverty, it would be desirable for
many more people to become engaged in wage employment. However, it is unlikely that a
sector that currently employs some 4 percent of the population will be able to absorb the
81 percent that are currently primarily engaged in agriculture.

Productivity needs to increase and the process of growth needs to become more inclusive.
A growth accounting calculation demonstrates that increases in labor account for most of the
growth in Niger, followed by increases in the capital stock. This is in line with the country’s
high population growth and, more recently, with increases in public and private investment.
However, there is little embedded technical change in these investments, and total factor
productivity (TFP) is still catching up following a steep decline in the 1980s. Other components,
particularly changes in human capital, play a much smaller role in explaining growth. This is
unsurprising given the low quality of education. To increase productivity and hence household
incomes, investments in human capital will be needed to improve the quality of this key
factor of production. The business environment will need to improve if the rate of return
on investment is to increase. However, this alone will not be sufficient. The growth process
also needs to become more pro-poor. Between 2005 and 2014, the growth rate in per capita
consumption was 0.4 percent for those in the bottom 40 percent, much less than the growth
rate attained by those in the top 60 percent (2.7 percent). Investments in infrastructure and the
natural resources sector (the drivers of the investment boom) alone are insufficient to generate
an inclusive growth process.

The most promising approach to inclusive growth consists of increasing productivity in the
short run and engaging in a process of classical structural transformation. Improvements
in the business environment for formal and informal enterprises and the way in which the
public sector is managed could immediately unlock significant economic potential by
stimulating private sector activity or by increasing the efficiency of public investments and
service provision. In the longer run, a process of classical structural transformation could
accelerate poverty reduction. This process starts by increasing the productivity of agriculture
(food staples in particular) and livestock rearing. Increases in agricultural production help
suppress fluctuations in food prices, which is beneficial for the poorest, who tend to be net
buyers of food. Once the share of food consumers relative to food producers grows because
of rural-urban migration, markets become more important, the nonfarm and agribusiness
sectors grow, and the food value chain and rural-urban linkages are strengthened. As rural
incomes grow, second-order effects are likely to emerge as the stock of human and physical



                                                                                                    40
capital increases and households invest part of their increased incomes in their offspring. This
leads to further productivity gains and to out-migration of (now better-) educated people. It
also unlocks a demographic transition, in part because higher incomes and higher levels of
education induce women to marry later, while increased irrigation and mechanization reduce
exposure to weather shocks and reliance on family labor.




P o l i t i c a l Ec o n o m y
Niger has a complex political settlement with multiple actors balancing each other’s
interests and power in a dynamic but relatively stable equilibrium. The ruling coalition
changes regularly, co-opting new power brokers and sidelining others, leading to high levels
of turnover in the administration. Since gaining independence in 1960, Niger has had no fewer
than seven civilian regimes and four military coups. Among the core power players are the
military, a group of lifetime politicians, powerful traders, and selected traditional leaders,
sheikhs, and religious leaders. This political class is sustained by a very poor, uneducated,
and uninformed population that tends to seek protection against poverty and shocks by
allying themselves with powerful actors. As a consequence of the dynamic nature of the
political settlement, politics is turbulent but never very violent.

The political settlement casts a shadow over Niger’s development prospects. Not only
are incentives in the public sector not aligned with poverty reduction, but the scope for
change is limited. Rent seeking, clientelism, and impunity are endemic as the competitive
political settlement and personalized bargaining among elites use payoffs as a means of
co-optation. This also leads to a non-inclusive development model that is non-ideological
and therefore mostly geared toward generating benefits for the better off. This explains a
preference for capital-intensive investments by the public sector in highways, dams, large
irrigation schemes, and oil-refineries as opposed to investments in agricultural extension,
small scale irrigation, or rural electrification. It also explains the large informal sector as
the economy is dominated by a small number of public and private monopolies that use
their connections to prevent further competition. This gives rise to an adverse business
environment characterized by high transaction costs, which can be avoided by remaining
informal or by becoming large and well-connected. It also leads to a fragmented and
inefficient administration, with many ministries and overlapping responsibilities and with
inefficient procurement procedures. Finally, it leads to economic exclusion and inefficient
and very low-quality service delivery in health and education.




                                                                                                   41
                                                                           FIGURE 5: Empowerment and service delivery


  Niger’s largely disempowered and illiterate population…                                                                                                         Niger’s largely disempowered and illiterate population…
                                                                                                                                                           90
                                                                                                                                                  7.0            81
                                                             Mean years of schooling                                                                                         78         Precent expressing a lot of trust in . ...
                                                                                                                                                           80      72                   73
                                                                                                                                                                                          69        70
                                                                                                                                                           70                                                   65
                                                                                                                                     5.2                               62                                         63

                                                                                                                     4.5                                   60                  55                      55
                                                                                      4.1             4.3

                                                                                                                                                                                  45                     46                46
                                                                                                                                                           50                                43                      43                44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40                                       39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  38             37
                                                         2.4               2.5                                                                             40                                                                                35
                                        2.0                                                                                                                                                                                      29      27            27
      1.4             1.5                                                                                                                                  30                                                                                            22       22

                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                           10
    Burkina          Niger          Mali               Ethiopia     Senegal         LDCs            Côte           Togo             SSA        Ghana
     Faso                                                                                         d'Ivoire                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                  Nig er     Sen eg al Bu rk in a Gu in ea     Mali          Ben in    To g o         Gh an a Cameroon
                                                                                                                                                                                          Faso
                                                                                                                                                                                      Relig io u s lead ers Trad itio n al lead ers     Presid en t

  But outside the urban areas, few services are available.                                                                                                         Services which are generally of poor quality

                                                                                                                                             4 2 .7
                                                                                                                                                      44                    Percentage of correctly identified diseases by clinical staff
                                              Net secondary education enrollment rate
                                                                                                                                    3 8 .6

                                                                                                                                                                 Malaria without anemia                                                                   79.9
                                                                                                                           2 9 .2
             boys                                                                                                                                                     Malaria with anemia                5.2
             girls
                                              2 1 .2                                2 0 .9                                                                       Pulmonary tuberculosis                                                                 76.9
   1 5 .9                                                                                              1 5 .7
                      1 4 .1                                      1 3 .7                                        1 4 .3                                                      Type 2 diabetes                        21.9
                                                                           1 1 .8            1 2 .4
                               1 0 .9                   11
                                                                                                                                                                                  Pneunomia                                            53.0
            5 .8
                                                                                                                                                                                        …
                                                                                                                                                               Acute diarrhea with severe                3.6

                                                                                                                                                            Correctly identified disease
    Tah o u a          Tillaberi                Marad i              Diffa            Zin d er           Do sso             Ag ad ez          Niamey
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.0         20.0          40.0        60.0        80.0           100.0



Source: United Nations Development Program (UNDP) 2015; Afrobarometer 2015; DHS 2012; and World Bank. 2016.
Service Delivery Indicator Survey.




O p p o r t u n i t i e s fo r P o v e r t y R e d u c t i o n
Opportunities for increasing incomes for the self-employed lie largely in increasing the
productivity of agriculture. Once incomes in agriculture increase, opportunities for off-
farm activities can be expected to increase as well. The scope for increasing agricultural
productivity is enormous. Limited access to irrigation leads to underemployment, low land
productivity, and exposure to weather risks. Farmers continue to rely heavily on the use of
simple tools (hoes, cutlasses, and spades) and techniques (manual weeding, hoeing, and
harvesting), resulting in a huge yield gap. Even if only half of the potential yield for rain-fed
farming were to be attained, millet yields would quadruple and sorghum yields grow almost
10-fold. Among the many reasons for low yields, the immediate causes are soil degradation
and limited reliance on improved (let alone hybrid) seed and other inputs (fertilizer, pesticide).
Limited access to extension advice and market interferences that reduce competition are also
important obstacles to increasing farm productivity.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           42
Policies that lead to increased production of food crops consumed by the poor (millet,
sorghum, and cowpeas) are particularly attractive for poverty reduction. Increasing the
productivity of these crops offers three paths to poverty reduction: increased production
(increased incomes), lower food prices (which are important for the rural poor, who purchase
food, but also for the urban poor), and increased demand for wage labor by commercial
farmers.

There exists great potential for irrigation using groundwater. An approximate calculation
using information on the presence of aquifers suggests that at least 250,000 ha is irrigable.10 As
yields may increase to 6,000 kg if rice were to be cultivated and two harvests a year obtained,
250,000 ha could sustain an exclusively rice-eating population of 48 million.112Irrigation thus
has the potential to increase incomes in the short run, reduce vulnerability to weather shocks,
and avoid a potential imminent Malthusian crisis as a result of high population growth and
dwindling access to fertile land. Successful irrigation does not necessitate investments
in large-scale infrastructure. A 2,500 m112 plot can be irrigated by a solar pump currently
marketed in Kenya for approximately USD500. This is sufficient to feed a family of 48 people
for an entire year. Clearly, there would be general equilibrium effects to consider if such a
large-scale program were to be executed. For example, prices could drop considerably, and
increased production could have a negative impact on farmers’ incomes. However, a drop in
income could be avoided if an irrigation policy were to be accompanied by a market access
and export strategy or the development of valuechains for other produce. In that scenario, the
(now lower) decline in prices and increased demand for wage labor would be highly beneficial
to poor people, who are net food buyers, and to those who depend on casual labor to make
ends meet, while still raising income for net food sellers. In fact, irrigation plus market access
is the package of reforms found to yield the best poverty reducing results according to the
Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model developed for this SCD.

Opportunities for wage employment (the second pathway) are limited. Few people are
employed in the formal sector, and with limited prospects for rapid industrialization, this will
remain the case in the foreseeable future. By contrast, casual labor opportunities on farms or
in off-farm enterprises are much more likely to emerge, particularly as agricultural productivity
increases.

Permanent migration is surprisingly unimportant. Despite the role seasonal migration plays
in ensuring sustainable livelihoods and despite the importance of transhumant livestock
rearing, few Nigeriens migrate permanently. The majority continue to live in the place where
they were born, and Niamey is a surprisingly small city, with only 1.1 million inhabitants in 2014
(compared, for instance, with 2.3 million for Bamako, Mali, a country with a smaller population



10 The water table lies less than 8 m below the surface, a depth that allows the use of surface pumps, making the land above the aquifer suitable
  for agriculture, and manually constructed boreholes feasible, thus making it possible for people who live in the area.

11	 Based on 374 calories per 100 grams of dry rice and total caloric needs of 2,100 calories per day per adult. Solar pump specifications and costs:
   Practica: http://practica.org/projects/introduction-solar-irrigation-pumps




                                                                                                                                                        43
than Niger, or 15.8 million).123 Moreover, fewer Nigeriens than expected reside in other countries
of the region considering the country’s population. This limited migration is surprising and the
reasons behind it as well as whether there is a latent demand for migration that remains unmet
deserve to be investigated.

Permanent migration is surprisingly unimportant. Despite the role seasonal migration plays
in ensuring sustainable livelihoods and despite the importance of transhumant livestock
rearing, few Nigeriens migrate permanently. The majority continue to live in the place where
they were born, and Niamey is a surprisingly small city, with only 1.1 million inhabitants in 2014
(compared, for instance, with 2.3 million for Bamako, Mali, a country with a smaller population
than Niger, or 15.8 million).134 Moreover, fewer Nigeriens than expected reside in other countries
of the region considering the country’s population. This limited migration is surprising and the
reasons behind it as well as whether there is a latent demand for migration that remains unmet
deserve to be investigated.

Social transfers are a third means of increasing household incomes. Social safety nets can
be used as short-term instruments to help the poor cope with economic shocks. They can
also operate as medium or long-term poverty alleviation programs, supporting minimum
consumption levels and promoting the accumulation of human as well as physical capital.
When transfers are provided to poor households over multiple periods, they are used to pay
off debts, accumulate productive assets, or buy inputs (fertilizer).145This enhances productive
capacity and resilience such that these households eventually no longer require support.
Most social safety nets in Niger focus on coping; only some are of the resilience-building type,
and none offers any guaranteed protection in the sense that people affected by a shock can
fully rely on such support (such as a standby cash for work program). Structured well, social
safety nets offer the opportunity to increase growth in a pro-poor manner while also reducing
poverty directly. Simulations carried out for this SCD suggest that a combination of growth
(2.4 percent per capita) over the next 15 years with perfectly targeted, transaction-cost-free
transfers to the equivalent of 2 percent of GDP is sufficient to achieve the objective of poverty
elimination by 2030.156




12	 World Development Indicators. Niamey does not lie in Niger’s most fertile zone. However, unlike Mali, Niger has a substantial number (13) of
     medium-size cities with over 100,000 inhabitants (versus only 6 in Mali).
13	 World Development Indicators. Niamey does not lie in Niger’s most fertile zone. However, unlike Mali, Niger has a substantial number (13) of
    medium-size cities with over 100,000 inhabitants (versus only 6 in Mali).
14	 For evidence from Niger, see, for example: Stoeffler, Quentin, and Bradford Mills. 2014. Households’ Investments in Durable and Productive Assets
    in Niger: Quasi-experimental Evidences from a Cash Transfer Project. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 7839.
15	 For comparison, in 2009, total tax exemptions were the equivalent of 1.9 percent of GDP (REDES 2011: Rapport sur les dépenses fiscales au
    Niger).




                                                                                                                                                        44
      FIGURE 6: Simulations of the change in poverty under different growth and transfer
                                    scenarios (2015–2030)


  Without strong growth (2.4 percent per capita) for the poorest 40 percent of citizens, poverty eradication by 2030
  would be impossible as poverty would decline from 44 percent to only 39 percent (top line). But strong growth in
  combination with income transfers can eliminate poverty. This can be seen by the numbers presented in brack-
  ets which reflect the transfers needed to eliminate poverty (expressed as percent of GDP). In 2014, 12 percent of
  GDP would be needed to eliminate poverty through perfectly targeted transfers. In 2030, and provided there has
  been strong growth, only 2 percent of GDP is needed.

                                                     50
                                                     45    44 (12.0%)
                                                                                                             39 (8.5%)
                                                     40
                             Poverty incidence (%)




                                                     35
                                                     30                                                            31 (5%)
                                                     25
                                                     20
                                                     15                                                        16 (2%)
                                                     10
                                                      5
                                                      0
                                                          2014            2018     2022        2026                2030


                                                                 0.4% growth     1.4% growth          2.4% growh



Source: Authors’ calculations using LSMS-ISA 2011 and 2014.

Note: Poverty rates are based on a per capita consumption welfare measure from LSMS-ISA 2014 and the USD1.90-a-
day poverty line (2011 PPP). The simulations above follow the methodology of Lakner, Negre, and Prydz (2014). Twin-
ning the Goals: How Can Promoting Shared Prosperity Help to Reduce Global Poverty? World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper No. 7106.




Changing Niger’s Development Paradigm
To put Niger on a sustainable path of poverty reduction, a change in trajectory is urgently
needed. Though poverty fell over the past decade, much of that fall can be attributed to
favorable external conditions that no longer apply. Natural resources prices have slumped,
climate change aggravates weather variability, and increased insecurity implies substantially
larger spending on security and humanitarian assistance, the latter to deal with the large
number of refugees and displaced people with whom Niger is confronted. Nigeria’s economy
is experiencing a major recession, and the naira has halved in value. This has led to reduced
demand for exports from Niger (goods as well as services, such as labor migrants) and
increased imports from Nigeria. The combination of lower natural resources prices, increased
competition from Nigeria, and increased outlays for the security sector has created liquidity
problems for the authorities. Meanwhile, the pressure of higher population is making itself




                                                                                                                             45
increasingly felt, and a major climatic shock is always a risk. As initial conditions remain poor161
and levels of poverty remain extremely high, and as the country looks increasingly fragile,
business as usual will not suffice to sustainably reduce poverty.

A citizen-centered approach is needed to support change and build ownership. Past
approaches have not delivered: service provision is unequal (focused on Niamey) and of
low quality and low efficiency, large-scale public investments are inefficient, the business
environment remains constrained, and total factor productivity improves only at a slow pace.
An approach that targets citizens more directly and pays more attention to financing results as
opposed to inputs offers promise. It strengthens local initiatives and decision making, increases
local incomes and autonomy, enhances access to information, and embraces service delivery
by whoever has the ability to do so. Such an approach would enhance ownership, a precondition
for sustainability, and shift the focus of decision makers and development agencies away from
a centralized, state-led development model. As purchasing power shifts increasingly toward
local areas, it can provide incentives to private sector operators to invest in rural areas. New
technologies, inexpensive computing, mobile telephony, and solar energy in particular offer
significant opportunities for accommodating a shift to citizen-centered approaches.




C o re B i n d i n g C o n s t r a i n t s
Three binding constraints prevail. In addition to security, a precondition for any development
strategy, three binding constraints affect Niger’s development:

• Low rural productivity;
• Inadequate human capital; and
• Poor governance.


Low productivity of key food crops and livestock arises from the lack of modernization of the
rural sector, which is held back by exposure to uninsured risk and limited adoption of modern
technologies. Where possible depending on the availability of water, sustainable irrigation
through small-scale solar production is critical. It reduces dependence on the weather, land
pressure, and underemployment as multiple harvests are possible in a single year. Implementing
an irrigation program will require close collaboration between those working in water
management, energy, agriculture, and finance (leasing) but also social protection as transfers
can be used as collateral and as a means to entice households to diversify. Where sustainable
irrigation is not possible, access to improved seeds and other inputs in combination with




16 Including low levels of human capital an adverse business environment and a pattern of growth that favors the non-poor.




                                                                                                                             46
agricultural extension (designed to introduce climate-smart technologies, improve water
management, and address soil degradation) should be pursued along with activities that
raise the productivity of livestock, particularly poultry and small ruminants, the animals most
frequently owned by poor households.

Market access needs to be addressed in parallel to increased farm productivity. Both
processes need to go hand in hand,172which will require attention being paid to transport
corridors, selected supply chains, and promoting the transformation of agricultural
produce. Market access can also be enhanced through improved farmer organizations
and cooperatives. Crop markets are dominated by a small number of powerful, politically
connected traders who control all local purchases through their access to capital and control
over middlemen. However, farmers who join cooperatives can bypass these middlemen
and access markets directly. Meanwhile, investments in road infrastructure are less urgent.
Niger’s road network is not very dense, and in only in few areas would additional paved
roads be economically justified (that is, where traffic exceeds 100 trucks a day). Given the
generally dry terrain, access problems are limited to the wet season. Improving access does
not require wholesale pavement but rather spot improvements in critical areas. Responsibility
for such improvements could be entrusted to local-level road maintenance groups paid and
supervised by higher-level authorities.

The low level of human capital is the missing core asset of poor individuals. As labor is
the main asset of the poor, alleviating this binding constraint is complementary to increasing
rural productivity through supply- and demand-side measures. Increased productivity leads
to higher incomes, which leads to better nutrition, which in turn improves the ability to work
or to pay for healthcare. Literacy provides farmers greater access to new information and
aids the adoption of new technologies. Better-educated people are also much more likely to
successfully migrate from rural to urban areas or to other countries.

To address low levels of human capital, a priority is service quality. Currently, the quality
of health and education services is so low that spending on social sectors yields very low
returns. This needs to be addressed. Minimum levels of literacy and numeracy (among young
children and adults) need to be ensured along with skills and competencies in areas critical to
development (health, education, extension). This requires investments in primary education,
adult literacy, and training at higher levels of education. Achieving the twin objectives of
higher levels of basic competencies and more people educated at higher levels requires a
reconsideration of how the school system operates. An inclusive approach in the early years
(when the unit cost of schooling is low) may have to be combined with an exclusive one for
higher education levels, when unit costs are high. This requires stringent selection based on
quality and, concomitantly, high dropout rates.



17	 A Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model developed for this SCD demonstrates that the largest impact on poverty reduction comes from
  a combination of actions that raise farm productivity in conjunction with improved trade facilitation.




                                                                                                                                               47
A focus on skills and competencies should be accompanied by a focus on behavioral
change. Radio messages and shows and interventions by social and health workers can offer
valuable information on a wide range of issues from family planning to hygiene and healthy
nutrition. Voter education, adult literacy training, and greater transparency about budgets and
spending decisions increase the accountability of leaders. This will involve relieving constraints
on information, requiring investments not only in information and communication technologies
(ICT) and mass media development but also in more traditional channels such as providing
information through extension officials.

Poor governance leads to low levels of efficiency and productivity in the public and private
sectors. There are four aspects to this dimension. First, a secure environment needs to be
guaranteed. Unfortunately, security can no longer be taken for granted. Easing the burden of
conflict and forced displacement imposed in some of the most deprived areas of the country
is important for poverty reduction and for preventing future conflict. It also implies paying
attention to mechanisms of conflict resolution, including strengthening internal security
mechanisms (police force), and addressing illicit financial flows.

Measures need to be taken to reach citizens directly and to empower them. This entails
moving away from a public sector-led provision of services to an approach that focuses on the
empowerment of citizens and service provision by whoever is best suited to doing so, including
the private sector, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), civil society organizations (CSOs),
and the public sector. This could be facilitated by relying more on small-scale (as opposed
to large-scale) interventions that can more easily target poor households. Technological
advances in ICT and biometric identification and engineering (solar power, computing) make
small-scale interventions and asset provision (such as pumps) capable of being implemented
on a realistic scale. Other aspects of operationalizing a citizen-centered approach include
improved access to information (including literacy), better alignment of incentives to service
providers with results through performance-based financing, promoting private sector service
provision (where feasible), and greater emphasis on external and civilian oversight of public
institutions and services, notably at the local level.

To successfully engage citizens directly, the capacity of the central administration needs
to be improved. Addressing governance constraints in a competitive political settlement with
low bureaucratic capacity is a major challenge. A long-term strategy designed to build capacity
is required. However, improving capacity across the board may not be feasible given the many
vested interests and the inability to implement a long-term strategy. However, an opportunistic
approach is achievable. After all, the State is a complex organization whose actions are shaped
by its actors, officials, and bureaucrats, their histories and personalities, and the incentives they
face. While islands of effectiveness already exist within the State, others could be created
in areas such as education, health, and agricultural extension, Public Financial Management
(PFM), and statistics, the latter especially when statistics are used to assess the performance
of service providers.



                                                                                                        48
Expanding infrastructure and economic opportunities would foster diversification.
Increasing the footprint of the agro-industrial and telecom sectors is a priority, the former
promoting non-mining exports and the latter playing a critical role in developing a citizen-
centered approach. Provided the mining sector is transparently managed, it has significant
potential for raising growth as well as public revenue. Finally, primary and secondary cities
should be seen as centers of economic growth and transformation. To make them productive,
sufficient attention needs to be paid to city planning and management, infrastructure provision
(roads, energy, water and sanitation, telecom), and assurance of a conducive business
environment for formal as well as informal sector activities.

Finally, improved public financial management is critical to both the revenue side and
spending. Too much money is lost through tax exemptions or evasion as a result of informal
trade, nontransparent procurement procedures, and poorly selected and executed investment
projects. The low quality of public investment management is a serious problem that has long
been flagged and needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency. The vulnerability of the
economy to oil-price shocks and the associated devaluation of the Nigerian naira highlight
the need to come up with export diversification policies, particularly as the country has limited
means of dealing with economic shocks through monetary instruments, which are all managed
at the regional level. Creating financial buffers in times of windfalls or developing insurance
instruments would help cushion external shocks when these materialize.




                                                                                                    49
                R e g i o n a l Ec o n o m i c Fo c u s
                          Macroeconomic indicators of AFCW3 countries at a glance, 2012-2017

                                                   Growth	recovery	is	regaining	momentum	in	2017,	                                                          ..and	 inflation	 will	keep	low,	except	for	steady	
                                                    but	Chad	is	still	undergoing	a	deep	downturn…                                                                              rates	in	Guinea	
                                                      Chad             Mali           Guinea               Niger                                                  Chad            Mali         Guinea               Niger
                                          15                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                     Annual,	average
    GDP	growth	rate	(%)




                                          10                                                                                                       15

                                           5                                                                                                       10

                                           0                                                                                                        5

                                           -5                                                                                                       0

                                          -10                                                                                                      -5
                                                   2012      2013       2014     2015          2016	e      2017	p                                             2012       2013     2014     2015        2016	e     2017	p


                                                  Excepting	Chad,	current	account	deficits	will	                                                        …only	 Chad	benefitted	from	positive	terms	of	trade
                                                remain	 high	in	2017,	even	with	slight	decline	in	
                                                                                                                                                                2012     2013      2014    2015      2016	e       2017	p
                                                               Guinea	and	Niger…
                                                     2012    2013      2014    2015     2016	e          2017	p                                    40
                                         -40
                                                                                                                    Annual,	%	 change




                                                                                                                                                  20
                                         -30
  %	of	GDP




                                                                                                                                                   0
                                         -20
                                                                                                                                                  -20
                                         -10
                                                                                                                                                  -40

                                           0
                                                     Chad            Mali        Guinea             Niger                                         -60
                                                                                                                                                                Chad            Mali        Guinea              Niger

                                                 Fiscal	consolidation	will	also	lead	 to	lower	fiscal	                                                      …partly	 supported	by	rising	revenue,	except	for	
                                                         deficits	in	all	countries	but	Niger…                                                                                   Guinea
                                                                                                                                                                 Chad           Mali          Guinea               Niger
Including	grants,	cash	basis,	%	of	GDP




                                          4          2012     2013      2014   2015       2016	e        2017	p
                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                     Excluding	grants,	%	of	GDP




                                          2

                                          0                                                                                                         30
                                          -2

                                          -4                                                                                                        20

                                          -6
                                                                                                                                                    10
                                          -8

                                         -10                                                                                                            0
                                                    Chad             Mali        Guinea             Niger                                                      2012      2013      2014     2015       2016	e     2017	p


Source: IMF and World Bank staff estimates; IMF AIV, several years.

Note: data for 2016 are revised estimates, and 2017 are projections. Fiscal deficits include grants and are on cash
basis (except for Niger – on commitment basis); they may slightly differ from those reported in the text done on a
commitment basis.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50
CHAD

The global oil price slump and the deteriorating regional security and humanitarian situation have
had a deeply negative impact on Chad’s economy. Despite its aggressive fiscal consolidation
program, the country remains in debt distress and dependent on international official support to
close a significant financing gap. To emerge from its deepest recession since 2003, the country
needs a recovery in oil prices, favorable agricultural conditions, and a broadly stable security
environment. In the medium term, increasing fiscal space and structural reform need to be
leveraged to diversify and support sustainable growth.




Recent Developments
Chad’s economy remains weak but is showing timid signs of recovery from its deepest
recession since 2003. Following a contraction of 6.4 percent in 2016, growth is estimated to
reach 0.4 percent in 2017, driven by gradually increasing oil prices and production. Subdued
public spending still weighs on non-oil GDP, but the dissipation of the effects of the fiscal
adjustment on domestic demand, improving secondary and tertiary sector activity, and rising
agricultural output should put an end to the economic contraction that started in 2017. The
primary sector is expected to grow at 3.1 percent in 2017, up from 2 percent in 2016, while
industry and services continue to contract, although at a significantly slower pace. Consumer
prices reflect these early signs of improving economic activity, with CPI inflation leaving
deflationary territory (-1.1 percent in 2016) to reach 0 percent in 2017.

Low oil prices, protracted regional insecurity, and the repayment of an oil-collateralized loan
have significantly aggravated Chad’s fiscal situation and ultimately rendered the government
illiquid. Despite substantial fiscal adjustment, Chad is dependent on external financing to
the tune of USD 355 million in 2017. Oil revenues should increase in 2017, but unexpected
production cuts of up to one-third by Esso may put a significant dent in revenue estimates.
Expenditures may slightly increase in 2017 to 18.8 percent of non-oil GDP. Thus, Chad’s fiscal
balance (including grants) is set to reach a surplus of 0.9 percent of GDP for 2017, up from a
deficit of 2.5 percent in 2016.

External public debt is currently in distress and tilted toward commercial creditors (53 percent
of total). External commercial debt restructuring is projected to yield an average reduction in
debt servicing costs of 48 percent per year between 2017 and 2021, and is a precondition to
making the external debt sustainable. Between 2016 and early 2017, a liquidity crunch pushed
external payment arrears to almost 1 percent of GDP. The domestic debt stock rose to around
24 percent of GDP in 2016, but by late 2017 the repayment of domestic arrears should cause it
to fall for the first time in five years.

Hard currency rationing and fiscal consolidation have contributed to a reduction in the external
current account deficit from 9.2 percent of GDP in 2016 to an estimated 2.2 percent in 2017.


                                                                                                     51
The trade balance is improving while foreign direct investment is set to pick up in 2017. As a
member of CEMAC, monetary and exchange rate policy is determined by the regional central
bank, the BEAC. Chad’s imputed FX reserves have been negative at -0.3 month of imports at
end-2016 and will stay around zero in the short term while its shallow financial sector remains
heavily exposed to the government’s fiscal position. However, repayment of arrears and a
slight increase in deposits should help stabilize banks in distress.



Outlook
Chad’s real GDP growth is projected at 0.4 percent in 2017, reflecting the start of a gradual
medium-term recovery on the back of rising oil prices and agricultural production. The outlook
hinges on a continued recovery in global oil prices and production increases, favorable
agricultural conditions, and a broadly stable security environment. Further expenditure
rationalization and rebounding oil revenues are expected to ease fiscal pressures, but Chad
will stay dependent on external financing to close its financing gap.

In 2018, oil sector GDP growth is projected to double to 6 percent, up from 3 percent in 2017,
as new oil fields become operational and expected oil production increases are realized.
This would complement more pronounced agricultural growth, improve industry and service
sector performances, and support a gradual uptick in non-oil GDP growth from 0.1 percent
in 2016 to 2.6 percent in 2018. An improving trade balance is expected to keep the external
current account deficit below 4 percent of GDP and be financed externally, increasing FDI and
shoring up reserves.

Increasing poverty levels coupled with annual population growth of 3.3 percent will lead to
more than one-and-a-half million new poor by 2019, increasing the absolute number from
4.7 million in 2011 to 6.5 million. Using the international poverty line (IPL, $1.90 per day PPP)
and projections based on GDP and population growth, poverty levels are expected to have
increased slightly from 38.4 percent in 2011 to 39.1 percent in 2016. Under the current growth
scenario, the poverty rate is expected to increase further to 40.7 percent by 2019. This reflects
the continuing impact of public service cuts due to austerity measures and income losses due
to the disruption of cross-border livestock trade. These trends were partially offset by modest
increases in agricultural production, which constitutes the primary sector of employment for
nearly three-quarters of the working-age population.




                                                                                                    52
Risks and Challenges
Chad has an immediate and persistent need for an improvement in liquidity and substantial
external support to close its financing gap. Inadequate support from Chad’s development
partners could result in a protracted macroeconomic crisis. A condition for robust support
will be the successful restructuring of external commercial debt. Persistent regional insecurity
presents serious exogenous risks, and any significant increase in either security spending
or humanitarian assistance could derail fiscal consolidation. Lastly, oil production or export
shortfalls pose another risk to GDP growth and fiscal revenue forecasts.

The key medium-term challenge is to reduce oil dependency as well as exposure to oil-
related shocks, diversify Chad’s economy, create a conducive investment climate, and boost
sustainable growth. Today, any recovery from the oil price shock needs to happen again on
the back of the exogenously driven oil sector. A more diversified economy would increase
resilience to exogenous shocks and economic cycles, create productive jobs, and lay the
foundation for sustainable and inclusive growth.




                                                                                                   53
                     Chad: Key Economic and Financial Indicators 2014-20

 	                                                2014	    2015	    2016(e)	 2017(p)	   2018(p)	   2019(p)	   2020 (p)	
 Real Economy		(annual percentage change unless otherwise specified)			
 				
 Real GDP	                                          6.9	     1.8	    -6.4	      0.4 	      2.4 	     3.1 	      3.9
     Oil GDP	                                       5.7	    32.1	    -8.4	      3.0 	      6.1 	     5.8 	      5.4
     Nonoil GDP	                                    7.1	    -2.9	    -6.0	      0.1 	      1.6 	     2.6 	      3.6
 Per Capita GDP (US$)	                            969.1	   954.6	   864.9	    842.9	     836.5	    836.2	         …
 GDP Deflator	                                      1.1	    -0.8	    -1.2	      0.1 	      1.7 	     2.3 	      3.1
 Consumer price inflation (average)	                1.7	     6.8	    -1.1	      0.0 	      1.6 	     3.0 	      3.0
 Oil Prices								
      WEO (US$/barrel)	                            96.2	    50.8	    42.8	     55.2 	     55.1 	    54.1 	     54.0
      Chadian Price (US$/barrel)   1	
                                                   94.0	    39.9	    36.2	     50.4 	     49.9 	    49.0 	     48.9
 								
 Fiscal Accounts		(percentage of nonoil GDP unless otherwise specified)			
 Expenditures (total)	                             29.4	    22.9	    18.0	     18.8 	     18.5	     18.7 	     18.2
 Revenues and grants (total)	                      23.2	    17.1	    14.9 	    19.9 	     19.2 	    19.2 	     19.5
 General government balance
 (commitment basis)	                               -6.2	-5.9	-3.0	1.1	 0.7	0.5	 1.3
 Overall balance
 (including grants, cash basis)	                   -4.4	    -4.5	    -4.9	      0.1	       0.0	     -0.4	       0.8
 Nonoil primary balance
 (commitment basis, excluding grants)	            -16.2	-9.7	 -4.4	-4.6	 -4.3	-4.2	 -3.6
 								
 Selected Monetary Accounts		(annual percentage change unless otherwise specified)			
 				
 Base money	                                       26.5	    -4.7	    -7.7	      5.8	         ..		                   ..
 Credit to the private sector	                     17.8	     1.1	    -2.7	      0.7	         ..		                   ..
 Interest (BEAC key policy rate)	                  2.95	    2.45	    2.45	     2.45	         …		                  …
 								
 Balance of Payments		(percentage of GDP unless otherwise specified)				
 			
 Current account balance 	                         -8.9	   -12.3	    -9.2	     -2.2	      -3.2	     -3.5	      -3.4
 Exports of goods and services (f.o.b.) 	          31.4	    29.6	    28.6	     36.5	      36.9	     36.6	      30.0
 Imports of goods and services (f.o.b.)	          -43.9	   -46.0	   -43.7	    -46.2	     -46.0	    -45.6	     -40.9
 Gross reserves (US$ billions, e.o.p.)	             1.2	     0.4	    -0.3	      0.0	       0.1	      0.3	       0.5
 Gross reserves
 (months of next year’s imports)	                   2.1	     1.0	    -1.0	     -0.1	       0.4	      0.8	       1.3
 External debt 	                                   29.1	    25.0	    27.1	     28.6	      27.8	     26.3	      24.2
 Terms of trade (percentage change)	               -4.8	   -47.6	    -6.9	     24.7	      -1.8	     -2.6	      -0.7
 Exchange rate (average)	                         493.6	   591.2	   592.7	        ..	        ..	       …		
 								
 Memorandum Items:								
 Nominal GDP (CFAF billions)	                     6,912	   6,474	   5,984	    6,023	    6,271	     6,618	     7,094

Source: Chadian Authorities, IMF and Bank staff

                                                                                                               54
GUINEA

The economy is gradually recovering from Ebola and the fall in commodity prices, with an esti-
mated growth rate of 6.6 percent in 2016, driven largely by mining. Medium-term growth pros-
pects are also good, as growth is projected at about 6 percent. Downside risks to the forecast
include socio-political tensions, reform slippage in the run-up to the 2018 legislative elections and
declining commodity prices.


Recent Economic Developments
The Guinean economy is gradually recovering from Ebola and the fall in commodity prices.
After slowing down during the period 2014-15 to about 3.5 percent, growth is estimated to have
reached 6.6 percent in 2016 (3.9 percent in per capita terms), supported by a strong pick-up
in mining production (bauxite and gold), a good agricultural harvest, and improved electricity
supply. Increased demand for bauxite from China and the gold price recovery supported higher
mining production. Agriculture has been resilient due to favorable weather and increased
distribution of subsidized fertilizer. The entry into service of the Kaléta Dam in September 2015
has improved the provision of electricity and boosted economic activity. However, GDP growth
was 2.4 percent lower than its potential, partly due to a lagging manufacturing sector.

The external account deficit has significantly increased, driven by investment-related imports,
from 15 percent of GDP in 2015 to 32 percent in 2016. Capital imports have been linked to the
development of mining projects and the beginning of construction work on the Souapiti dam.
International reserves improved to 2.3 months of imports in 2016 compared with 1.5 months in
2015. The external current account deficit is partly financed by FDI (30.4 percent of GDP) and
public borrowing (1.4 percent of GDP).

Fiscal policies for 2016 led to a significant reduction in the fiscal deficit, which was reduced
from 8.1 percent of GDP in 2015 to 1.9 percent of GDP in 2016. The Government took action
to address the fiscal slippages that occurred in 2015, when significant increases of capital
expenditure were pre-financed by private companies and guaranteed by the central bank
in the context of presidential elections. Fiscal consolidation was broad based, although
it excluded subsidies to the electricity utility. Central bank advances to the Treasury worth
0.4 percent of GDP were repaid.

Revenue mobilization improved in 2016 due to higher indirect and direct tax revenues. Indirect
tax collection increased from 8.6 to 9.7 percent of GDP, reflecting an increase in goods and
services tax revenue. This included an increase from 18 to 20 percent in the VAT rate, which
was reversed at the end of 2016 due to social protests. New taxes on telecommunications,
introduced in July 2015, and a stamp duty on imported used vehicles also contributed to more
domestic revenue mobilization in 2016.




                                                                                                        55
On the monetary policy side, in early 2016, the central bank reduced its interventions in the
foreign exchange market and allowed the currency to depreciate by more than 10 percent
in nominal terms, leading to a virtual unification of the official and parallel market rates. The
central bank maintained its policy rate at 12.5 percent, and the reserve requirement remains
at 16 percent to stem the impact of inflation. Private sector credit growth slowed down to 2.9
percent in 2016 from 10.8 percent in 2015, reflecting the adjustment to a more sustainable
level after two years of large increases fueled by central bank guarantees. Inflation remained
high at 8.2 percent in 2016 due to higher prices for imported goods resulting from the nominal
exchange rate depreciation.

Poverty remains widespread in Guinea, with the estimated national poverty line stagnating
at around 55 percent during 2002-2012, which included a slight decline in 2007. Ebola has
exacerbated poverty and eroded living standards. Simulations based on the 2014 census
suggest a likely increase in poverty to nearly 58 percent in the country, with both urban and
rural areas experiencing increased poverty. At the same time, the population living in poverty
is projected to have increased to about 6 million, which, compared with 2002, represents
net increases of 500,000 and one million poor people in urban and rural areas, respectively.
Meanwhile, the extreme poverty rate, based on the international poverty line (US$1.9 per day
PPP), was estimated at 35.3 percent in 2012.



Outlook
Over the medium term, authorities plan to strengthen macroeconomic sustainability and
implement further reforms to support the resumption of investment and economic activity.
Economic growth is forecast to average 6 percent in 2017-19, driven by mining and agriculture.
Significant mining investment is expected, Guinea benefiting from an increase in its market
share of Chinese imports of bauxite and aluminum following the introduction of bans in
Indonesia and Malaysia on mineral exports to China. In addition to mining investment, the
government is planning to undertake several infrastructure projects, including in the energy,
agriculture, and road sectors. The Souapiti hydropower dam is expected to be delivered in
2021, with support from China.

The government aims to keep the fiscal deficit below 3 percent of GDP out to 2019. Efforts
to better control public spending and mobilize domestic revenue are to be pursued. The
inflation rate is forecast to remain at 8 percent, reflecting sound monetary policy and
expected increases in agricultural productivity and food supply. The external current account
deficit may remain high owing to capital-intensive mining and energy investments, which
would generate stronger exports in the long term. The risk of debt distress remains moderate
in Guinea, but a higher debt service burden in the medium term points to increased debt
vulnerabilities. Guinea’s debt dynamics will remain sustainable, as long as the government
continues to give priority to concessional external loans and grants.

The poverty outlook for the post-2012 period has been negatively affected by the Ebola crisis
and commodity price shocks. In fact, the extreme poverty rate, based on the international


                                                                                                    56
poverty line (US$1.9 per day PPP), was expected to increase from 35.3 percent in 2012 to a
peak of 38.1 percent in 2015, before declining gradually to 34.4 percent in 2019 thanks to the
post-Ebola economic recovery.



Risks and Challenges
Guinea’s economic outlook depends on the ability of the authorities to manage socio-political
tensions. The opposition has recently resumed street demonstrations in protest against the
lack of enforcement of the political agreement signed in October 2016. Under the agreement,
local elections were to be held in early 2017, but they have been postponed several times,
with no exact date yet specified. The run-up to the 2018 legislative elections could undermine
medium-term growth and weaken policy discipline and the structural reforms. In addition,
there has been increased social unrest amid demands for better salaries, including in the
banking sector, and for better jobs and access to public services in Boké, the country’s main
bauxite region.

The expected increase in mining and public investment remains a challenge, as it depends
on several factors. Indeed, delays in mining projects or a decline in commodity prices, limited
capacity and financial constraints in the implementation of investment projects, and weak
implementation of structural reforms could undermine medium-term growth prospects.




                                                                                                  57
                      Guinea: Key Economic and Financial Indicators 2014-19

                                                 2014            2015            2016             2017       2018       2019
                                                                                                  proj       proj       proj
                                                   (annual change in percent)
 National Accounts and Prices
 GDP at constant prices                           3.7              3.5            6.6              6.7        5.8         5.9

 GDP at current prices                            6.6              6.4            15.7            15.0       14.0        14.1

 GDP deflator                                     2.8              2.8            8.5              7.8        7.7         7.8
 Consumer Prices
 Annual average                                   9.7              8.2            8.2              8.5        8.2         8.0
 End of period                                    9.0              7.3            8.7              8.2        8.0         8.0
 External Sector
 Exports (in US$ terms)                           4.7            -18.5            55.0            13.7       23.1        18.5
 Imports (in US$ terms)                          26.1             -6.7           102.1             1.4        -2.1       -8.9

 Money and Credit
 Net foreign assets                               -8.3           -11.0            7.6              7.8        6.0         6.9
 Net domestic assets                             20.6             31.2            2.4              2.9        6.9         7.2

 Net claims on government                         7.5             17.2            1.9              0.3        -0.4       -0.2

 Credit to non-government sector                 13.7             10.8            2.9              2.4        6.4         6.8

 Broad money                                     12.3             20.3            9.9             10.7       12.9        14.1
 Reserve money                                   14.5              2.6            15.5             8.3        7.8        11.5
 Central Government Finances
 (% of GDP)
 Total revenue and grants                        17.0             14.9            16.2            17.0       17.8        18.7
   Revenue                                       13.8             13.7            15.0            14.8       15.9        16.9
   Grants                                         3.1              1.2            1.2              2.1        1.9         1.8
 Total expenditure and net lending               20.2             21.8            16.4            17.6       19.5        20.5
 Current expenditure                             13.6             14.1            11.5            12.7       12.3        12.2
 Capital expenditure                              6.4              7.6            4.8              5.1        7.2         8.3
 Overall budget balance
 (cash basis)
   Excluding grants                               -6.3            -8.1            -1.4             -2.8       -3.6       -3.6
   Including grants                               -3.2            -6.8            -0.1             -0.6       -1.7       -1.8
 Current Account Balance
 (% of GDP)
 Including official transfers                    -13.4           -15.4           -31.9            -28.0      -21.0       -10.5
 Excluding official transfers                    -14.7           -15.5           -32.9            -28.5      -21.4       -11.0
 Overall balance of payments                      -0.7            -4.0            1.3              0.1        0.6         1.1
 Gross official reserves                          3.7              1.5            2.3              2.7        3.2         3.6
 (months of imports)
 External public debt                            19.7             20.3            22.5            24.1       31.3        34.7
 Total public debt                               33.4             39.4            41.8            41.1       45.2        46.3
 Nominal GDP (GNF billion)                     61,664.0        65,627.0        75,943.0          87,356.0   99,557.0   11,3629.0
Source: Guinea authorities, International Monetary Fund, Bank staff estimates and projections.
                                                                                                                                   58
MALI

Despite deteriorating security conditions, the economy continues to perform strongly with robust
growth and declining poverty. However, an increase in public investments has led to a weakening
of the fiscal and external positions. The macroeconomic outlook is positive in terms of growth
and poverty alleviation, but subject to downside risks related to security and commodity price
shocks. Going forward, Mali needs to restore security, address high population growth, and further
diversify its economy.


Recent Developments
Despite volatile security conditions, a robust performance by the agriculture and service
sectors led to an estimated growth rate of 5.8 percent in 2016, compared with 6.0 percent
in 2015. Despite the peace agreement signed in 2015, the north remains difficult for the
government to control and insecurity has also spread to the central and southern regions. In this
unfavorable context, economic activity remained resilient, sustaining the recovery observed
in recent years. Primary sector growth accelerated from 6.9 percent in 2015 to 7.6 percent in
2016 thanks to good agriculture output due to favorable rainfall, while tertiary sector growth
has remained robust at around 6 percent since 2014 on the back of renewed dynamism in the
ICT sector. On the demand side, private consumption rose by 5.1 percent, driven by increased
agricultural incomes in rural areas and stable food prices in urban areas. Meanwhile, gross
fixed investment increased sharply by 14.9 percent, reflecting the government’s efforts to
bridge infrastructure gaps including those related to the Peace Agreement. Inflation dropped
to -1.8 percent despite strong economic activity, mainly due to falling food prices under the
effect of good agricultural production and low international oil prices.

While lower gold prices dented the value of exports, increased imports for public investment
contributed to widen the current account deficit from 5.3 percent of GDP in 2015 to 7.3 percent
in 2016. The current account deficit was financed by net capital inflows, mainly in the form of
aid and foreign direct investment. The weakening of the external position sharply decreased
foreign reserves. Broad money increased by 6.4 percent in 2016, in line with economic growth.

Substantial public investments have contributed to a deterioration in the fiscal position. The
overall fiscal balance (including grants) widened from -1.8 percent of GDP in 2015 to -4.0 percent
in 2016 due to increased public spending, despite significant improvements in domestic
revenues. Public expenditures and net lending to the central government rose sharply to
22.4 percent of GDP, from 20.9 percent in 2015, mainly due to a 2 percent of GDP increase in
capital expenditure from 2015. An improved fuel tax policy and reforms to broaden the tax
base and rationalize tax exemptions saw the Government’s tax revenues increase by 1 percent
of GDP. Debt distress remains moderate, although the public debt increased by 3 percent of
GDP from 2014 to 2016.




                                                                                                     59
Mali is a member of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU). Monetary and
exchange rate policies are managed at the regional level by the Central Bank of West African
States (BCEAO), which maintains a peg between the CFA Franc and the Euro, supported by
the French Treasury. In December 2016, the BCEAO increased the marginal lending facility
rate from 3.5 to 4.5 percent, thereby increasing the cost of funds for sovereigns in the regional
market. However, the impact of this measure was mitigated in March 2017, when the BCEAO
reduced the reserve requirement ratio from 5 percent to 3 percent.

The economic slowdown following the security and political crises in 2012-13 led the extreme
poverty rate to rise by 2.6 percentage points from its 2011 level to 50.4 percent in 2013.
Nonetheless, exceptional agricultural output growth from 2014 coupled with expansion in the
tertiary sector led to strong GDP per capita growth, and to a decline in the poverty rate to
43.1 percent in 2017 based on the international poverty line (IPL US$1.9 PPP). Inequality is also
likely to have waned, since the revenue increase ought to have mostly benefited households
working in the agricultural and tertiary sectors which are most affected by poverty.



Outlook
Growth is projected to remain robust at about 5 percent over the medium term, in line with
Mali’s long-run potential rate of growth. Agricultural growth is assumed to be underpinned
by favorable weather and the positive effects from input subsidy reform. Services growth will
continue its dynamism, especially in telecom, transport, trade, and financial services. Inflation
is projected to remain moderate, as good agricultural production keeps a lid on food prices. On
the demand side, investments are expected to further increase through the operationalization
of the PPP law and the Sustainable Development Fund, which is expected to help finance
regional development projects, especially in the north. The external current account deficit is
projected to reach 8.4 percent of GDP in 2017 but should gradually narrow to about 6.5 percent
of GDP, in line with planned fiscal consolidation. The deficit is expected to be financed by a
combination of FDI and external borrowing.

Expected sustained fiscal adjustment efforts through the rationalization of current expenditures
and improved tax revenues would lower the overall fiscal deficit from 4.3 percent of GDP in
2016 to 3.0 percent in 2019. However, debt sustainability remains vulnerable to a tightening of
financial conditions, lower remittances, lower foreign direct investment, or lower commodity
prices.

The poverty rate is projected to decline steadily, provided the robust expansion of the Malian
economy continues over the period 2017-19 and the security threat does not spread further
south. Under these assumptions, GDP per capita will rise with a concomitant reduction in the
poverty rate to about 41.2 percent in 2019.




                                                                                                    60
Risks and Challenges
There is an urgent need to tackle the deterioration in the security situation, particularly in
the central and southern regions, which account for 95 percent of the country’s population
and almost all its production capacity, to avoid dampening economic growth which could
result from decreased private investment or a shift in public spending toward less productive
security expenditures.

High population growth of 3.0 percent represents a key challenge for the Malian economy.
Unless fertility rates fall faster than expected or death rates start to rise, Mali will come
very close to tripling its population in the next 40 years. Such population growth is clearly
unsustainable and would diminish the impact of economic growth and poverty reduction.

Mali remains heavily dependent on traditional primary products and relatively few export
markets. By diversifying its exports in addition to gold and cotton and its domestic production,
Mali would be on a sustainable path of faster economic growth, lower output volatility, and
greater macroeconomic stability.




                                                                                                   61
                      Mali: Key Economic and Financial Indicators 2014-19

	                                              2013	 2014	2015	2016	2017	2018	2019

							
Real Economy		Annual change in percentage, unless otherwise indicated			
			

    GDP (nominal, CFAF billions)	              6,544	 7,114	7,748	8,322	8,868	9,445	9,961

    Real GDP	                                     2.3	 7.0	6.0	5.8	5.3	5.0	4.7

    GDP deflator	                                 0.7	 1.6	2.8	1.5	1.2	1.4	0.7

    Consumer price inflation (average)	          -0.6	 0.9	1.4	-1.8	0.2	1.2	1.6

							
Fiscal Accounts 		Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated					
	

    Total expenditures	                         19.7	 20.0	20.9	22.2	24.0	23.4	23.3

    Total revenues	                             14.5	 14.9	16.4	16.7	18.3	17.9	18.3

    Grants	                                       2.8	 2.2	2.7	1.6	2.3	2.1	2.0

    General government balance	                  -2.4	 -2.9	-1.8	-3.9	-3.5	-3.4	-3.0

    Public debt	                                26.4	 27.8	30.2	30.7	31.8	32.5	33.7

							
Selected Monetary Accounts		Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated			
			

    Base money	                                   1.3	       -3.7	 14.6	14.7	 7.8	9.4	 8.1

    Credit to the economy	                      11.7	 18.7	19.9	18.8	12.5	11.4	10.9

    Broad money (M2)	                             7.4	        7.1	 13.2	 6.4	 7.8	9.4	 8.1

							
Balance of Payments 		Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated					
	

    Current account balance	                     -2.9	 -4.8	-5.3	-7.3	-8.4	-6.8	-6.5

    Imports	                                    39.9	 38.0	39.6	39.5	41.2	39.2	38.0

    Exports	                                    24.9	 22.5	24.0	22.9	23.1	23.1	22.5

    Foreign direct investment	                    2.3	 1.0	0.9	0.9	0.9	0.9	0.8

    External debt	                              21.5	 21.0	22.6	24.9	25.3	26.1	27.4

    Terms of trade	                            -16.6 	        5.5 	      18.6 	    16.7	         -6.4 	   -0.1 	   0.3

							
Other memo items	 						

GDP nominal in US$ (billions)	                  13.2	 14.4	13.1	14.1	15.1	16.0	17.0




Sources: Ministry of Finance, IMF and Bank staff estimates (2013-16) and projections (2017-19)




                                                                                                                         62
NIGER

Niger’s economy recovered in 2016, growing by 5.0 percent after 4.0 percent in 2015, despite
several shocks. Both the fiscal and the external current accounts improved in 2016 on the back of
fiscal consolidation efforts. Despite numerous risks, the outlook is positive. Over 2017-2019, growth
is projected to average 5.4 percent. Challenges to the outlook include security threats, weather
risks, the pace of Nigeria’s recovery, and high population growth.


Recent Developments
Growth recovered in 2016 on the back of agriculture and private consumption. Niger’s economic
growth is estimated to have reached 5.0 percent (1.1 percent in per capita terms) in 2016 after
4.0 percent in 2015, performing slightly above its potential growth rate of 4.7 percent. This was
due to buoyant agricultural production, supported by favorable weather conditions and an
expansion of crop irrigation. On the demand side, growth was buoyed by private consumption
of 5.1 percent, driven by increased agricultural incomes in rural areas and stable food prices in
urban areas. Investment declined by 10.0 percent as a result of fiscal consolidation.

The external current account deficit (excluding grants) improved in 2016, although it was
still high. The deficit narrowed from 20.5 percent of GDP in 2015 to 17.3 percent in 2016. This
improvement mainly reflects the lower import content of public investment. Lower imports
offset the drop in uranium exports and the downturn in exports and re-exports to Nigeria. As
in the past, the current account deficit continued to be primarily financed by external public
borrowing as well as foreign direct investment (FDI).

Enhanced control over expenditures helped reduce the fiscal deficit in 2016. Fiscal 2016
registered tax revenue shortfalls due to subdued economic activity, particularly in the mining,
oil, and information and communications technology (ICT) sectors, and reduced official trade
flows with Nigeria. The revenue shortfall led the Government to curtail spending. The bulk of
the adjustment in 2016 was borne by public investment, which fell by about 5 percent of GDP.
The fiscal consolidation continued into the first half of 2017, when revenue shortfalls were
followed by tighter control of expenditures, which helped prevent a sharper fiscal deterioration.
As a result, the overall fiscal deficit (on a commitment basis, including grants) is estimated to
have narrowed to 6.1 percent of GDP in 2016 from 9.0 percent in 2015. Public debt has risen
sharply in recent years, from 33.7 percent of GDP in 2014 to 47.0 percent of GDP in 2016, driven
by public infrastructure investment. The risk of external debt distress is moderate, according
to the latest Debt Sustainability Analysis.

Niger is a member of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU). Monetary and
exchange rate policies are managed at the regional level by the Central Bank of West African
States (BCEAO), which maintains a peg between the CFA Franc and the Euro, supported by
the French Treasury. In December 2016, the BCEAO increased the marginal lending facility
rate from 3.5 to 4.5 percent, thereby increasing the cost of funds for sovereigns in the regional


                                                                                                        63
market. However, the impact of this measure was mitigated in March 2017, when the BCEAO
reduced the reserve requirement ratio from 5 percent to 3 percent. Inflation stood at 0.2 percent
in 2016 and 0.6 percent in July 2017, far below the WAEMU target of 3 percent on account of
tight monetary policy, a good crop season, and government food price subsidy programs.
Foreign reserves are estimated at 4.0 months of imports as of mid-2017.

While Niger has achieved some income poverty reduction in the last decade, the country
remains among the poorest in the world. With an HDI estimated at 0.353 (in 2015), Niger
ranks second last among 188 countries (UNDP 2015). When poverty is assessed based on a
multidimensional index, Niger is also among the six countries with the highest proportion (more
than 60 percent) of its population deprived in more than half of the dimensions considered.
Between 2005 and 2014, Niger experienced a significant reduction in monetary poverty. Using
the national poverty line, poverty incidence fell from 53.7 percent to 44.5 percent. Similar trends
were observed in both rural and urban areas. In rural areas, poverty incidence declined by
about 8 percentage points (from about 59 percent to about 51 percent) over the same period.
Income poverty fell faster in the capital city of Niamey and other urban areas. This reduction in
income poverty is due to the pattern of the underlying growth process.



Outlook
The economic outlook is positive. Growth is projected to exceed 5.0 percent over the medium
term, performing slightly above its potential. Growth prospects will be underpinned by
increased productivity in agriculture, favorable commodities prices, and policy reforms in the
energy, mining, and telecommunications sectors. Inflation is expected to remain subdued
below the 2.0 percent target under regional monetary policy, aided by positive agricultural
output. The external current account deficit (excluding grants) is projected to stabilize at about
15 percent of GDP over 2017-19, reflecting the gradual improvement of the economic situation
in Nigeria and the recovery in international commodity prices. Reserves are projected to
stabilize at 4 months of imports. Fiscal consolidation efforts are expected to continue, with a
rationalization and cuts to public expenditure combined with the adoption of tax and customs
administration measures. The fiscal deficit is projected to increase to 7.3 percent in 2017 before
declining and stabilizing at 4.7 percent of GDP in 2019, above the WAEMU target of 3.0 percent.
Using the international poverty line (US$1.9 a day, PPP terms), poverty is expected to decline
by 3 percentage points over 2017-2019.




                                                                                                      64
Risks and Challenges
The macroeconomic outlook is subject to numerous challenges and risks. Niger remains
vulnerable to the effects of numerous shocks, including security threats, fluctuations in
commodity prices, and frequent weather-related shocks (drought and flooding) affecting
economic activity and food security. A slower-than-expected recovery in Nigeria also poses
risks. In the medium term, Niger needs to diversify its economy and strengthen its revenue
mobilization capacity in order to allow sufficient room to absorb the fiscal impact of security
and commodity price shocks. High population growth and gender equality remain a challenge.
High fertility is associated with large families, high dependency ratios, and low levels of
education, factors that are all positively associated with poverty.




                                                                                                  65
                   Niger: Key Economic and Financial Indicators 2014-20

	                                                         Projections (2017-2020)
		2013                                           2014        2015          2016     2017    2018      2019     2020
Real Economy		(annual percentage change, unless otherwise specified)
Real GDP	                               5.3	7.5	 4.0	5.0	5.2	5.5	5.4	7.4
    Non-resources GDP	                  4.2	      7.9	        4.1	          4.3	     5.0	     5.6	     5.5	     6.0
Consumption 	                           4.2	7.2	 7.9	2.5	7.7	7.2	6.9	8.7
    Government consumption	             4.6	     25.9	       11.3	         -7.7	     7.3	     5.2	     3.4	     5.7
    Private consumption	                4.1	      3.6	        7.1	          5.1	     5.8	     4.1	     2.6	     9.1
Investments	                            5.8	 11.2	            7.1	 -10.0	            3.1	     5.2	12.7	 1.7
     Public investment	                12.6	     12.4	        3.5	         -7.5	    22.0	     3.6	     6.6	     9.1
     Private investment	                2.3	     10.6	        9.2	        -11.4	    -7.9	     6.4	    17.2	    -1.4
Imports	                                5.7	 5.0	             6.6	 -14.5	            6.5	     1.9	 1.6	10.3
Exports	                                8.9	 -0.5	           -9.4	 -2.8	             6.4	     4.7	 0.2	30.5
Consumer price inflation (average)	     2.3	      -0.9	       1.0	          0.2	     0.9	     0.9	     1.2	     2.0
								
Fiscal Accounts	                           percent GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
                                          (	
Expenditures	                          27.2	 31	 32.7	26.5	28.1	27.3	26.4	26
Revenues	                              16.6	17.5	 18.1	15.3	16.1	16.8	17.5	19.1
Overall bal.
(commit. basis, incl. grants)	 -2.6	 -8.0	 -9.0	 -6.1	 -7.3	 -6.1	 -4.5	 -2.9
 								
Selected Monetary Accounts		(annual change, in percent of beginning-of-period broad money)
Base money	                            10.1	     25.7	        3.6	         14.4	     9.4	     9.7	    11.5	     9.6
Credit to non-government	 2.5	 6.1	 6.8	 7.5	 4.2	 4.3	 3.9	 4.6
								
Balance of payments		(percent GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Current account balance
(excl. grants)	                       -15.1	-15.4	 -20.5	-17.3	-15.5	-15.0	-15.1	-15.4
Imports of goods and services,
f.o.b.	                                26.3	26.2	 27.5	25.3	26.7	27.3	27.7	28.1
Exports of goods and services,
f.o.b.	                                20.7	17.5	 15.2	13.8	13.8	14.3	14.8	17.9
Foreign direct investment	              8.1	      8.9	        6.9	          7.7	     8.8	    10.5	    10.9	     8.9
Gross reserves (months of imp. eq)	     4.2	       4.8	       4.6	          4.2	     3.9	     4.0	     4.0	     4.1
Total public debt	                     27.2	     33.7	       41.9	         47.0	    51.5	    53.0	    53.9	    52.4
Public external debt 	                 22.6	     25.1	       30.4	         34.1	    35.8	    37.1	    36.8	    38.5
Public domestic debt	                   4.6	      8.7	       11.5	         12.9	    15.3	    16.0	    15.8	    14.0
Foreign aid	                           11.1	8.9	10.4	9.5	9.0	8.9	8.4	7.5
Terms of trade (percentage change)	    -3.1	      -9.4	       -7.5	        11.0	    -4.9	     1.2	    -4.7	    -4.7
Exchange rate (average)	              493.9	    493.6	      591.5	        593.0	   593.0	      …	       …	       …
Memorandum items:								
GDP (nominal, local currency)	        3,703	    4,077	      4,242	        4,430	   4,761	   5,130	   5,504	   5,993
GDP (in nominal US$ bn)	                7.7	      8.3	        7.2	          7.6	     8.3	     8.9	     9.7	   10.7

Source: Nigerien authorities; IMF and World Bank staff estimates, 2017.
                                                                                                                      66
      Sahel Refugees:
      HUMAN FACE
       of a
                 REGIONAL CRISIS




COUNTRY FOCUS:
NIGER
