      JOBS
  WORKING
    PAPER
Issue No. 5




              Job Creation in the
                  Private Sector
 Thomas Farole, Esteban Ferro, and Veronica Michel Gutierrez



             An Exploratory Assessment of Patterns and
      Determinants at the Macro, Sector, and Firm Levels
©	2017	International	Bank	for	Reconstruction	and	Development	/	The	World	Bank.	

1818	H	Street	NW,	Washington,	DC	20433,	USA.	
Telephone:	202-473-1000;	Internet:	www.worldbank.org.	

Some	rights	reserved	

This	work	is	a	product	of	the	staff	of	The	World	Bank	with	external	contributions.	The	findings,	interpretations,	and	
conclusions	expressed	in	this	work	do	not	necessarily	reflect	the	views	of	The	World	Bank,	its	Board	of	Executive	
Directors,	or	the	governments	they	represent.	The	World	Bank	does	not	guarantee	the	accuracy	of	the	data	
included	in	this	work.	The	boundaries,	colors,	denominations,	and	other	information	shown	on	any	map	in	this	
work	do	not	imply	any	judgment	on	the	part	of	The	World	Bank	concerning	the	legal	status	of	any	territory	or	the	
endorsement	or	acceptance	of	such	boundaries.		

Nothing	herein	shall	constitute	or	be	considered	to	be	a	limitation	upon	or	waiver	of	the	privileges	and	immunities	
of	The	World	Bank,	all	of	which	are	specifically	reserved.	

Rights	and	Permissions	


                      	
This	work	is	available	under	the	Creative	Commons	Attribution	3.0	IGO	license	(CC	BY	3.0	IGO)	
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/igo.	Under	the	Creative	Commons	Attribution	license,	you	are	free	to	
copy,	distribute,	transmit,	and	adapt	this	work,	including	for	commercial	purposes,	under	the	following	conditions:	

Attribution—Please	cite	the	work	as	follows:	Thomas	Farole,	Esteban	Ferro,	and	Veronica	Michel	Gutierrez.	2017.	
“Job	Creation	in	the	Private	Sector	-	An	Exploratory	Assessment	of	Patterns	and	Determinants	at	the	Macro,	
Sector,	and	Firm	Levels.”	World	Bank,	Washington,	DC.	License:	Creative	Commons	Attribution	CC	BY	3.0	IGO	

Translations—If	you	create	a	translation	of	this	work,	please	add	the	following	disclaimer	along	with	the	
attribution:	This	translation	was	not	created	by	The	World	Bank	and	should	not	be	considered	an	official	World	
Bank	translation.	The	World	Bank	shall	not	be	liable	for	any	content	or	error	in	this	translation.	

Adaptations—If	you	create	an	adaptation	of	this	work,	please	add	the	following	disclaimer	along	with	the	
attribution:	This	is	an	adaptation	of	an	original	work	by	The	World	Bank.	Views	and	opinions	expressed	in	the	
adaptation	are	the	sole	responsibility	of	the	author	or	authors	of	the	adaptation	and	are	not	endorsed	by	The	
World	Bank.	

Third-party	content—The	World	Bank	does	not	necessarily	own	each	component	of	the	content	contained	within	
the	work.	The	World	Bank	therefore	does	not	warrant	that	the	use	of	any	third-party-owned	individual	component	
or	part	contained	in	the	work	will	not	infringe	on	the	rights	of	those	third	parties.	The	risk	of	claims	resulting	from	
such	infringement	rests	solely	with	you.	If	you	wish	to	re-use	a	component	of	the	work,	it	is	your	responsibility	to	
determine	whether	permission	is	needed	for	that	re-use	and	to	obtain	permission	from	the	copyright	owner.	
Examples	of	components	can	include,	but	are	not	limited	to,	tables,	figures,	or	images.	

All	queries	on	rights	and	licenses	should	be	addressed	to	World	Bank	Publications,	The	World	Bank	Group,	1818	H	
Street	NW,	Washington,	DC	20433,	USA;	fax:	202-522-2625;	e-mail:	pubrights@worldbank.org.	

Project	Number:	P164622	
Report	Number:	AUS22807	

Images:	©	World	Bank.	Further	permission	required	for	reuse.	

	
ABSTRACT
	

Why	do	some	countries	create	more	jobs	than	others?	To	consider	this	question,	in	this	paper	we	focus	
on	one	of	the	most	basic	relationships,	between	growth	and	employment.	In	practice,	the	private	sector	
responds	 very	 differently	 to	 growth	 (and	 decline)	 across	 countries.	 Understanding	 the	 patterns	 and	
drivers	of	private	sector	decisions	to	expand	and	shed	jobs	may	be	important	to	guide	policy	approaches	
for	 job	 creation.	 This	 paper	 analyzes	 the	 output-employment	 relationship	 in	 the	 context	 of	 business	
cycles	at	three	levels:	the	macro-economy;	industry	(in	manufacturing);	and	firms.	The	results	highlight	
major	differences	in	private	sector	job	creation	responsiveness	to	growth	across	stages	of	development	
and	 economic	 structures,	 but	 a	 critical	 finding	 is	 that	 economies	 (and	 firms)	 where	 formal	 sector	 job	
creation	 was	 more	 responsive	 to	 growth	 cycles	 generated	 more	 jobs	 overall.	 In	 addition,	 results	 from	
both	the	macro	analysis	and	the	sectoral	analysis	suggests	significant	complementarity	between	capital	
and	 labor.	 Finally,	 the	 findings	 may	 help	 to	 frame	 a	 broad	 policy	 agenda	 for	 job	 creation,	 including:	
macro-economic	 fundamentals,	 responsive	 labor	 markets,	 access	 to	 finance,	 competition,	 and	 a	
facilitative	 business	 regulatory	 environment.	 These	 are	 not	 surprising,	 but	 nevertheless	 frame	 a	 set	 of	
issues	that	could	be	explored	in	further	research.	

	




	




	                                                                                                                  1	
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
	

This	 report	 was	 prepared	 by	 the	 World	 Bank	 Group’s	 (WBG)	 Jobs	 Group.	 The	 principal	 authors	 are	
Thomas	 Farole,	 Esteban	 Ferro,	 and	 Veronica	 Michel	 Gutierrez.	 We	 are	 grateful	 to	 Alvaro	 Gonzalez,	
Marek	Hanusch,	and	Gonzalo	Varela	for	their	valuable	comments	and	suggestions.	We	are	also	grateful	
to	 Alvaro	 Gonzalez,	 Hari	 Subhash,	 and	 Leonardo	 Lacovone	 for	 providing	 access	 to	 the	 dataset	 used	 in	
Section	3	of	this	paper.	

The	 publication	 of	 this	 report	 has	 been	 made	 possible	 through	 a	 grant	 from	 the	 World	 Bank’s	 Jobs	
Umbrella	Trust	Fund,	which	is	supported	by	the	Department	for	International	Development/UK	AID,	and	
the	 Governments	 of	 Norway,	 Germany,	 Austria,	 the	 Austrian	 Development	 Agency,	 and	 the	 Swedish	
International	Development	Cooperation	Agency.		

The	report	was	prepared	under	project	Firms,	Access	to	Markets,	Value	Chains	and	Jobs	(P164622).	

	

	




	




	                                                                                                                2	
CONTENTS
	
ABSTRACT	............................................................................................................................................	1	
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS	.........................................................................................................................	2	
1.	ECONOMIC	GROWTH,	THE	PRIVATE	SECTOR	AND	JOB	CREATION	–	FRAMING	THE	ISSUE	..................	6	
2.	MACRO-LEVEL	VIEW:	THE	LINK	BETWEEN	BUSINESS	CYCLES	AND	EMPLOYMENT	GROWTH	..............	9	
Business	cycles	and	employment	growth	–	descriptive	overview	highlighting	country	variation	...............	9	
Determinants	of	employment	outcomes	...................................................................................................	18	
3.	INDUSTRY-LEVEL	VIEW:	ANALYSIS	OF	GROWTH	AND	EMPLOYMENT	RELATIONSHIPS	IN	
MANUFACTURING	..............................................................................................................................	21	
                                          ........................................................................................	21	
Relationship	between	growth	and	employment	
How	are	employment	elasticities	associated	with	overall	job	creation?	...................................................	26	
4.	FIRM-LEVEL	VIEW:	FIRM	TYPES,	REGULATION,	AND	JOB	CREATION	................................................	30	
The	regulatory	environment	and	job	turnover	..........................................................................................	31	
5.	CONCLUSIONS	AND	FUTURE	RESEARCH	..........................................................................................	39	
ANNEX	A:	OKUN’S	LAW	......................................................................................................................	42	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	...................................................................................................................................	46	
	

	
	




	




	                                                                                                                                                    3	
ABBREVIATIONS
	
Most	used	abbreviations	list:	please	keep	relevant	ones	and	add	your	own		
ADB	      	    Asian	Development	Bank	
ALMP	     	    active	labor	market	program			
ASA		     	    advisory	services	and	analytics	
CBO	      	    community-based	organization	
CCSA	     	    cross-cutting	solutions	area	
CCT		     	    conditional	cash	transfer	
CEO	      	    chief	executive	officer	
CIS			    	    Commonwealth	of	Independent	States	
CPF		     	    country	partnership	framework	
DAC	      	    Development	Assistance	Committee	(OECD)	
DfID		    	    Department	for	International	Development	(United	Kingdom)	
EBRD		    	    European	Bank	for	Reconstruction	and	Development		
ECA		     	    Europe	and	Central	Asia		
EU			     	    European	Union		
FAO		     	    Food	and	Agriculture	Organization	of	the	United	Nations	
FDI			    	    Foreign	Direct	Investment		
FCS		     	    fragile	and	conflict	state	
FY		 	    	    fiscal	year		
GDP		     	    Gross	Domestic	Product		
GIZ			    	    Deutsche	Gesellschaft	für	Internationale	Zusammenarbeit		
GNI		     	    Gross	National	Income		
GP	 	     	    global	practice	
HIC			    	    high-income	country	
HS		 	    	    household	survey		
IAT			    	    informal	apprenticeship	training		
ICLS		    	    International	Conference	of	Labour	Statisticians		
ICR	 	    	    implementation	completion	report		
IDA		     	    International	Development	Association		
IE	 	     	    impact	evaluation		
IDB		     	    Inter-American	Development	Bank		
IEG		     	    Independent	Evaluation	Group	
IGA		     	    income-generating	activity	
ILC			    	    International	Labour	Conference		
IFC	 	    	    International	Finance	Corporation	
IILS			   	    International	Institute	for	Labour	Studies	
ILS			    	    International	Labour	Standards		
IMF		     	    International	Monetary	Fund		
IOE			    	    International	Organization	of	Employers		
ITUC		    	    International	Trade	Union	Confederation		
IZA			    	    Institute	for	the	Study	of	Labor		
ICT			    	    information	and	communications	technology		
ILO	 	    		   International	Labor	Organization		



	                                                                            4	
ISIC		   	   International	Standard	Industrial	Classification		
KILM		   	   Key	Indicators	of	Labor	Market		
KM		     	   Knowledge	Management		
LDC		    	   least	developed	country		
LFS			   	   labor	force	survey		
MDG		    	   Millennium	Development	Goal		
M&E	     	   monitoring	and	evaluation		
MFI		    	   micro-finance	institution		
MoF		    	   Ministry	of	Finance		
MIS		    	   management	information	system	
MSE		    	   micro	and	small	enterprise		
MSME	    	   micro,	small	and	medium	enterprise	
NIS			   	   National	Institute	of	Statistics		
n.a.		   	   not	applicable		
N/A,	—	 	    not	available		
NGO		    	   nongovernmental	organization		
NEET		   	   not	in	education,	employment,	or	training		
ODA		    	   official	development	assistance		
OECD		   	   Organization	for	Economic	Co-operation	and	Development		
OOP		    	   out-of-pocket	payments	
PER		    	   public	expenditure	review	
PEP		    	   public	employment	programme	
PES		    	   public	employment	services	
PPP		    	   purchasing	power	parity	
PHC		    	   population	and	housing	census	
PRSP		   	   poverty	reduction	strategy	paper	
RCT		    	   randomized	control	trial	
SME		    	   small	and	medium-sized	enterprises		
SDG	     	   sustainable	development	goal	
SCD		    	   strategic	country	diagnostic	
SOE		    	   state	owned	enterprise		
STEP	    	   skills	towards	employment	and	productivity	
TFP		    	   Total	Factor	Productivity	
TOR		    	   terms	of	reference		
TVET		   	   Technical	and	Vocational	Education	and	Training	
UN			    	   United	Nations		
UNDP		   	   United	Nations	Development	Programme	
UNIDO	 	     United	Nations	Industrial	Development	Organization	
USD		    	   United	States	Dollars	
VAT		    	   Value	added	Tax		
VET		    	   technical	and	vocational	education	and	training	
VC		 	   	   value	chain	
WBG		    	   World	Bank	Group	
WDI		    	   World	Development	Indicators		
WDR	     	   World	Development	Report	
WTO		    	   World	Trade	Organization		



	                                                                       5	
1. ECONOMIC GROWTH, THE PRIVATE
SECTOR AND JOB CREATION – FRAMING THE
ISSUE
	
Listen	to	any	policymaker’s	speech	or	pick	up	any	newspaper,	and	the	urgency	of	job	creation	is	clear.		
The	World	Development	Report	(WDR)	on	Jobs	(World	Bank,	2013)	reports	that	more	than	200	million	
people	 worldwide	 are	 unemployed,	 while	 another	 2	 billion	 working	 age	 adults	 remain	 outside	 the	
workforce.	On	top	of	this,	the	report	estimates	600	million	additional	jobs	will	be	needed	over	the	next	
15	years	just	to	keep	pace	with	new	entrants	to	the	labor	market.	
	
Where	will	these	jobs	come	from?	While	public	sector	employment	has	a	role	to	play,	the	WDR	argues	
that	the	private	sector	is	the	only	sustainable	engine	of	job	creation	in	any	economy,	emphasizing	the	
widely	reported	statistic	that	9	out	of	every	10	jobs	are	in	the	private	sector	(World	Bank,	2013).	But	this	
includes	farmers,	other	self-employed,	and	informal	workers,	in	addition	to	those	that	are	wage	workers	
in	formal	enterprises.	Indeed,	formal	private	sector	jobs	are	the	exception	rather	than	the	rule	in	many	
countries.	Thus,	the	role	of	the	private	sector	in	job	creation	is	likely	to	vary	significantly	depending	on	
the	structure	of	the	economy	and	the	nature	of	the	private	sector.	It	is	also	likely	to	vary	significantly	
depending	the	policies	governments	pursue,	which	sets	the	conditions	that	facilitate	or	hinder	private	
sector	job	creation.	For	this	reason,	understanding	the	patterns	of	employment	across	economies,	time	
periods,	and	broad	policy	domains,	is	an	important	starting	point	to	considering	how	to	support	robust	
private	sector	job	creation.	
	
We	can	think	of	three	broad	(but	not	mutually	exclusive)	mechanisms	that	determine	job	creation	in	the	
private	sector.	First	and	foremost	is	growth	–	in	response	to	increased	aggregate	demand	new	firms	are	
established	 or	 when	 existing	 firms	 expand.	 Expanded	 output	 is	 usually	 a	 necessary	 condition,	 if	 not	 a	
sufficient	 one	 (output	 growth	 may	 be	 employment	 neutral	 if	 labor	 productivity	 increases	 at	 a	
corresponding	rate	or	if	firms	substitute	capital	for	labor).	Second,	for	any	given	level	of	output,	relative	
demand	for	labor	may	vary	depending	on	the	sectoral	and	enterprise	structure	of	the	economy	(some	
sectors	and	enterprise	types	are	more	labor	intensive	than	others.	Finally,	for	any	given	level	of	output	
and	 sector/firm	 composition,	 the	 relative	 use	 of	 capital	 and	 labor	 (factor	 intensity)	 will	 determine	 the	
number	of	jobs	created.	
	
This	paper	is	intended	as	the	first	in	a	possible	series	of	analyses	on	private	sector	job	creation.	We	focus	
in	 this	 paper	 on	 the	 first	 of	 the	 mechanisms	 outlined	 above,	 analyzing	 one	 of	 the	 most	 basic	
relationships	in	economics,	–	between	growth	and	employment	 –	although	we	also	explore	briefly	how	
compositional	 effects	 and	 factor	 intensity	 mediates	 the	 output-employment	 relationship.	 Subsequent	
papers	in	this	series	could	probe	some	of	the	findings	from	this	initial	assessment	as	well	as	explore	the	
other	mechanisms	outlined	above.	
	




	                                                                                                                   6	
This	paper	analyzes	the	output-employment	relationship	in	the	context	of	business	cycles1,	which	allows	
for	 comparing	 across	 a	 large	 set	 of	 countries	 by	 measuring	 employment	 elasticities	 to	 growth	 and	
decline.	A	substantial	literature	exists	job	creation	over	business	cycles.	Most	papers	focus	on	which	firm	
types	drive	job	creation,	including	the	long-standing	debate	on	whether	large	or	small	and/or	young	or	
established	 firms	 create	 more	 jobs	 (Gertler	 and	 Gilchrist,	 1994;	 Fort	 et	 al,	 2013;	 Decker	 et	 al,	 2014).	
Analysis	 taking	 the	 business	 cycles	 approach	 also	 tend	 to	 be	 single-country	 focused,	 most	 often	 using	
data	 from	 the	 United	 States	 or	 other	 high	 income	 countries,	 with	 relatively	 little	 analysis	 done	 on	
countries	outside	of	the	OECD	(for	an	example	of	multi-country	analysis	outside	the	OECD,	see	Hanusch,	
2012).	 Among	 the	 few	 large	 cross-country	 studies	 that	 follow	 a	 broadly	 similar	 approach,	 Freund	 and	
Rijkers	 (2014)	 study	 episodes	 of	 sharp	 unemployment	 reduction	 in	 94	 rich,	 middle-income,	 and	
transition	countries.	They	find	that	while	the	business	cycle	is	the	biggest	factor	shaping	unemployment	
trends,	countries	with	a	better	regulatory	environment	better	are	less	likely	to	have	high	unemployment	
and	more	likely	to	recover	rapidly	following	a	spike	in	unemployment.	
	
The	main	objective	of	this	paper	is	modest	–	we	aim	to	assess	the	relationship	between	growth	and	job	
creation	across	a	broad	cross-section	of	economies.	The	focus	is	on	identifying	and	describing	patterns	
in	the	relationship	between	growth	and	job	creation	over	business	cycles	in	different	country	contexts.	
But	we	also	ask	why	is	that	some	countries	create	more	jobs	than	others	during	periods	of	growth.	And	
so	we	begin	to	explore	structural	and	policy-related	factors	that	may	explain	the	patterns	of	overall	job	
creation	and	employment	elasticity	to	growth.	We	can	think	of	several	factors	that	may	be	relevant	in	
determining	 these	 patterns:	 structural	 and	 compositional	 effects;	 relative	 prices	 of	 capital	 and	 labor;	
market	rigidities	(business	regulations,	financial	and	labor	markets);	and	uncertainties	emanating	from	
policy,	institutions,	and/or	historical	volatility.	
	
The	 hypothesis	 is	 that	 factors	 such	 as	 income	 levels,	 sectoral	 composition,	 capital	 intensity,	 and	 the	
structure	of	the	enterprise	sector	and	of	labor	markets	will	have	significant	impacts	on	how	the	private	
sector	responds	to	create	(shed)	jobs	in	periods	of	growth	(decline).	However,	controlling	for	structural	
factors,	the	hypothesis	is	that	countries	with	more	effective	enabling	environments	(broadly	defined)	to	
support	the	private	sector	will	create	more	jobs	overall	and	exhibit	employment	outcomes	that	respond	
efficiently	to	business	cycles	(i.e.	in	terms	of	patterns	of	labor	shedding	and	absorption).	This	hypothesis	
is	 explored	 through	 a	 combination	 of	 descriptive	 and	 regression	 analysis	 of	 cross-country	 data	 on	
employment	 outcomes	 at	 three	 levels:	 in	 the	 macro	 economy;	 at	 the	 meso	 (sector)	 level;	 and	 at	 the	
micro	(firm)	level.		
	
The	paper	is	organized	in	four	sections	following	this	introduction.	Section	2	takes	a	macro	lens	to	the	
relationship	between	business	cycles	and	employment	outcomes,	introducing	the	Okun	coefficient	as	a	
key	measure	of	the	employment	elasticity	to	growth.	The	Okun	coefficient	is	derived	from	Okun’s	Law,	
which	 refers	 to	 the	 empirical	 regularity	 found	 in	 the	 United	 States	 that	 seems	 to	 hold	 between	 the	
output	and	unemployment	gaps,	or	between	cyclical	unemployment	and	cyclical	output.	We	then	test	
Okun’s	Law	across	the	global	economy,	where	we	find	it	holds	well	for	high	and	upper	middle-income	
countries.	But	we	find	that	job	creation	is	not	associated	with	output	changes	in	lower-middle	income	

																																																													
1
 	We	use	the	term	‘business	cycles’	to	refer	to	patterns	of	economic	growth	or	decline;	note	that	while	the	term	‘business	cycle’	
is	often	associated	with	quarterly	periods,	this	paper	we	have	data	only	in	one-year	intervals.	




	                                                                                                                              7	
and	 low-income	 countries.	 This	 is	 perhaps	 not	 surprising,	 given	 that	 low-income	 countries	 are	
characterized	 by	 high	 levels	 of	 self-employment,	 and	 so	 labor	 markets	 may	 adjust	 to	 growth	 more	
through	 earnings	 than	 through	 job	 creation	 per	 se.	 Nevertheless,	 the	 findings	 are	 relevant	 as	 we	 also	
find	 that	 countries	 in	 which	 Okun’s	 law	 holds,	 have	 on	 average	 higher	 employment	 growth.	 Thus,	
understanding	 what	 determines	 Okun’s	 law	 may	 also	 help	 us	 discover	 what	 determines	 higher	
employment	growth	across	countries.		
	
The	 third	 section	 moves	 to	 the	 sector	 level	 and	 carries	 out	 a	 more	 descriptive	 analysis	 with	 a	 cross-
country	 dataset	 limited	 to	 the	 manufacturing	 sector.	 This	 helps	 to	 control	 for	 issues	 of	 sectoral	
composition	and	informality	that	introduce	comparability	problems	in	the	macro	analysis.	We	find	that,	
controlling	 for	 these	 factors,	 job	 creation	 patterns	 in	 lower	 income	 countries	 respond	 equally	 well	 to	
output	changes	as	in	higher	income	countries	(in	fact,	even	more	so).	This	corroborates	the	hypothesis	
that	 structural	 and	 compositional	 factors	 determine	 significantly	 the	 patterns	 observed	 in	 the	 macro	
data.	The	findings	from	the	sectoral	analysis	also	suggest	that	capital	intensity	is	not	necessarily	a	barrier	
to	job	creation.	In	this	section,	we	also	test	to	see	if	there	is	evidence	of	any	systematic	delays	to	the	
adjustment	 process	 at	 the	 sector	 of	 country-group	 level	 and	 find	 no	 evidence.	 Finally,	 we	 test	 for	
whether	 volatility	 in	 output	 impacts	 adjustment	 (as	 measured	 by	 contemporaneous	 elasticity	 of	
employment)	and	find	supporting	evidence	at	the	sector	level	but	not	at	the	country	level,	suggesting	
that	 countries	 may	 follow	 an	 explicit	 or	 implicit	 ‘portfolio	 strategy’	 in	 sectoral	 specialization	 that	
smooths	volatility.	
	
Section	 4	 moves	 the	 lens	 to	 the	 firm	 level,	 exploiting	 firm	 microdata	 to	 understand	 how	 firms	 create	
jobs	in	response	to	output	changes.	We	explore	the	links	between	the	regulatory	environment	in	which	
firms	operate	and	job	turnover	by	exploiting	the	observed	industry-size	variations	through	a	difference-
in-difference	 approach.	 Additionally,	 we	 explore	 firm	 characteristics	 that	 are	 associated	 with	 higher	
employment	growth	rates	in	the	short	run	and	the	long	run,	and	identify	the	firm	types	with	the	largest	
impact	 on	 employment	 growth.	 Understanding	 the	 determinants	 of	 the	 number	 of	 high	 growth	 firms	
across	 countries	 can	 help	 us	 understand	 that	 is	 needed	 to	 create	 the	 environment	 for	 these	 types	 of	
firms	to	flourish.	We	find	mixed	results,	but	overall	macro,	structural,	and	firm	characteristics	are	most	
associated	with	job	creation,	while	regulatory	factors	and	institutions	also	mediate	outcomes.	
	
Section	5	concludes	and	outlines	possible	paths	for	future	research.		
	

	                                   	




	                                                                                                                  8	
2. MACRO-LEVEL VIEW: THE LINK BETWEEN
BUSINESS CYCLES AND EMPLOYMENT
GROWTH
BUSINESS	CYCLES	AND	EMPLOYMENT	GROWTH	–	DESCRIPTIVE	OVERVIEW	HIGHLIGHTING	
COUNTRY	VARIATION	
The	 responsiveness	 of	 the	 labor	 market	 over	 business	 cycles	 has	 important	 implications	 for	 workers.	
Shocks	 to	 the	 economy	 cause	 output	 to	 fluctuate	 around	 the	 economy’s	 potential.	 These	 output	
movements	 cause	 firms	 to	 hire	 and	 fire	 workers,	 changing	 employment;	 changes	 in	 employment,	 in	
turn,	 move	 the	 unemployment	 rate	 in	 the	 opposite	 direction.	 But	 the	 nature	 and	 strength	 of	 this	
relationship	varies.	For	example,	in	the	US,	the	last	three	recessions	(1990-91,	2001,	and	2007-09)	have	
been	 followed	 by	 "jobless	 recoveries".	 Jobless	 recoveries	 are	 periods	 following	 the	 end	 of	 recessions	
when	 output	 growth	 resumes	 but	 employment	 does	 not	 grow.	 In	 contrast,	 cyclical	 recoveries	 prior	 to	
1990	were	accompanied	by	prompt	recoveries	in	employment	and	declines	in	unemployment.		
	
While	labor	market	relationships	with	growth	vary	over	time	within	countries,	they	vary	even	more,	and	
more	 systematically,	 across	 countries.	 Figure	 1	 shows	 examples	 of	 the	 relation	 between	 GDP	 and	
employment	growth	for	six	different	countries.	In	the	top	panel,	we	can	see	that	in	Sweden	and	the	US	
there	 is	 very	 close	 relation	 between	 GDP	 growth	 and	 employment	 growth	 rates.	 It	 is	 also	 worth	
highlighting	how	these	two	economies	are	more	stable	than	the	others,	particularly	employment	does	
not	 have	 major	 swings	 in	 either	 direction,	 with	 the	 exception	 of	 2009	 when	 the	 world	 financial	 crisis	
affected	 most	 developed	 countries.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 these	 two	 economies	 also	 show	 substantial	
differences	in	their	response	to	the	wild	fluctuations	in	output	that	accompanied	the	2009	crisis,	with	
employment	falling	much	less	sharply	in	Sweden	in	2009,	but	also	rebounding	much	less	sharply	in	2010.	
This	 suggests	 that	 while	 the	 upper	 income	 status	 is	 part	 of	 the	 explanation	 for	 GDP	 and	 employment	
growth	patterns,	other	factors	also	play	a	significant	role,	in	this	case	potentially	the	level	of	safety	nets	
available	 in	 Sweden	 versus	 the	 US,	 the	 relative	 share	 of	 private	 versus	 public	 employment,	 or	 the	
willingness	of	the	private	sector	to	maintain	workers	during	a	downturn.	
	
The	middle	panel	shows	two	developing	countries,	Ecuador	and	Vietnam.	It	is	clear	that	both	GDP	and	
labor	 markets	 are	 much	 more	 volatile	 than	 the	 countries	 in	 the	 top	 panel.	 Ecuador	 is	 an	 interesting	
example,	 which	 shows	 a	 low	 correlation	 between	 GDP	 and	 employment	 growth	 between	 1995	 and	
2000;	between	2000	and	2005	there	is	a	high	correlation,	and	between	2005	and	2010	there	appears	to	
be	a	negative	correlation	between	the	two	indicators.	In	Vietnam,	there	also	appears	to	be	a	negative	
correlation	between	GDP	and	employment	growth.	The	final	panel	shows	the	relation	between	GDP	and	
employment	growth	for	Burundi	and	China.	In	these	countries,	there	appears	as	if	there	is	no	correlation	
between	GDP	and	employment	growth.	In	the	case	of	Burundi	this	is	partially	explained	by	the	fact	that	
nearly	90	percent	of	the	labor	force	is	self-employed	or	otherwise	informal.	In	this	context,	employment	
responses	to	growth	(or	decline)	are	unlikely	to	register	as	significant	(this	issue	will	be	discussed	in	more	
detail	later	in	this	section).	
	
	



	                                                                                                                  9	
              Figure	1		
              Relation	between	GDP	and	Employment	Growth		

                          GDP and Employment Growth (detrended)                                                       GDP and Employment Growth (detrended)
                                              Sweden                                                                                 United States
                                                                                                          2
                   5


                                                                                                          0
Growth Rate (%)




                                                                                        Growth Rate (%)
                   0

                                                                                                          -2

                   -5
                                                                                                          -4



                  -10                                                                                     -6
                        1995      2000           2005          2010          2015                                1995         2000          2005           2010           2015
                                                Year                                                                                       Year
                                 GDP Growth             Employment Growth                                                    GDP Growth              Employment Growth

                                                                                        	                                                                                            	

                                                                                                                      GDP and Employment Growth (detrended)
                                                                                                                                          Vietnam
                                                                                                          2



                                                                                                          1
                                                                                        Growth Rate (%)




                                                                                                          0



                                                                                                          -1



                                                                                                          -2
                                                                                                               1995         2000           2005           2010            2015
                                                                                                                                           Year

                                                                                                                            GDP Growth              Employment Growth

                                                                                    	                                                                                                	

                          GDP and Employment Growth (detrended)                                                       GDP and Employment Growth (detrended)
                                              Burundi                                                                                     China
                  10                                                                                      4


                   5
Growth Rate (%)




                                                                                        Growth Rate (%)




                                                                                                          2

                   0


                                                                                                          0
                   -5



                  -10                                                                                     -2
                        1995      2000          2005          2010          2015                                 1995        2000          2005           2010           2015
                                               Year                                                                                       Year

                                GDP Growth              Employment Growth                                                   GDP Growth              Employment Growth

                                                                                    	                                                                                            	
              	
              Okun’s	Law		
              Typically,	 growth	 slowdowns	 coincide	 with	 rising	 unemployment,	 and	 vice	 versa.	 This	 negative	
              correlation	 between	 GDP	 growth	 and	 unemployment	 has	 been	 named	 “Okun’s	 law,”	 after	 the	
              economist	 Arthur	 Okun	 who	 first	 documented	 it	 in	 the	 early	 1960s.	 Part	 of	 the	 enduring	 appeal	 of	



              	                                                                                                                                                                  10	
Okun’s	law	is	its	simplicity,	since	it	involves	two	important	macroeconomic	variables.	Additionally,	the	
relationship	appears	to	enjoy	empirical	support.		

Ever	 since	 Okun	 (1962)	 tested	 it	 empirically,	 the	 relationship	 has	 been	 examined	 by	 a	 number	 of	
economists	 including,	 inter	 alia,	 Smith	 (1975),	 Gordon	 (1984),	 Knoester	 (1986),	 Kaufman	 (1988),	
Prachowny	 (1993),	 and	 Weber	 (1995).	 While	 most	 these	 studies	 examined	 its	 validity	 for	 the	 United	
States	 economy,	 the	 relationship	 has	 also	 been	 tested	 for	 other	 countries,	 e.g.,	 Knoester	 (1986)	
Kaufman	 (1988),	 and	 Moosa	 (1997).	 Also,	 Ball,	 Leigh	 and	 Loungani	 (2016),	 show	 that	 Okun’s	 Law	 has	
held	up	well	for	a	set	of	20	advanced	economies.	Although	the	results	generally	support	the	empirical	
validity	of	the	relationship	in	the	sense	of	finding	a	significantly	negative	coefficient	on	cyclical	output,	
the	so-called	Okun	coefficient;	nevertheless,	the	authors	find	significant	cross-country	differences	in	the	
magnitude	of	the	coefficients,	with	larger	coefficients	found	for	the	United	States	and	Canada	than	for	
Europe	and	Japan.	The	authors	attribute	the	difference	in	the	elasticity	across	countries	to	differences	in	
the	rigidity	of	the	labor	markets.		
	
We	expect	to	that	Okun’s	law	will	be	applicable	in	developing	countries;	however,	we	can	expect	to	find	
that	 the	 Okun	 coefficient	 will	 be	 significantly	 different	 across	 countries.	 Since	 labor	 markets	 differ	 in	
regulations,	structure,	and	each	country	has	a	very	different	economic	structure	in	terms	of	what	they	
produce	 and	 in	 the	 income	 level	 of	 their	 populations	 we	 also	 expect	 that	 there	 are	 significant	
differences	 in	 the	 way	 labor	 markets	 react	 to	 changes	 in	 business	 cycles.	 For	 example,	 in	 many	 low-
income	 countries	 the	 large	 majority	 of	 the	 working	 age	 population	 is	 self-employed,	 either	 in	
subsistence	 agriculture	 or	 some	 informal	 non-farm	 activity.	 While	 these	 are	 accounted	 for	 as	 ‘jobs’	 in	
the	employment	data,	the	reality	is	that	they	will	not	come	and	go	in	periods	of	economic	growth	and	
decline;	 rather,	 the	 adjustment	 to	 business	 cycles	 is	 likely	 to	 be	 observed	 through	 earnings,	 working	
hours,	and/or	shifts	in	employment	within	the	informal	sector.		
	
In	this	section,	we	examine—among	other	employment	outcomes—how	the	Okun	coefficient	behaves	
for	 developing	 and	 developed	 countries.	 Since	 Okun’s	 Law	 has	 not	 been	 studied	 extensively	 in	 the	
context	of	developing	countries	(although	see	Hanusch,	2012,	for	one	example),	and	is	a	less	well	known	
concept,	 much	 of	 this	 subsection	 explains	 how	 the	 Okun	 coefficient	 is	 estimated	 and	 how	 it	 differs	
between	 countries	 of	 different	 income	 levels.	 We	 then	 explain	 why	 some	 countries’	 labor	 force	 are	
more	responsive	to	changes	in	outcome	than	others.	Since	we	are	particularly	interested	in	how	private	
sector	contributes	to	job	creation,	we	explore	employment	in	the	formal	sector	as	well	as	private	sector	
determinants	of	the	Okun	coefficient.	The	motivation	is	two-fold.	First,	developing	countries	account	for	
a	 large,	 and	 growing,	 share	 of	 the	 global	 labor	 force.	 Hence,	 understanding	 the	 determinants	 of	 labor	
market	outcomes	in	these	countries	is	important.	There	is	ample	evidence	that	job	creation	contributes	
to	individual	and	social	welfare,	whereas	unemployment	and	job	loss	are	associated	with	persistent	loss	
of	income,	health	problems,	and	breakdown	of	family	and	social	cohesion	(see	the	World	Bank’s	 World	
Development	 Report	 on	 “Jobs”	 (2013)).	 A	 second	 motivation	 is	 to	 probe	 the	 common	 perception	 that	
labor	 market	 outcomes	 in	 developing	 countries	 reflect	 mostly	 structural	 factors	 rather	 than	 short-run	
cyclical	 fluctuations.	 Whether	 this	 perception	 is	 correct	 has	 important	 policy	 implications.	 If	 cyclical	
fluctuations	account	for	a	substantial	part	of	labor	market	developments,	macroeconomic	stabilization	
policies—such	as	central	bank	actions,	countercyclical	fiscal	policies	and	prudential	policies	to	mitigate	
financial	crises—gain	in	importance	relative	to	structural	policies	(e.g.	improving	education	and	skills	of	
the	labor	force).	


	                                                                                                                   11	
	
There	are	different	versions	on	how	to	estimate	Okun’s	coefficient.	However,	Okun’s	two	relationships,	
arise	 from	 the	 observation	 that	 more	 labor	 is	 typically	 required	 to	 produce	 more	 goods	 and	 services	
within	an	economy.	More	labor	can	come	through	a	variety	of	forms,	such	as	having	employees	work	
longer	 hours	 or	 hiring	 more	 workers.	 To	 simplify	 the	 analysis,	 Okun	 assumed	 that	 the	 unemployment	
rate	can	serve	as	a	useful	summary	of	the	amount	of	labor	being	used	in	the	economy.	

A	high	rate	of	unemployment,	Okun	reasoned,	would	typically	be	associated	with	idle	resources.	In	such	
a	circumstance,	one	would	expect	the	actual	rate	of	output	to	be	below	its	potential.	A	very	low	rate	of	
unemployment	 would	 be	 associated	 with	 the	 reverse	 scenario.	 The	 original	 version	 of	 Okun’s	 law	
compares	 the	 gap	 between	 actual	 and	 potential	 (or	 natural)	 rate	 of	 unemployment	 and	 the	 gap	
between	actual	output	and	potential	output.	Alternatively,	we	estimate	the	difference	version	of	Okun’s	
law	 which	 has	 the	 advantage	 that	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 determine	 the	 natural	 output	 and	 employment	
which	a	non-trivial	exercise.	This	version	of	Okun’s	Law	posits	a	relationship	between	the	changes	in	the	
unemployment	rate	and	the	growth	rate	of	output	and	is	defined	as	follows:	

              	∆"#,% = '∆(#,% + *#,% 	 	                        	   	         	          (1)	
	
where	 ∆"#,% 	is	the	change	in	the	unemployment	rate	in	country	 i	in	year	 t.	 ∆(#,% 	is	the	change	in	output	
in	country	i	in	year	t,	and	*#,% 	is	the	error	term.		
		
Equation	 (1)	may	be	modified	by	 including	a	constant	term	and	introducing	some	limited	dynamics	to	
obtain	
	
          ∆"#,% = + + ,∆"#,%-. + '∆(#,% + /#,% 	 	              	        (2)	
	
The	 addition	 of	 lagged	 change	 in	 unemployment	 is	 required	 to	 remove	 serial	 correlation	 which	 often	
arises	if	the	static	equation	(3)	is	used.2	This	model	is	estimated	using	a	rolling	OLS	with	a	window	of	10	
years.	 A	 rolling	 regression	 estimates	 a	 specific	 relationship	 over	 many	 different	 sample	 periods.	 Each	
regression	 produces	 a	 set	 of	 estimated	 coefficients.	 If	 the	 relationship	 is	 stable	 over	 time,	 then	 the	
estimated	 coefficients	 should	 be	 relatively	 similar	 from	 one	 regression	 to	 the	 next.	 Variations	 in	 the	
relationship	will	appear	as	sizable	movements	in	the	estimated	coefficients.	
	
Each	 rolling	 regression	 is	 estimated	 based	 on	 10	 year	 of	 data	 points.	 Thus,	 the	 first	 rolling	 regression	
would	estimate	the	values	of	+ 	and	' from	equation	(2),	using	the	sample	period	for	the	first	10	years	of	
available	data	for	country	 i.	for	example	from	1991	to	2000.	The	sample	period	is	then	moved	forward	
one	year,	and	the	regression	is	re-estimated	to	produce	a	second	set	of	estimates	of	+ 	and	' ,	using	data	
																																																													
2	
  It	must	be	emphasized,	however,	that	following	Hendry	and	Mizon	(1978)	and,	more	recently,	Mizon	(1995)	serial	correlation	
is	viewed	as	indicating	misspecification,	and	so	the	model	is	respecified	instead	of	adopting	the	faulty	alternative	of	correcting	
for	 serial	 correlation.	 In	 a	 paper	 with	 the	 provocative	 title	 ‘‘A	 simple	 message	 for	 autocorrelation	 correctors:	 Don’t,’’	 Mizon	
(1995)	asserts	that	correction	for	autocorrelation	may	yield	inconsistent	estimates,	that	it	is	generally	invalid,	and	that	it	cannot	
be	justified	on	the	grounds	of	‘‘robustifying’’	estimation	against	the	presence	of	residual	serial	correlation.	In	a	study	of	Okun’s	
law,	 Weber	 (1995,	 p.	 440)	 also	 found	 the	 static	 regression	 to	 exhibit	 first-order	 serial	 correlation	 which	 he	 considered	 to	 be	
‘‘evidence	for	misspecified	dynamics,’’	and	so	he	introduced	dynamic	equations.	In	our	case,	the	limited	dynamics	turns	out	to	
be	adequate	because	of	the	use	of	annual	data.	




	                                                                                                                                            12	
from	1992	to	2001.	This	process	is	repeated	until	the	final	estimates	are	made	using	the	entire	sample	
period	available	for	country	i.	
	
As	a	robustness	check	on	our	results	we	also	estimate	the	original	version	of	Okun’s	law	using	different	
methods	to	estimate	the	natural	rate	of	unemployment	and	output.	More	details	on	these	estimations	
can	be	found	in	the	Annex.	
	
Applying	Okun’s	Law	to	The	Rest	of	The	World	
The	idea	is	to	explore	how	Okun’s	law	behaves	in	different	countries	and	to	learn	how	this	relationship	
can	 help	 us	 understand	 private	 sector	 job	 creation	 around	 the	 world.	 Countries	 with	 higher	 absolute	
Okun	 coefficients	 will	 be	 able	 to	 absorb	 more	 workers	 when	 the	 economy	 is	 expanding,	 whereas	 in	
economic	downturns,	firms	in	countries	with	high	absolute	Okun	coefficient	are	able	to	lay	off	workers	
to	adjust	to	the	new	macroeconomic	conditions	in	the	market.	On	the	other	hand,	an	Okun	coefficient	
closer	 to	 zero	 would	 imply	 that	 the	 labor	 market	 is	 unresponsive	 to	 economic	 expansions	 or	
contractions.		

We	estimate	the	Okun	coefficient	using	unemployment	rate	and	GDP	data	from	the	World	Bank’s	World	
Development	Indicators.	The	sample	consists	of	176	countries	from	different	income	groups	and	regions	
for	the	period	1993	until	2015.	To	motivate	this	research,	Figure	2	shows,	the	relation	between	changes	
in	 the	 unemployment	 rate	 and	 real	 output	 growth	 for	 several	 countries,	 which	 belong	 to	 different	
income	 groups,	 regions,	 and	 economic	 structure.	 It	 is	 evident	 that	 Okun’s	 law	 is	 not	 stable	 across	
countries.	Even	though	Okun’s	law	holds—for	the	most	part—in	the	United	States	across	time,	Okun’s	
coefficient	is	not	constant	across	countries.		

Figure	 2	 shows	 that	 the	 Sweden’s	 and	 United	 States’	 (two	 high	 income	 countries)	 labor	 markets	 are	
more	responsive	to	changes	in	real	GDP	than	Ecuador’s	and	Thailand’s	labor	markets	(two	upper	middle	
income	countries).	Honduras	(lower	middle-income	country)	and	Haiti	(low-income	country)	have	labor	
markets	 that	 are	 barely	 responsive	 to	 GDP	 growth	 nevertheless,	 the	 slopes	 of	 the	 regression	 lines	 are	
negative.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 labor	 markets	 in	 Cameroon	 (lower	 middle-income	 country)	 and	 Rwanda	
(low-income	country)	are	non-responsive	to	GDP	growth,	the	regression	line	even	has	a	slightly	positive	
slope.	Furthermore,	in	the	US	and	Thailand	for	example,	the	observations	are	well	represented	by	the	
fitted	line	whereas	for	the	other	countries	the	observations	are	more	distant	to	the	fitted	line.	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	



	                                                                                                                13	
                              Figure	2	
                              Okun’s	law:	examples	of	country	variation	

                                              Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment                                                Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment
                                                              Sweeden                                                                                United States
                                  4                                                                                         4
Change in Unemployment Rate




                                                                                          Change in Unemployment Rate
                                  2                                                                                         2




                                  0                                                                                         0




                                  -2                                                                                        -2
                                       -5                 0                5              10                                     -5              0                   5           10
                                                              GDP Growth                                                                             GDP Growth
                                                                                                                        	                                                             	

                                              Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment                                                Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment
                                                               Thailand                                                                                Ecuador
                                  4                                                                                         4
Change in Unemployment Rate




                                                                                          Change in Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                                            2
                                  2




                                                                                                                            0
                                  0



                                                                                                                            -2
                                  -2
                                        -10          -5          0             5     10                                          -5              0                   5           10
                                                              GDP Growth                                                                             GDP Growth
                                                                                                                        	                                                             	

                                              Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment                                                Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment
                                                              Honduras                                                                                Cameroon
                                  4
                                                                                                                            4
Change in Unemployment Rate




                                                                                          Change in Unemployment Rate




                                  2
                                                                                                                            2




                                  0                                                                                         0




                                  -2                                                                                        -2

                                       -5                 0                5              10                                             -5           0                  5       10
                                                              GDP Growth                                                                             GDP Growth
                                                                                                                        	                                                             	




                              	                                                                                                                                                           14	
                                               Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment                                                   Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment
                                                                           Rwanda                                                                            Haiti
                                     4
Change in Unemployment Rate




                                                                                              Change in Unemployment Rate
                                                                                                                                4
                                     2

                                                                                                                                2



                                     0                                                                                          0


                                                                                                                                -2


                                    -2
                                                    -5       0       5     10                                                        -5               0                5             10
                                                                         GDP Growth                                                                       GDP Growth
                                                                                                                            	                                                             	
                              In	these	examples,	a	pattern	develops	where	countries	with	higher	levels	of	development	tend	to	have	
                              more	 responsive	 labor	 markets	 to	 changes	 in	 GDP	 growth	 compared	 to	 those	 in	 less	 developed	
                              countries.	In	the	following	section,	we	explore	the	relation	between	changes	in	the	unemployment	rate	
                              and	 GDP	 growth	 by	 country	 groups	 including	 income	 and	 economic	 structure.	 Figure	 3	 shows	 how	
                              Okun’s	law	performs	in	countries	with	different	income	levels.	We	can	clearly	see	from	the	graphs	that	
                              the	Okun	coefficient	decreases	(absolute	terms)	with	the	level	of	income.	Unemployment	rates	in	high-
                              income	 countries	 improve	 on	 average	 by	 0.21	 for	 every	 percentage	 point	 increase	 in	 GDP.3	 The	
                              responsiveness	of	the	unemployment	rates	to	changes	in	GDP	decreases	by	income	groups.	The	average	
                              Okun	 coefficient	 for	 upper-middle	 income	 countries	 is	 -0.08,	 -0.03	 for	 lower	 middle-income	 countries,	
                              and	-0.005	for	lower	income	countries.	The	statistical	significance	of	the	coefficients	and	the	R2	for	the	
                              regressions	also	decreases	as	the	level	of	income	decrease.4		

                              As	 suggested	 previously,	 these	 findings	 on	 income	 groupings	 are	 not	 at	 all	 unexpected.	 In	 most	 low-
                              income	countries,	very	few	are	unemployed	–	lack	of	sufficient	safety	nets	means	they	cannot	afford	to	
                              be.	But	rather	a	large	share	of	workers	are	self-employed,	either	in	subsistence	or	basic	agriculture,	or	in	
                              non-farm	 self-employment.	 In	 these	 environments,	 adjustment	 to	 upturns	 and	 downturns	 in	 the	
                              economy	are	likely	to	take	place	through	earnings	rather	than	employment	per	se.		

                              On	 the	 other	 hand,	 Figure	 3	 highlights	 significant	 dispersion	 around	 the	 fitted	 lines.	 This	 means	 that	
                              even	 among	 countries	 within	 similar	 income	 groupings,	 there	 exist	 large	 differences	 in	 the	
                              responsiveness	of	job	creation	to	growth.	For	example,	the	Okun	coefficient	is	0.85	in	Poland,	but	just	
                              0.03	 in	 Hungary;	 it	 is	 0.43	 in	 Bolivia	 and	 0.38	 in	 Chile	 but	 just	 0.03	 in	 Peru;	 similarly,	 while	 the	 Okun	
                              coefficient	is	nearly	zero	in	Vietnam	it	is	0.32	in	Indonesia.	

                              	

                              	

                              	

                              	

                              																																																													
                              3
                                	The	Okun’s	coefficient	for	the	United	States	is	0.44	but	with	a	constant	term	equal	to	1.2.	This	is	higher	than	the	one	reported	
                              by	Knoteck	(2007);	however,	the	sample	period	is	different.		
                              4
                                	Annex	Figure	1	shows	the	distribution	of	Okun’s	coefficients	by	income	groups.	



                              	                                                                                                                                                               15	
                              Figure	3			
                              Okun’s	law	by	Income	Group	

                                               Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment                                                               Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment
                                                                   High Income Countries                                                                       Upper-Middle Income Countries
                                     4                                                                                                     4
Change in Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                             Change in Unemployment Rate
                                     2                                                                                                     2



                                     0                                                                                                     0



                                    -2                                                                                                     -2



                                    -4                                                                                                     -4
                                         -10                      0                           10        20                                      -20          -10            0              10    20
                                                                         GDP Growth                                                                                     GDP Growth
                                                                                                                                 	                                                                    	

                                               Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment                                                               Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment
                                                              Lower-Middle Income Countries                                                                        Low Income Countries
                                     4                                                                                                     4
Change in Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                             Change in Unemployment Rate




                                     2
                                                                                                                                           2


                                     0

                                                                                                                                           0

                                    -2


                                                                                                                                           -2
                                    -4
                                         -20               -10               0                     10   20                                      -20          -10            0              10    20
                                                                         GDP Growth                                                                                     GDP Growth
                                                                                                                                 	                                                                    	
                              Okun’s	 law	 also	 varies	 greatly	 by	 the	 economic	 structure	 of	 each	 country	 (Figure	 4).	 The	 less	
                              sophisticated	 an	 economy	 is	 the	 less	 responsive	 is	 the	 labor	 force	 to	 changes	 in	 GDP.	 The	 negative	
                              relationship	 between	 unemployment	 rates	 and	 GDP	 growth	 is	 stronger	 in	 industrial,	 service	 intensive,	
                              tourism	intensive,	and	high	tech	product	intensive	economies.	In	contrast,	economies,	which	depend	on	
                              natural	resources	and	agriculture,	have	a	regression	line	with	a	slope	that	is	nearly	zero.5		Again,	some	of	
                              this	is	likely	related	to	the	structure	of	employment	(reliance	on	self-employment),	at	least	in	the	case	of	
                              agriculturally-dominated	 economies,	 or	 more	 broadly	 in	 limited	 share	 of	 formal	 employment	 in	 these	
                              countries.	

                              	

                              	

                              	


                              																																																													
                              5
                               	To	define	the	economic	structure	of	a	country	we	use	the	percentage	of	natural	resources,	agriculture,	industry,	services	as	a	
                              percentage	of	GDP	and	tourism	and	high-tech	exports	as	percentage	of	total	exports.	For	each	of	these	measures	we	compute	
                              the	80th	percentile	per	year	and	estimate	the	difference	between	each	country’s	measure	and	the	80th	percentile.	We	then	
                              rank	these	differences;	the	largest	value	determines	the	group	to	which	the	country	belongs	in.	




                              	                                                                                                                                                                       16	
                              	
                              Figure	4		
                              Okun’s	law	by	Economic	Structure	

                                             Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment                                                           Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment
                                                    Natural Resource Intensive Countries                                                                           Agricultural Countries
                                  4                                                                                                 4
Change in Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                      Change in Unemployment Rate
                                  2                                                                                                 2



                                  0                                                                                                 0



                                  -2                                                                                                -2



                                  -4                                                                                                -4
                                       -20          -10                 0                   10   20                                      -20               -10              0                  10         20
                                                                    GDP Growth                                                                                          GDP Growth
                                                                                                                              	                                                                                	

                                             Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment                                                           Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment
                                                                Industrial Countries                                                                             Service Intensive Countries
                                  4                                                                                                 4
Change in Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                      Change in Unemployment Rate




                                  2                                                                                                 2



                                  0                                                                                                 0



                                  -2                                                                                                -2



                                  -4                                                                                                -4
                                       -20          -10                 0                   10   20                                             -10         -5           0         5                10   15
                                                                    GDP Growth                                                                                          GDP Growth
                                                                                                                              	                                                                                	

                                             Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment                                                           Okun's Law - GDP Growth and Unemployment
                                                          Tourism Intensive Countries                                                                               High Tech Countries
                                  4                                                                                                 4
Change in Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                      Change in Unemployment Rate




                                  2                                                                                                 2



                                  0                                                                                                 0



                                  -2                                                                                                -2



                                  -4                                                                                                -4
                                       -10                  0                          10        20                                       -10         -5               0           5                10   15
                                                                    GDP Growth                                                                                          GDP Growth
                                                                                                                              	                                                                                	
                              Relationship	Between	Okun’s	Coefficient	and	Aggregate	Job	Creation	
                              That	there	are	differences	in	the	responsiveness	of	private	sector	job	creation	to	economic	growth	only	
                              matters	if	this	relationship	is	associated	with	greater	overall	job	creation.	In	this	section,	we	explore	the	
                              correlation	 between	 employment	 growth	 and	 the	 Okun	 coefficients	 estimated	 for	 each	 country.	 We	
                              expect	 to	 find	 that	 a	 larger	 negative	 Okun’s	 coefficient	 is	 associated	 with	 higher	 employment	 growth	


                              	                                                                                                                                                                                17	
since	the	labor	force	moves	more	freely	with	GDP	movements.	We	confirm	our	hypothesis	with	a	set	of	
regressions	where	the	dependent	variables	are	employment	growth	rate	in	the	 formal	sector	as	well	as	
the	 number	 of	 formal	 jobs	 added	 from	 year	 to	 year.	 We	 control	 for	 country	 and	 time	 fixed	 effects.	
Results	 are	 displayed	 in	 Table	 1.	 We	 use	 the	 three	 different	 estimates	 for	 unemployment	 Okun	 as	
described	in	the	previous	section	and	in	the	Annex.	Okun’s	coefficient	does	appear	to	be	associated	with	
higher	 levels	 of	 formal	 employment	 growth.	 The	 results	 highlight	 the	 importance	 of	 this	 relation	 and	
supports	the	idea	that	the	Okun	coefficient	should	be	analyzed	as	a	relevant	employment	outcome.		
Table	1		
Relation	between	Okun’s	Coefficient	and	Employment	

VARIABLES                                             formal employment growth                                                   formal jobs added
Estimation Method                  OLS          GMM        OLS      GMM        OLS             GMM          OLS        GMM        OLS        GMM         OLS       GMM
                                    1            2           3        4         5               6            7          8           9         10          11        12

okun (difference)                  -0.041     -0.093                                                        -0.616    -0.950
                                 [0.012]*** [0.029]***                                                    [0.192]*** [0.407]**
okun (gap - detrend)                                        -0.026     -0.057                                                     -0.407    -0.858
                                                           [0.015]*   [0.027]**                                                  [0.210]* [0.305]***
okun (gap - moving average)                                                        -0.020      -0.033                                                   -0.421     -0.687
                                                                                   [0.017]     [0.029]                                                 [0.178]** [0.246]***
formal employment growth (t-1)                  -0.385                  -0.397                 -0.397
                                              [0.038]***              [0.037]***             [0.040]***
formal jobs added (t-1)                                                                                                -0.269                -0.268                -0.247
                                                                                                                     [0.044]***            [0.046]***            [0.043]***
Constant                           0.020        0.046        0.023      0.037       0.042      0.058        10.844     13.850     10.899     13.422     11.027     13.611
                                 [0.006]***    [0.043]     [0.007]*** [0.016]**    [0.039]    [0.045]     [0.122]*** [0.577]*** [0.123]*** [0.587]*** [0.136]*** [0.506]***

Observations                      1,711      1,549      1,555     1,400            1,593       1,433        1,272       814       1,154       729       1,182       750
R-squared                         0.148                 0.144                      0.143                    0.820                 0.822                 0.824
Number of id                                  136                  136                          136                     127                   125                   126
Robust standard errors in brackets *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                                                                                             	

DETERMINANTS	OF	EMPLOYMENT	OUTCOMES	
Thus	 far	 we	 have	 documented	 important	 differences	 in	 Okun’s	 coefficients	 across	 income	 groups	 and	
across	 different	 economic	 structures,	 and	 have	 shown	 that	 these	 differences	 matter	 from	 the	
perspective	of	overall	job	creation.	What	determines	the	responsiveness	of	employment	to	changes	in	
GDP?	Is	there	a	common	pattern	across	countries	that	can	help	us	explain	employment	outcomes	across	
countries?	 We	 identify	 possible	 determinants	 of	 employment	 outcomes,	 including	 indicators	 of	 the	
labor	 market	 structure,	 macroeconomic	 indicators	 that	 measure	 economic	 stability	 and	 investment,	
indicators	of	labor	regulation,	indicators	of	quality	of	institutions.	These	indicators	come	from	the	World	
Development	 Indicators	 (WDI)	 database.	 We	 also	 include	 several	 indicators	 that	 measure	 the	 ease	 of	
doing	 business	 in	 the	 country.	 These	 indicators	 are	 based	 on	 the	 World	 Bank	 Group’s	 Doing	 Business	
report.	 For	 these	 measures	 to	 be	 comparable	 across	 countries	 and	 time,	 they	 are	 recomputed	 as	 the	
distance	to	the	frontier.	A	measure	of	100,	is	the	best	or	the	frontier,	and	a	measure	of	0	is	the	furthest	
from	the	frontier.6		

We	 expect	 that	 macroeconomic	 variables	 such	 as	 GDP	 per	 capita,	 GDP	 growth,	 gross	 fixed	 capital	
formation,	 foreign	 direct	 investment,	 openness,	 and	 domestic	 credit	 to	 the	 private	 sector	 should	 all	
have	 a	 positive	 association	 with	 employment	 growth	 (negative	 relation	 with	 the	 Okun	 coefficient).	 A	
better	 business	 environment	 (i.e.,	 time	 to	 start	 a	 business	 and	 the	 global	 measure	 of	 doing	 business)	
																																																													
6
  	For	this	section	on	the	determinants	of	employment	outcomes,	we	omit	from	the	sample	low	income	countries	because	from	
the	previous	section	we	learned	there	is	no	statistical	relation	between	changes	in	unemployment	rates	and	the	rates	of	growth	
of	GDP.	Including	these	countries	in	the	sample	only	adds	noise	to	our	regressions	without	providing	any	additional	benefit.		




	                                                                                                                                                                      18	
and	 institutions	 (i.e.,	 rule	 of	 law)	 should	 have	 a	 positive	 effect	 on	 employment	 growth	 and	 a	 negative	
effect	on	the	Okun	coefficient.	Among	the	measures	of	labor	market	rigidity,	we	expect	a	more	flexible	
probation	time	for	new	hires	will	have	a	positive	effect	of	employment	growth	(negative	on	the	Okun	
coefficient)	whereas	a	higher	severance	pay	for	redundancy	dismissal	will	negatively	affect	employment	
growth	and	positively	affect	the	Okun	coefficient.	Finally,	as	mentioned	earlier,	the	bigger	the	informal	
sector	of	a	country,	measured	by	the	percentage	of	the	labor	force	that	is	self-employed,	the	slower	we	
expect	employment	to	grow	(negative	coefficient	on	employment	growth)	as	well	as	a	slower	reaction	
of	the	labor	force	to	react	to	changes	in	business	cycles	(positive	coefficient	on	the	Okun	regression).					

Table	2	shows	the	results	of	regressions	where	the	dependent	variables	are	the	employment	outcomes	
of	interest,	including	employment	growth	rate,	the	change	in	the	number	of	jobs	in	the	formal	sector,	
and	the	Okun	coefficients	found	for	each	country.	The	independent	variables	are	described	above.	We	
make	 use	 of	 two	 specifications.	 The	 first	 includes	 country	 and	 year	 fixed	 effects,	 whereas	 the	 second	
specification	only	includes	year	effects.	Instead	of	country	fixed	effects,	we	use	additional	controls	that	
only	vary	across	countries	but	do	no	change	over	time,	such	as	the	initial	labor	force	and	the	initial	level	
of	development	measured	by	a	country’s	GDP	per	capita.	We	include	this	second	specification	because	
we	 want	 to	 exploit	 the	 variation	 across	 countries	 and	 much	 of	 this	 variation	 is	 absorbed	 by	 the	 fixed	
effects	used	in	the	first	specification.		

The	most	robust	results	suggest	that	better	employment	outcomes	are	associated	with	higher	rates	of	
GDP	 growth,	 higher	 levels	 of	 economic	 development,	 and	 lower	 levels	 of	 labor	 informality.	 The	 Okun	
coefficient	 is	 negative	 and	 statistically	 significant	 in	 the	 first	 set	 of	 regressions,	 indicating	 that	 a	 more	
responsive	 labor	 force	 results	 in	 higher	 employment	 growth,	 and	 a	 higher	 number	 of	 created	 jobs.	
Among	other	country	characteristics	that	are	significantly	associated	with	higher	job	creation	are	higher	
FDI	inflows	and,	counterintuitively,	a	more	closed	economy	as	measured	by	its	openness	(the	sum	of	a	
country’s	 exports	 and	 imports	 as	 percentage	 of	 GDP)	 (see	 columns	 2	 and	 5).	 Better	 institutions,	
measured	by	the	rule	of	law	of	a	country,	is	associated	with	a	more	responsive	labor	force	to	changes	in	
business	cycles	(columns	3	and	6).		

Surprisingly	 our	 results	 show	 that	 the	 ease	 to	 hire	 and	 fire	 workers	 does	 not	 appear	 to	 influence	 the	
employment	 outcomes.	 Our	 proxies	 for	 the	 rigidity	 of	 the	 labor	 market,	 the	 maximum	 time	 for	 a	
probation	period	during	the	hiring	process	and	the	severance	pay	for	redundancy	dismissal	for	1	year	of	
service,	 are	 not	 statistically	 significant	 except	 for	 severance	 pay	 variable	 in	 column	 6,	 which	 has	 the	
opposite	 sign	 than	 expected.	 The	 results	 suggest	 that	 higher	 severance	 pay	 is	 associated	 with	 a	 more	
responsive	 labor	 force,	 even	 though	 a	 higher	 severance	 pay	 means	 that	 it	 is	 more	 burdensome	 and	
expensive	for	firms	to	fire	workers.	Previous	literature	suggest	that	the	responsiveness	of	labor	markets	
could	depend	on	regulations	governing	labor	and	product	markets.	For	instance,	in	discussing	hiring	and	
firing	regulations	in	Middle	Eastern	and	North	African	countries,	Ahmed,	Guillaume,	and	Furceri	(2012)	
argue	that	such	regulations	can	discourage	“firms	from	expanding	employment	in	response	to	favorable	
changes	in	the	economic	climate.”	That	is,	greater	employment	protection	can	dampen	hiring	and	firing	
as	output	fluctuates,	reducing	the	employment	responsiveness.	We	find	little	association	between	the	
Okun	coefficient	and	aggregate	measures	of	labor	market	flexibility.	Our	results	also	suggest	that	private	
sector	investment	and	private	sector	access	to	credit	do	not	influence	employment	outcomes.		

In	 this	 section,	 we	 learned	 that	 Okun’s	 law	 is	 applicable	 to	 other	 countries;	 however,	 the	 Okun	
coefficient	varies	greatly	across	countries.	The	level	of	income	and	the	economic	structure	of	a	country	



	                                                                                                                        19	
determine	 how	 responsive	 the	 labor	 force	 is	 to	 changes	 along	 the	 business	 cycles.	 Because	 the	 Okun	
coefficient	is	correlated	to	higher	employment	growth,	it	is	important	to	analyze	it	as	an	employment	
outcome	 as	 well	 as	 a	 determinant	 of	 employment	 growth.	 Unfortunately,	 we	 find	 that	 neither	 job	
creation	nor	the	elasticity	of	unemployment	to	GDP	is	determined	by	private	sector	characteristics	such	
as	 private	 sector	 investment	 and	 private	 sector	 access	 to	 credit	 but,	 mainly	 by	 macroeconomic	 and	
structural	determinants	such	as	GDP	growth	and	the	level	of	labor	informality	in	a	country.	
Table	2		
Determinants	of	Employment	Outcomes	

                                                                         1              2             3              4              5             6
                                                                    employment      change in        okun       employment      change in        okun
         VARIABLES                                                   growth rate   formal jobs   (difference)    growth rate   formal jobs   (difference)

         okun (difference)                                              -0.063         -0.915                       -0.025         0.050
                                                                      [0.038]*      [0.403]**                      [0.022]        [0.298]
         polulation growth rate                                         -0.040         0.355        -0.016          0.008          0.368         0.017
                                                                      [0.020]*        [0.336]      [0.033]         [0.006]     [0.072]***       [0.023]
         GDP growt rate                                                 0.005          0.069        0.001           0.005          0.055         0.000
                                                                     [0.001]***    [0.016]***      [0.002]       [0.001]***    [0.014]***       [0.004]
         log GDPpc                                                      -0.119         -2.014       -0.203          -0.022         0.308         0.039
                                                                      [0.052]**     [0.799]**     [0.092]**        [0.020]        [0.204]       [0.049]
         informality rate                                               -0.011         -0.090       -0.003          -0.018         -0.032        0.003
                                                                     [0.003]***    [0.034]***      [0.003]       [0.005]***    [0.006]***      [0.002]*
         domestic credit to private sector (% of GDP)                   0.000          0.008        0.001           0.000          -0.011        -0.000
                                                                       [0.000]        [0.008]      [0.001]         [0.000]        [0.005]       [0.001]
         gross fixed capital formation, private sector (% of GDP)       0.002          -0.010       0.001           0.000          -0.010        0.002
                                                                       [0.001]        [0.016]      [0.002]         [0.001]        [0.014]       [0.002]
         foreign direct investment, net inflows (% of GDP)              0.000          0.027        0.001           0.001          0.019         -0.001
                                                                       [0.001]       [0.016]*      [0.002]         [0.001]        [0.015]       [0.002]
         openess                                                        -0.001         -0.019       -0.001          -0.000         -0.002        0.000
                                                                       [0.000]     [0.006]***      [0.001]         [0.000]        [0.002]       [0.000]
         time to start a business (distance to frontier)                0.000          0.006        0.000           0.000          0.000         0.000
                                                                       [0.000]        [0.004]      [0.001]         [0.000]        [0.003]       [0.001]
         rule of law                                                    0.021          -0.035       -0.102          -0.004         -0.306        -0.162
                                                                       [0.031]        [0.538]     [0.049]**        [0.023]        [0.235]    [0.062]***
         average Doing Buiness global (distance to frontier)                                                        0.001          0.010         0.004
                                                                                                                   [0.002]        [0.016]       [0.003]
         log max length of probation period (months)                                                                -0.009         -0.257        0.035
                                                                                                                   [0.010]      [0.123]**       [0.024]
         Severance pay for redundancy dismissal (for a worker                                                       -0.002         -0.034        -0.010
         with 1 year of tenure, in salary weeks)                                                                   [0.002]       [0.019]*     [0.004]**
         log (employment at t0)                                                                                    0.141          1.997         0.139
                                                                                                                  [0.138]        [1.513]       [0.307]
         log (GDP at t0)                                                                                           0.002          -0.291        0.105
                                                                                                                  [0.025]        [0.178]       [0.085]
         log (GDPpc at t0)                                                                                         -0.020         -0.289        -0.131
                                                                                                                  [0.033]        [0.274]       [0.114]
         log (labor force at t0)                                                                                   -0.135         -0.805        -0.236
                                                                                                                  [0.137]        [1.541]       [0.310]

         Constant                                                      1.464         32.210         1.672          0.193          0.902        -0.962
                                                                     [0.460]***    [7.368]***     [0.843]**       [0.143]        [1.614]      [0.409]**

         Fixed effects                                                  c, y          c, y           c, y          year          year           year
         Observations                                                   405           308            413            309           231            317
         R-squared                                                     0.417         0.822          0.660          0.145         0.779          0.163
         Robust standard errors in brackets *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                                                                  	
	

	

	




	                                                                                                                                                               20	
3. INDUSTRY-LEVEL VIEW: ANALYSIS OF
GROWTH AND EMPLOYMENT
RELATIONSHIPS IN MANUFACTURING
	

Given	the	significant	differences	in	economic	structures	across	countries,	some	of	the	key	findings	from	
the	 previous	 section	 may	 be	 explained	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 employment	 responses	 to	 growth	 in	
economies	 dominated	 by	 agriculture	 and	 informality	 cannot	 be	 compared	 with	 those	 where	 most	
workers	 are	 wage	 employed.	 Therefore,	 in	 this	 section	 we	 provide	 some	 initial	 descriptive	 analysis	
carried	out	at	the	sectoral	level,	within	manufacturing.	This	helps	to	control	both	for	sectoral	variation	
and	mitigates	issues	related	to	informality.	On	the	other	hand,	by	restricting	the	analysis	to	within	the	
sector,	we	are	unable	to	capture	spillover	effects	(e.g.	multipliers	arising	from	supply	chain	linkages	and	
other	indirect	effects).	

The	dataset	used	for	the	analysis	is	drawn	from	the	Industrial	Statistics	Database	of	the	United	Nations	
Industrial	Development	Organization	(UNIDO).	It	provides	industrial	statistics	reﬂecting	characteristics	of	
the	 units	 engaged	 in	 a	 class	 of	 industrial	 activities,	 which	 are	 arranged	 according	 to	 the	 International	
Standard	Industrial	Classification	of	All	Economic	Activities	(ISIC)	summarized	to	2	digits.	Data	is	reported	
by	country,	year	and	ISIC	code.	It	includes	170	countries	and	52	years	(1963-2014),	although	coverage	
varies	 by	 country.	 Specifically,	 this	 analysis	 comprises	 an	 unbalanced	 panel	 that	 uses	 23	 classes	 of	
industrial	activity	within	the	manufacturing	sector,	deﬁned	in	terms	of	the	ISIC	Revision	3.	It	makes	use	
of	three	statistics:	number	of	employees,	value	added,	and	gross	fixed	capital	formation,	and	draws	on	
previous	analysis	from	Gonzalez,	Iacovone,	and	Subhash	(2013).	

RELATIONSHIP	BETWEEN	GROWTH	AND	EMPLOYMENT		
As	 a	 first	 step,	 we	 assess	 correlations	 between	 employment	 growth	 and	 growth	 in	 output	 and	 value	
added.	As	shown	in	Table	3,	moderate	correlation	is	evident	between	employment	growth	and	output	
growth	in	the	manufacturing	sector.	Not	surprisingly,	this	correlation	increases	when	using	value	added	
rather	than	simple	output	as	the	measure	for	sectoral	growth.	We	also	assess	whether	the	employment	
relationship	with	output	and	value	added	is	stronger	in	a	contemporaneous	measure	(same	year)	or	if	
employment	outcomes	are	lagged	by	one	or	two	years.	As	Table	2	shows,	the	relationship	diminishes	to	
insignificance	 as	 soon	 as	 we	 start	 to	 lag	 the	 impact,	 suggesting	 the	 contemporaneous	 effect	 is	 more	
appropriate	 for	 considering	 sectoral	 responses	 to	 output	 and	 value	 added	 growth.	 For	 the	 remaining	
analysis	in	this	section	we,	therefore,	focus	only	on	the	contemporaneous	relationship	of	employment	
growth	to	value	added	growth.	
Table	3	
Correlation	coefficient	of	manufacturing	sector	employment	with	output	and	value	added	

          	                      Contemporaneous	                  One-year	lag	               Two-year	lag	
Output	                               0.230	                         0.0034	                     0.0035	
Value	Added	                          0.357	                         -0.0037	                    0.0051	
	


	                                                                                                                   21	
How	 do	 these	 relationships	 vary	 by	 income	 groups?	 Table	 4	 shows	 interesting	 results.	 Most	 striking	 is	
the	 extremely	 high	 correlation	 between	 job	 growth	 and	 value	 added	 growth	 in	 low	 income	 countries.	
This	 result	 is	 striking	 not	 only	 because	 the	 correlation	 is	 so	 high	 (this	 might,	 in	 fact,	 be	 expected	 in	
economies	which	are	likely	to	be	relatively	low	wage	and	labor	intensive)	but	because	the	relationship	is	
so	 dramatically	 different	 from	 what	 we	 saw	 with	 the	 macro	 look	 in	 Section	 2,	 where	 low-income	
countries	exhibited	virtually	no	correlation	between	GDP	growth	and	employment	growth.	The	finding	
here	 suggests	 that	 the	 macro	 result	 is	 indeed	 shaped	 largely	 by	 the	 dominance	 of	 self-employment,	
particularly	in	agriculture,	in	these	economies.	Whereas	once	we	focus	on	a	sector	that	is	largely	formal,	
the	tight	relationship	between	growth	and	job	creation	becomes	clear.	The	other	interesting	finding	in	
Table	 4	 is	 the	 fact	 that	 high	 income	 countries	 also	 show	 a	 relatively	 strong	 correlation	 between	 value	
added	growth	and	job	creation.	One	reason	for	this	may	be	that	although	high	income	countries	have	
relatively	 limited	 direct	 employment	 creation	 through	 value	 added	 growth,	 they	 have	 much	 higher	
indirect	job	creation	through	supply	chain	spillovers,	while	low	and	middle	income	countries	may	have	
less	integrated	domestic	supply	chains,	limiting	potential	employment	multipliers	through	growth.	

While	 employment-output	 relationships	 are	 relatively	 strong	 in	 high	 income	 countries,	 they	 are,	 by	
contrast,	much	weaker	in	lower	middle	income	and	(especially)	upper	middle	income	countries.	While	
we	 have	 no	 data	 to	 indicate	 why	 this	 may	 be	 the	 case,	 it	 may	 be	 that	 the	 middle-income	 category	
contains	a	diverse	set	of	economic	structures	and	contexts.	It	may	also	have	something	to	do	with	the	
nature	of	the	industrial	transformation	(see	results	below	on	how	similar	patterns	emerge	when	we	go	
from	low	to	mid-level	to	high	levels	of	capital	intensity).	
Table	4		
Correlation	coefficient	of	manufacturing	sector	employment	and	value	added	by	income	level	

    Income	level	                                           Value	added	(contemporaneous)	
    	                                           Correlation	coefficient	                 N	
    Low	                                               0.86685	                        4238	
    Lower	middle	                                      0.23576	                       12,833	
    Upper-middle	                                      0.17430	                       16,214	
    High	                                              0.46981	                       36,020	
	

Figure	 5	 mirrors	 the	 descriptive	 analysis	 from	 Figure	 1,	 illustrating	 annual	 trends	 in	 value	 added	 and	
employment	 growth	 (detrended)	 –	 in	 this	 case	 with	 data	 from	 the	 manufacturing	 sector.	 The	 analysis	
compares	many	of	the	same	countries	as	in	Figure	1,	although	manufacturing	sector	data	is	not	available	
for	 all	 countries	 presented	 previously.	 While	 the	 relationship	 between	 value	 added	 and	 employment	
growth	 in	 Sweden’s	 manufacturing	 sector	 matches	 almost	 exactly	 with	 the	 overall	 economy	 picture	
shown	in	Figure	1,	the	patterns	in	the	US	are	remarkably	different	(both	from	Sweden	and	from	the	US	
overall	 economy).	 Here	 we	 see	 job	 creation	 trending	 with	 value	 added	 growth	 in	 the	 two	 tails	 of	 the	
period,	but	diverging	sharply	(and	inexplicably)	from	the	mid-1990s	through	the	mid-2000s.	As	might	be	
expected	from	natural	resources-based	economies,	both	Ecuador	and	Cameroon	show,	for	most	of	the	
period,	 relatively	 modest	 shifts	 in	 employment	 growth	 despite	 much	 sharper	 swings	 in	 value	 added	
growth.	 Finally,	 we	 look	 at	 manufacturing-oriented	 economies	 in	 latter	 stages	 of	 structural	
transformation.	In	the	case	of	Turkey,	job	creation	appears	to	respond	fluidly	to	changes	in	value	added,	
with	greater	responsiveness	on	the	upside	than	on	the	downside	since	2000.	For	most	of	the	period	(at	
least	since	1995),	China	similarly	shows	strong	elasticity	of	employment	to	manufacturing	value	added,	


	                                                                                                                      22	
                  which	stands	in	contrast	the	much	weaker	relationship	between	jobs	and	growth	in	the	overall	economy	
                  (Figure	1).	
                  		
                  Figure	5				
                  Manufacturing	value	added	and	employment	growth	–	country	examples	

                            Value Added and Employment Growth (detrended MVA)                                            Value Added and Employment Growth (detrended MVA)
                                                     Sweden                                                                                               USA
                                                                                                                    5
                      20
Growth Rate (%)




                                                                                                Growth Rate (%)
                       0

                                                                                                                    0


                      -20




                      -40                                                                                          -5
                            1995       2000            2005       2010             2015                                 1990            1995              2000            2005          2010
                                                       Year                                                                                               Year
                                      Value Added Growth       Employment Growth                                                       Value Added Growth           Employment Growth

                                                                                          	                                                                                                        	

                             Value Added and Employment Growth (detrended MVA)                                           Value Added and Employment Growth (detrended MVA)
                                                     Ecuador                                                                                         Cameroon
                      100                                                                                          40



                       50                                                                                          20
Growth Rate (%)




                                                                                              Growth Rate (%)




                        0                                                                                           0



                       -50                                                                                         -20



                                                                                                                   -40
                      -100
                               1990       1995          2000       2005            2010                                  1980          1985              1990        1995          2000
                                                       Year                                                                                                Year

                                      Value Added Growth       Employment Growth                                                       Value Added Growth          Employment Growth

                                                                                          	                                                                                                    	

                            Value Added and Employment Growth (detrended MVA)                                             Value Added and Employment Growth (detrended MVA)
                                                      Turkey                                                                                              China
                                                                                                                    40
                      40


                                                                                                                    20
                      20
                                                                                                 Growth Rate (%)
Growth Rate (%)




                       0                                                                                             0



                      -20                                                                                          -20



                      -40                                                                                          -40
                            1995       2000            2005       2010             2015                                         1990              1995             2000            2005
                                                       Year                                                                                                 Year

                                      Value Added Growth       Employment Growth                                                       Value Added Growth           Employment Growth

                                                                                          	                                                                                                    	
                  In	 Figure	 6,	 we	 illustrate	 differences	 in	 the	 growth-employment	 relationship	 in	 manufacturing	
                  subsectors;	the	table	is	organized	according	to	the	standard	categorization	of	ISIC	2-digit	sectors.	We	see	



                  	                                                                                                                                                                        23	
very	large	variations	across	sectors,	which	might	be	expected.	Sectors	with	the	highest	correlations	are:	
furniture,	 wood	 products,	 and	 machinery	 and	 equipment,	 which	 tend	 to	 be	 relatively	 labor	 intensive,	
although	also	somewhat	capital	intensive.	By	contrast,	sectors	where	job	creation	is	least	responsive	to	
growth	 patterns	 include	 one	 of	 the	 most	 labor	 intensive	 sectors	 (wearing	 apparel)	 along	 with	 sectors	
that	tend	to	be	capital	intensive,	including:	radio,	television	and	communication	equipment;	petroleum,	
and	chemicals.	
	
Figure	6	
Correlation	coefficient	of	manufacturing	sector	employment	and	value	added	by	income	level	
	


	

	

	
	

	



	

	

	

	

One	factor	that	may	explain	country	differences,	as	well	as	subsectoral	differences	is	the	relative	capital	
intensity	of	manufacturing	activities.	We	would	assume	that	more	capital-intensive	production	would	be	
associated	 with	 a	 lower	 correlation	 between	 value	 added	 growth	 and	 jobs	 growth.	 Table	 5	 shows	 the	
results	of	correlations	using	two	different	measures	of	capital	intensity	(capital	to	labor	ratio	and	capital	
to	value	added	ratio).	The	results	confirm	the	expected	negative	relationship	between	capital	intensity	
and	employment	responsiveness	to	growth,	with	broadly	similar	trends	using	both	measures.	However,	
it	the	decline	in	correlation	between	low	and	high	levels	of	capital	intensity	is	relatively	minimal.	

Table	5		
Correlation	coefficient	of	manufacturing	employment	and	value	added	by	capital	intensity	
                     Capital	to	labor	ratio                                       Capital	to	value	added	ratio

                     corr_coeff          _N                                       corr_coeff       _N
 Low                0.457431            25107                 Low              0.577714             26461
 Middle             0.354886            28447                 Middle           0.466883             25972
 High               0.35204             16585                 High             0.357352             17706             	
We	 also	 check	 again	 whether	 it	 may	 be	 the	 case	 that	 some	 country	 groups	 or	 sector	 types	 (capital	
intensity	 of	 sectors)	 may	 adjust	 differently	 if,	 for	 example,	 structural	 factors	 delay	 but	 do	 not	 prevent	



	                                                                                                                    24	
the	 adjustment	 process.	 Figure	 7	 presents	 the	 correlation	 between	 value	 added	 growth	 in	 time	 t	 and	
employment	growth	in	different	stages:	contemporaneous	(time	t)	as	well	as	lagged	by	1-3	years.	The	
basic	 correlation	 analysis	 does	 not	 give	 any	 hint	 of	 systematic	 adjustment	 delays.	 In	 fact,	 all	 country	
grouping	 and	 capital	 intensity	 grouping	 react	 in	 broadly	 the	 same	 way,	 with	 high	 contemporaneous	
correlation,	rapid	degradation	of	the	correlation	(and	turning	negative)	time	t+1,	low	but	positive	in	time	
t+2,	and	then	further	fading	of	the	relationship.		
Figure	7	
Correlation	coefficient	of	manufacturing	sector	employment	growth	in	time	t,	t+1,	t+2,	and	time	t+3	to	value	added	growth	in	
time	t	




                                                                                                               	
                                                               	
Finally,	we	ask	whether	volatility	in	output	may	affect	adjustment.	To	the	degree	there	are	restrictions	
to	 the	 flexibility	 of	 hiring	 and	 firing	 or	 even	 just	 transaction	 costs	 involved	 in	 the	 process	 (which	 will	
always	be	the	case),	we	can	imagine	firms	will	be	more	hesitant	to	hire	in	situations	where	output	tends	
to	 vary	 significantly	year-on-year.	 By	 contrast,	in	countries	and	sectors	where	demand	and	output	 are	
relatively	stable,	firms	may	be	expected	to	adjust	quickly.	Scatterplots	of	this	relationship	at	the	sector	
and	 country	 level	 are	 shown	 in	 Figures	 8	 and	 9,	 respectively.	 We	 find	 a	 strong	 relationship	 at	 the	
sectoral	 level.	 In	 general,	 manufacturing	 sectors	 that	 have	 greater	 volatility	 in	 output	 have	 weaker	
employment	elasticities	to	growth.	However,	no	clear	pattern	is	evident	at	the	country	level	(Figure	9).	
One	possible	reason	for	this	is	that	countries	end	up	adopting	(maybe	implicitly)	a	portfolio	approach	to	
their	industry	specialization,	that	balances	high	volatility	sectors	with	others	that	are	lower	in	volatility.	
	

	

	

	

	

	


	                                                                                                                          25	
Figure	8	
Relationship	between	sectoral	output	volatility	and	employment	elasticity	(contemporaneous)	




                                                                                                        	
Figure	9	
Relationship	between	national	output	volatility	and	employment	elasticity	(contemporaneous)	




                                                                                                            	

         	

HOW	ARE	EMPLOYMENT	ELASTICITIES	ASSOCIATED	WITH	OVERALL	JOB	CREATION?	
In	 this	 section,	 we	 ask	 if	 the	 employment	 elasticities	 we	 observed	 in	 the	 previous	 subsection	 are	
associated	with	aggregate	job	creation	over	a	period.	The	point	here,	as	was	also	discussed	in	section	2,	
is	 that	 having	 a	 robust	 relationship	 between	 growth	 and	 job	 creation	 is	 only	 useful	 if	 it	 is	 associated	
somehow	 with	 aggregate	 job	 creation.	 As	 a	 first	 step	 to	 exploring	 this	 issue,	 in	 Figure	 10	 we	 map	
countries	 in	 the	 dataset	 based	 on	 their	 average	 annual	 job	 creation	 during	 periods	 of	 growth	 and	
decline.	 We	 see	 significant	 variation	 across	 countries,	 although	 the	 most	 common	 situation	 is	 positive	
job	 creation	 in	 growth	 periods	 and	 job	 shedding	 in	 periods	 of	 decline.	 Here	 we	 have	 countries	 like	 Sri	


	                                                                                                                    26	
Lanka,	 Libya,	 and	 to	 a	 lesser	 degree	 Jordan	 and	 Malaysia	 that	 experienced	 large	 jobs	 growth	 during	
growth	 periods	 but	 also	 relatively	 sharp	 job	 loss	 during	 declines.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 oil	 producing	
countries	 (UAE,	 Qatar)	 along	 with	 countries	 that	 have	 experienced	 strong	 structural	 transformation	
(China,	 Turkey,	 Honduras)	 experienced	 almost	 the	 same	 (large)	 shift	 both	 in	 periods	 of	 output	 growth	
and	 decline.	 Transition	 countries	 like	 Ukraine	 and	 Croatia	 show	 relatively	 strong	 downside	
responsiveness	 during	 decline	 but	 much	 weaker	 upside	 responsiveness	 during	 growth	 (this	 pattern	
holds	for	many	transition	countries).		
Figure	10	
Relationship	between	size	of	employment	movements	during	periods	of	growth	and	decline	




                                                                                                       	
Figure	11	
Relationship	between	elasticity	and	aggregate	job	creation		




                                                                                                   	




	                                                                                                              27	
Figure	11	looks	at	long	term	job	creation	and	its	association	with	jobs	elasticity	of	value	added	growth	in	
the	manufacturing	sector.	Here	we	measure	overall	job	creation	(growth	%)	over	a	period	of	20	years7	
and	the	average	employment	elasticity	to	value	added	growth	over	that	period.	Overall	it	shows	a	strong	
correlation	 between	 employment	 elasticity	 to	 growth	 and	 overall	 job	 creation.	 Again,	 we	 see	 the	 oil	
producers	 (UAE,	 Qatar,	 Kuwait,	 possibly	 Jordan)	 with	 very	 high	 overall	 job	 creation,	 despite	
responsiveness	of	employment	to	growth.	Bangladesh,	where	growth	and	job	creation	has	been	rapid	
but	 where	 informality	 still	 dominates,	 looks	 similar.	 Finally,	 somewhat	 disparate	 set	 of	 countries,	
including	Thailand,	Ethiopia,	Mexico,	and	Bolivia,	show	relatively	strong	responsiveness	to	growth	along	
with	robust	job	creation	in	the	manufacturing	sector	
	
Finally,	 we	 assess	 how	 the	 employment	 elasticity	 to	 growth	 varies	 by	 interacting	 the	 country	 income	
level	 and	 capital	 intensity	 of	 the	 subsector.	 Figure	 12	 shows	 that	 for	 low	 capital	 intensive	 activities,	
elasticity	 of	 jobs	 to	 growth	 is	 highest	 in	 low-income	 countries	 (as	 might	 be	 expected	 given	 their	
comparative	advantage	in	labor	costs.	Similarly,	the	opposite	is	true	for	high	income	countries.	However,	
as	one	moves	to	mid-level	capital	intensity,	the	relationship	changes	quickly	with	low	and	lower-middle	
income	 countries	 facing	 much	 lower	 employment	 elasticity,	 while	 is	 upper	 middle-income	 and	 high	
income	 countries	 experience	 a	 sharp	 jump	 in	 elasticity.	 Moving	 to	 highly	 capital	 intensive	 activities,	
however,	we	see	elasticity	jump	almost	all	income	groups,	including	the	lowest	income	group.	This	dip	in	
mid-tier	 levels	 of	 capital	 intensity	 and	 jump	 again	 at	 higher	 levels	 of	 capital	 intensity	 suggests	 the	 job	
creation	relationship	we	are	seeing	may	be	linked	to	processes	of	structural	transformation	that	emerge	
in	 the	 mid-levels	 of	 capital	 intensity.	 Yet	 at	 upper	 levels	 of	 capital	 intensity,	 activities	 may	 be	 of	
sufficiently	higher	value	added	or	part	of	sufficiently	large	domestic	clusters	to	make	the	employment	
impact	of	growth	much	stronger.	These	findings	are	supported	in	Figure	13,	which	shows	the	long-term	
employment	 impacts	 are	 actually	 highest	 (across	 just	 about	 all	 income	 groups)	 in	 the	 most	 capital	
intensive	activities.	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

																																																													
7
 	We	take	the	latest	20	years	available	from	each	country,	which	results	is	significant	differences	in	the	periods	covered	across	
countries.	




	                                                                                                                               28	
Figure	12	
Elasticity	of	employment	to	growth	by	income	and	capital	intensity	level	




                                                                            	
Figure	13	
Long	term	job	creation	by	income	level	and	capital	intensity	




                                                                            	
                                                                	

                                                                	

                                                                	


	                                                                               29	
4. FIRM-LEVEL VIEW: FIRM TYPES, REGULATION,
AND JOB CREATION
	

In	 section	 2,	 we	 explored	 the	 relation	 between	 changes	 in	 unemployment	 and	 GDP	 growth	 and	
determined	 that	 in	 high	 income	 countries	 there	 exists	 a	 statistically	 significant,	 negative	 association	
between	 these	 two	 variables.	 The	 higher	 the	 absolute	 value	 of	 the	 Okun’s	 coefficient,	 the	 more	
responsive	 is	 the	 labor	 market	 to	 changes	 in	 GDP.	 We	 also	 documented	 that	 countries	 with	 higher	
negative	values	of	Okun’s	coefficient,	on	average,	also	create	more	jobs	during	the	period	analyzed.	In	
section	 3,	 we	 tried	 to	 get	 a	 better	 perspective	 on	 these	 findings	 by	 considering	 the	 manufacturing	
sector,	 and	 found	 that	 the	 relationship	 between	 growth	 and	 job	 creation	 was	 strongest	 in	 the	 lowest	
and	highest	income	countries,	and	in	the	least	and	most	capital	intensive	sectors.	Finally,	in	this	section,	
as	a	complement	to	the	previous	analyses,	we	turn	to	the	firm-level	determinants	of	private	sector	job	
creation	and	carry	out	three	separate,	but	related	analyses.	

Firm	entry	and	exit	–	Schumpeterian	“creative	destruction”	–	is	critical	for	the	continued	dynamism	of	
the	modern	economy.	Though	evidence	has	linked	entrepreneurship	and	economic	growth	in	developed	
countries,	 we	 have	 scarce	 evidence	 that	 such	 a	 relationship	 exists	 in	 developing	 countries.	 New	 firms	
enter	the	market	and	create	new	jobs,	while	other	unprofitable	firms	exit	the	market	contributing	to	job	
destruction	(see	e.g.	Sutton	(1997),	Pakes	and	Ericson	(1998),	Geroski	(1995)).	Incumbent	firms	are	in	a	
continuous	process	of	adaptation	in	response	to	the	development	of	new	products	and	processes,	the	
growth	 and	 decline	 in	 markets	 and	 changes	 in	 competitive	 forces	 (Davis	 and	 Haltiwanger	 (1999)).	
Market	conditions	and	institutional	factors	play	a	major	role	in	shaping	the	magnitude	of	job	flows	and	
their	characteristics	(Davis	et	al.	(1996)).	

In	the	first	analysis	in	this	section,	using	firm	level	data,	we	study	how	regulations	affect	employment	
growth	 across	 countries.	 We	 explore	 the	 links	 between	 the	 regulatory	 environment	 in	 which	 firms	
operate	 and	 job	 turnover	 by	 exploiting	 the	 observed	 industry-size	 variations	 through	 a	 difference-in-
difference	 approach.	 Additionally,	 we	 explore	 firm	 characteristics	 that	 are	 associated	 with	 higher	
employment	 growth	 rates	 in	 the	 short	 run	 and	 the	 long	 run	 and	 identify	 those	 firms	 that	 create	 the	
largest	 impact	 on	 employment	 growth.	 We	 exploit	 cross-country	 differences	 to	 control	 for	 how	
macroeconomic	 conditions,	 and	 business	 and	 labor	 regulations	 affect	 job	 creation.	 Note	 that	 because	
we	do	not	have	access	to	cross-country	panel	data	at	the	firm	level,	in	this	section	we	move	away	from	
the	 focus	 on	 responses	 to	 business	 cycles,	 although	 we	 do	 incorporate	 the	 Okun	 coefficient	 into	 the	
assessment.	

To	carry	out	the	analysis,	we	use	surveys	carried	out	by	the	world-wide	Enterprise	Survey	project	of	the	
World	Bank	Group	between	2006	and	2016.	The	firms	surveyed	are	for	the	most	part	registered	for	tax	
purposes;	they	employ	at	least	five	employees	and	are	located	in	urban	areas.	The	manager/owner	of	
the	firm	is	interviewed	in	detail	about	basic	firm	characteristics	(age,	legal	status,	number	of	employees,	
etc.),	as	well	as	specific	investment	climate	questions,	for	instance	whether	the	firm	has	experienced	
power	outages,	what	the	delays	have	been	when	it	requested	a	public	service,	how	difficult	it	is	to	deal	




	                                                                                                               30	
with	public	officers,	etc.	The	Enterprise	Surveys	use	a	stratified	sampling	methodology	thus	individual	
observations	need	to	be	properly	weighted	when	making	inferences	about	the	population.8	

THE	REGULATORY	ENVIRONMENT	AND	JOB	TURNOVER	
With	these	data,	we	explore	in	detail	the	industry	and	size	dimensions	of	the	job	flows,	and	relate	them	
to	 institutional	 differences	 across	 countries.	 Two	 papers	 exploit	 job	 flows	 across	 industries	 within	
countries	 to	 investigate	 the	 role	 of	 employment	 protection:	 Haltiwanger,	 Scarpetta,	 and	 Schweiger	
(2008)	and	Micco	and	Pages	(2006).	Micco	and	Pages	(2006)	exploits	industry	level	gross	job	flows	data	
for	 manufacturing	 for	 18	 countries	 and	 uses	 a	 difference-in-difference.	 Haltiwanger,	 Scarpetta,	 and	
Schweiger	(2008)	use	a	harmonized	firm-level	database	that	covers	all	firms	with	at	least	one	employee	
for	 both	 manufacturing	 and	 non-manufacturing	 sectors	 for	 7	 European	 countries,	 5	 Latin	 American	
countries,	 and	 4	 transition	 economies,	 and	 exploit	 country,	 industry	 and	 firm	 size	 variation	 in	 their	
analysis.	 The	 analysis	 hereafter	 follows	 closely	 the	 work	 of	 Haltiwanger	 et	 al.	 (2006)	 but	 we	 apply	 the	
methodology	 to	 164	 countries	 ranging	 from	 high-income	 countries	 to	 low-income	 countries.	 As	 in	
Haltiwanger	 et	 al.	 (2006),	 we	 find	 that	 firm	 size	 is	 by	 far	 the	 most	 important	 factor	 accounting	 for	
variation	 in	 the	 job	 flows	 across	 country,	 industry,	 and	 firm	 size	 classes.	 This	 suggests	 that	 exploiting	
data	by	firm	size	is	important	to	provide	greater	within	country	variation	in	job	flows	for	our	empirical	
identification	strategy,	but	also	that	distortions	to	job	flows	across	countries	may	very	well	interact	with	
the	flow	and	firm	size	relationship.		
	
Specifically,	 we	 explore	 the	 links	 between	 the	 regulatory	 environment	 in	 which	 firms	 operate	 and	 job	
turnover	by	exploiting	the	observed	industry-size	variations	through	a	difference-in-difference	approach	
(see	 Rajan	 and	 Zingales	 (1998)).	 The	 test	 is	 constructed	 as	 follows:	 we	 identify	 an	 industry-size	
propensity	 for	 job	 reallocation	 from	 the	 Polish	 data.	 Poland	 is	 the	 country	 with	 the	 largest	 (negative)	
Okun	coefficient	as	calculated	in	the	analysis	in	Section	1,	meaning	that	Poland	has	a	labor	market	that	
adjusts	easily	to	movements	in	business	cycles.9	Under	the	assumption	that	regulations	in	the	labor	and	
goods	 markets	 in	 Poland	 are	 among	 the	 least	 restrictive	 in	 our	 sample,	 variation	 in	 job	 reallocation	
across	industry-size	cells	in	Poland	should	proxy	for	the	technological	and	market	driven	differences	in	
job	 reallocation	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 policy	 induced	 adjustment	 costs.	 Under	 the	 additional	 assumption	
that	these	technological	and	market	driven	differences	in	the	demand	for	job	reallocation	carry	over	to	
other	countries,	we	assess	whether	industry-size	cells	that	have	a	greater	propensity	for	job	reallocation	
are	disproportionally	affected	by	regulations	that	raise	adjustment	costs.	This	would	imply	that,	ceteris	
paribus,	 industry-size	 cells	 with	 more	 volatile	 idiosyncratic	 profit	 shocks	 and	 more	 frequent	 factor	
adjustments	 should	 be	 more	 strongly	 affected	 by	 regulations	 raising	 adjustment	 costs	 than	 those	
industry-size	 cells	 with	 less	 volatile	 idiosyncratic	 profit	 shocks	 and	 less	 frequent	 adjustment.	 The	
advantage	of	this	approach	compared	to	standard	cross-country/cross-industry	empirical	studies	is	that	
we	 exploit	 within	 country	 differences	 between	 industry-size	 cells	 based	 on	 the	 interaction	 between	

																																																													
8
 	Under	stratified	random	sampling	unweighted	estimates	are	biased	unless	sample	sizes	are	proportional	to	the	size	of	each	
stratum.	 With	 stratification,	 the	 probability	 of	 selection	 of	 each	 unit	 is,	 in	 general,	 not	 the	 same.	 Consequently,	 individual	
observations	must	be	weighted	by	the	inverse	of	their	probability	of	selection	(probability	weights	or	pw	in	Stata.)	
9	
   Haltiwanger	et	al.	(2006)	use	the	United	States	as	the	benchmark	country	for	their	sample.	Since	the	enterprise	Surveys	mostly	
covers	developing	countries	and	does	not	include	the	United	States	we	had	to	choose	and	alternative	benchmark.	As	a	
robustness	check	we	use	Chile	(best	score	in	Economic	Freedom	Index	in	our	sample)	as	a	benchmark	and	results	are	consistent	
to	those	reported.	These	results	are	available	from	the	author.		



	                                                                                                                                          31	
country	and	industry-size	characteristics.	Thus,	we	can	also	control	for	country	and	industry-size	effects,	
thereby	minimizing	problems	of	omitted	variable	bias	and	other	misspecifications.	
	
The	core	model	specification	used	in	our	empirical	analysis	can	be	summarized	as	follows:	
	
        012345#6 = '7 + @×A                      9
                              5#:. ,5# 85# + 6:. ,6 86 + '. (<32012345# ×>6 ) + /5#6 	                   	        (8)	
	
where	Dsi	are	industry	x	size	si	(si	=	1,….,	I	x	S)	dummies,	Dc	are	country	c	(c	=	1,….,C)	dummies,	PolJFlowsi	
is	 Poland’s	 job	 flow	 variable	 in	 size	 class	 s	 and	 industry	 i,	 and	 /	is	 the	 iid	 error	 term.	 Controlling	 for	
country	 effects	 sweeps	 out	 any	 country-specific	 variation,	 controlling	 for	 industry-size	 effects	 sweeps	
out	the	large	common	factors	associated	with	industry	and	size,	and	the	key	interaction	term	between	
Poland’s	 flow	 in	 the	 industry-size	 class	 and	 the	 country	 regulation	 allows	 us	 to	 identify	 how	 the	
measured	 regulatory	 environment	 affects	 the	 variation	 across	 industry-size	 classes	 within	 countries.	
Poland’s	 job	 flow	 is	 used	 to	 quantify	 the	 propensity	 for	 the	 industry-size	 class	 to	 reallocate	 and,	 as	
discussed,	 reflects	 the	 fundamental	 driving	 forces	 underlying	 job	 reallocation	 across	 industry-size	
classes.		
	
In	what	follows,	the	measure	of	job	flows	used	in	the	empirical	analysis	is	the	sum	of	job	creation	and	
                                                                                             H∈LM E∆FGHIJ
job	destruction	rates	(sum).	Job	creation	rate	is	defined	as	C3D5#6% =                                          	and	job	destruction	
                                                                                         7.O(FGHIJ EFGHI,JPQ)
                              H∈LM E∆FGHIJ
rate	 as	 RST5#6% =                              	 ,	 where,	 i	 represents	 industry,	 s	 represents	 size	 class,	 c	 represents	
                          7.O(FGHIJ EFGHI,JPQ)
country,	 t	 represents	 time	 and	 E	 denotes	 employment.	 Capital	 letters	 S	 and	 C	 refer	 to	 a	 set	 of	 size	
classes	 or	 countries,	 respectively.	 The	 symbol	 ∆	 denotes	 the	 first-difference	 operator,	 ∆U% = U% −
U%-. .10	 In	 addition	 to	 the	 core	 specification,	 we	 consider	 some	 closely	 related	 specifications.	 As	 a	
robustness	check,	we	estimate	an	augmented	model	that	also	considers	business	sector	regulations.	
	
We	 consider	 three	 measures	 of	 the	 regulatory	 environment	 for	 each	 country:	 one	 a	 composite	 index,	
one	aimed	at	measuring	labor	regulations,	and	a	third	that	measures	business	regulations.	The	source	of	
these	measures	is	the	 Economic	Freedom	of	the	World	(EFW)	measures	created	by	the	Frasier	Institute.	
The	index	published	in	EFW,	measures	the	degree	to	which	the	policies	and	institutions	of	countries	are	
supportive	of	economic	freedom.	Studies	have	found	that	countries	with	institutions	and	policies	more	
consistent	with	economic	freedom	have	higher	investment	rates,	more	rapid	economic	growth,	higher	
income	levels,	and	a	more	rapid	reduction	in	poverty	rates.	Each	of	these	indexes	is	measure	on	a	scale	
of	0	to	10,	with	0	being	the	most	restrictive	environment.	The	average	of	the	composite	index	is	highest	
for	 high-income	 countries	 (7.18)	 and	 lowest	 for	 low-income	 countries	 (6.11)	 whereas	 the	 average	 for	
lower	 and	 upper	 middle-income	 countries	 falls	 in	 between	 these	 two	 groups.	 The	 monotonically	
increasing	averages	among	income	groups	are	also	found	for	labor	and	business	regulations.		
	
Previous	 research	 (see,	 e.g.,	 Caballero	 et	 al.	 (2004),	 Heckman	 and	 Pages	 (2004))	 suggests	 that	
regulations	 affect	 outcomes	 in	 the	 economy	 in	 the	 degree	 in	 which	 those	 regulations	 are	 enforced.	
Available	indicators	suggest	a	significant	variation	in	the	rules	of	law	and	the	degree	of	enforcement	of	
laws	and	regulations	in	our	sample.	Not	only	are	some	firms	and	jobs	not	registered	in	Latin	America	but	
																																																													
10
     	As	in	Haltiwanger	et	al.	(2006),	we	take	averages	of	pos	and	neg	among	firms,	and	then	calculate	sum.	




	                                                                                                                                32	
also	registered	firms	may	also	not	fully	comply	with	the	existing	rules	and	regulations	where	corruption	
is	rampant—such	as	in	some	African	countries	in	our	sample.	As	an	indication	of	the	different	degree	of	
enforcement	of	laws	and	regulations,	we	consider	the	rule	of	law	indicator	from	the	World	Bank’s	World	
Governance	Indicators.	The	indicator	ranges	between	-2.5	and	+2.5,	with	+2.5	being	the	best	performer.	
The	 indicator	 shows	 high-income	 countries	 have	 the	 highest	 compliance	 with	 laws	 and	 regulations	
(average	of	0.68),	followed	by	upper	middle-income	countries	(average	of	-0.37),	then	by	lower	middle-
income	countries	(average	of	-0.67),	and	finally	by	low-income	countries	(average	-0.83).	
	
To	 control	 for	 possibly	 differing	 degrees	 of	 enforcement	 of	 laws	 and	 regulations	 we	 adjust	 our	
regulatory	variables	as	follows:	
        	
                                 Z[\]	^_	\W`Ea.O
              >6,WXY =                                       ×>6 	 	                       	             (9)	
                                             O
	
Table	6	presents	the	empirical	results	of	the	estimation	of	our	core	specification	(8)	and	various	
variations.	Recall	that	in	equation	(8)	we	specify	a	difference-in-difference	analysis	that	identifies	the	
impact	of	regulations	via	the	interaction	effect	Poland’s	job	flows	in	the	industry×size	class	with	the	
country-specific	regulation.	The	estimated	coefficients	on	the	interaction	between	Poland’s	job	flow	and	
the	different	regulation	measures	(Table	6)	is	strongly	significant	overall,	and	in	each	of	the	income-
groups	when	we	allow	the	coefficient	of	the	interaction	to	vary.	Consistent	with	the	working	hypothesis,	
more	volatile	industries	and	firm	size	classes	are	impacted	more	in	countries	with	more	stringent	
regulations,	including	business	and	labor	regulations.	The	results	are	robust	to	the	different	regulation	
variables	adjusted	for	the	degree	of	enforcement	in	each	country.	
Table	6	
Job	Flows	and	the	Role	of	Regulations	(Difference	in	Difference	Analysis)	
                                                        regulation = EF        regulation = labor          regulation =        regulation = adj. EF      regulation = adj.       regulation = adj.
VARIABLES                                                    index                   index               business index                index                labor index           business index
                                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)         (10)        (11)       (12)

jflow_POL x regulation                                 0.064                    0.037                    0.039                   0.029                   0.043                   0.029
                                                     [0.021]***               [0.011]***               [0.018]**               [0.014]**               [0.014]***               [0.015]*
low income x jflow_POL x regulation                                 -0.019                    -0.016                  -0.019                 -0.042                    -0.037                 -0.044
                                                                  [0.008]**                [0.008]**               [0.008]**               [0.019]**                [0.018]**              [0.020]**
lower-middle income x jflow_POL x regulation                        -0.014                    -0.011                  -0.013                 -0.033                    -0.030                 -0.034
                                                                  [0.006]**                 [0.006]*                [0.007]*               [0.016]**                 [0.017]*               [0.017]*
upperr-middle income x jflow_POL x regulation                       -0.007                    -0.003                  -0.006                 -0.012                    -0.005                 -0.010
                                                                   [0.006]                   [0.006]                 [0.007]                [0.013]                   [0.013]                [0.015]
Constant                                               -0.026       0.083       0.019         0.079     0.019         0.081      0.050       0.081       0.043         0.078     0.053        0.079
                                                      [0.051]     [0.040]**    [0.043]     [0.040]**   [0.046]     [0.040]**    [0.041]    [0.040]**    [0.041]      [0.040]*   [0.041]    [0.040]**

Observations                                         8,118       8,118     8,118      8,118         8,118      8,118           8,118     8,118      8,118       8,118       8,118      8,118
R-squared                                            0.229       0.229     0.229      0.228         0.228      0.228           0.228     0.228      0.229       0.228       0.228      0.228
Robust standard errors in brackets *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The depedent variable in all regressions is jflow sic . All regressions include sector x size effects and country effects.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       	
	
Determinants	of	Employment	Growth	at	The	Firm	Level	
	
In	this	subsection,	we	explore	specific	firm	characteristics	that	are	associated	with	higher	employment	
growth	 rates	 in	 the	 short	 run	 and	 the	 long	 run.	 We	 also	 exploit	 cross-country	 differences	 to	 discover	
how	macroeconomic	conditions,	and	business	and	labor	regulations	affect	job	creation.			

Following	 La	 Porta	 et	 al.	 (1999),	 Botero	 et	 al.	 (2004),	 and	 Fox	 and	 Oviedo	 (2013)	 we	 examine	 the	 link	
between	 regulation	 and	 job	 growth	 using	 a	 reduced-form	 model.	 We	 use	 robust	 OLS	 to	 estimate	 the	



	                                                                                                                                                                                               33	
relationship	 between	 overall	 business	 and	 labor	 regulation	 and	 job	 growth,	 controlling	 for	 firm	 and	
country	characteristics.	We	estimate	the	following	equation:	

               SbC_Td#% = +6 + +e + +	% + 'fghS#%i + 'jTS# + 'k4RSdDℎgC# + mknℎSd# 	

Where	 SbC_Td#% 	is	firm	 i’s	job	(employment)	growth;	Size	is	the	initial	size	of	the	firm,	divided	into	six	
employment	 categories	 (5	 or	 less,	 6–10,	 11–20,	 21–50,	 51–100	 and	 over	 100);	 Age	 is	 one	 of	 five	 age	
categories	 (less	 than	 5,	 5–9,	 10–19,	 20–39	 and	 40	 and	 older);	 Ownership	 denotes	 whether	 the	 firm	 is	
private-domestic,	 private-foreign,	 public,	 or	 other.	 Other	 represents	 other	 firm	 characteristics,	 namely	
exporter	 status,	 access	 to	 credit,	 technology	 use,	 and	 human	 capital.	 We	 have	 two	 specifications,	 the	
first	includes	country-year	and	industry	fixed	effects.	The	second,	includes,	country,	industry,	and	year	
effects.	 We	 include	 these	 effects	 to	 minimize	 the	 potential	 for	 omitted	 variable	 bias.	 The	 second	
specification	allows	us	to	control	for	country-year	varying	determinants	such	as	GDP	growth,	the	rolling	
Okun	coefficient,	and	labor	and	business	environment	measured	by	EFW	indicators	described	above.	We	
cluster	the	errors	at	the	country	level.	Finally,	we	estimated	equation	(1)	using	firm	weights	provided	by	
the	surveys.		

The	dependent	variable	SbC_Td#% 	is	measured	either	as	annual	average	job	growth	over	the	last	3	years	
(short	term)	or	as	the	average	annual	growth	rate	from	startup	to	current	size	(long	run)	for	firms	that	
are	at	least	5	years	old.	In	both	cases,	we	have	a	truncation	problem.	The	sample	contains	data	on	live	
firms	 only;	 therefore,	 changes	 in	 employment	 over	 the	 period	 considered	 for	 job	 growth	 exclude	
changes	coming	from	firm	exit.	Obviously,	the	longer	the	period	considered	for	job	growth,	the	worse	
the	truncation	problem	is	likely	to	be.	Thus,	for	the	long-run	job	growth	variable,	the	truncation	problem	
may	be	severe.	For	example,	if	employment	is	more	volatile	in	countries	with	a	low	EFW	score	than	in	
countries	 with	 a	 high	 EFW	 score	 (there	 is	 more	 rapid	 expansion	 but	 also	 many	 more	 firm	 deaths),	 we	
would	observe	a	higher	expansion	in	countries	with	a	low	EFW	score	even	though	long-run	job	growth	is	
actually	 higher	 in	 countries	 with	 a	 high	 EFW	 score	 because	 there	 are	 fewer	 deaths.	 Thus,	 these	
estimates	should	be	regarded	with	care.	

Table	7	presents	the	OLS	results	for	the	two	dependent	variables.	The	results	for	the	short-term	growth	
confirm	that	smaller	and	younger	firms	grow	faster,	since	all	our	size	and	age	coefficients	are	negative	
and	 significant	 (the	 excluded	 categories	 are	 the	 smallest	 and	 youngest	 firms,	 respectively).	 The	
differences	are	greater	between	age	classes	than	between	size	classes.	Annual	job	growth	seems	to	be	
closely	related	with	exporter	status	and	technology	use,	as	measured	by	the	use	of	e-mail.	Also,	firms	
with	access	to	credit	and	that	invest	in	human	capital	tend	to	have	higher	growth	rates.	These	results—
exporters	and	technology	users	that	invest	in	human	capital	grow	faster—are	likely	due	in	part	to	the	
fact	that	these	types	of	firms	are	more	productive.	Regarding	the	country	environment	controls,	we	find	
that	 a	 more	 hassle-free	 labor	 environment	 is	 associated	 with	 higher	 employment	 growth,	 whereas	
countries	 with	 more	 hassle-free	 business	 regulations	 are	 related	 to	 lower	 employment	 growth.	 Even	
though	 institutions	 has	 a	 positive	 coefficient	 it	 is	 not	 statistically	 significant.	 We	 also	 control	 for	
macroeconomic	variables	including	GDP	growth,	FDI,	gross	capital	formation,	and	of	particular	interest,	
the	Okun’s	coefficient	found	in	section	2.	Results	show	that	higher	GDP	growth,	investment	(i.e.,	gross	
fixed	 capital	 formation),	 and	 the	 level	 of	 development	 are	 all	 associated	 with	 higher	 levels	 of	
employment	 growth	 in	 the	 short	 run.	 FDI	 is	 found	 to	 have	 a	 negative	 and	 significant	 coefficient;	
however,	it	is	not	statistically	significant	(columns	2	and	3).	A	more	responsive	labor	force,	given	by	the	




	                                                                                                                 34	
Okun	 coefficient,	 is	 associated	 with	 higher	 employment	 growth	 at	 the	 level	 of	 the	 firm;	 however,	 the	
effect	is	not	statistically	significant.		

Results	 from	 using	 long-term	 growth	 as	 the	 dependent	 variable	 differ	 and	 reveal	 further	 elements	 of	
employment	 dynamics.	 Micro-firms	 still	 grow	 faster	 (from	 a	 small	 base),	 but	 there	 are	 also	 large	
differences	 in	 growth	 between	 small,	 medium,	 and	 large	 firms.	 However,	 we	 find	 that	 state-owned	
enterprises	 have	 a	 negative	 effect	 on	 employment	 growth	 and	 the	 effect	 is	 statistically	 significant.	 In	
fact,	all	the	firm	characteristics	included	in	the	regression	show	positive	and	significant	coefficients;	this	
includes	 whether	 a	 firm	 provides	 training	 to	 their	 workers,	 suggesting	 that	 firms	 that	 invest	 in	 their	
workers	have	higher	job	growth	in	the	longer	term.	Over	the	long-term,	the	macro	variables,	including	
the	 Okun	 coefficient,	 largely	 lose	 their	 statistical	 significance,	 except	 for	 openness	 which	 becomes	
statistically	significant.	In	the	long-run,	it	appears	as	a	hassle-free	labor	environment	deter	employment	
growth.			
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	


	                                                                                                                 35	
Table	7	
Determinants	Employment	Growth	by	Firms	

                                                                                 1             2              3            4
             VARIABLES                                                    short-run	employment	growth   long-run	employment	growth

             exporter                                                          0.013          0.008         0.006          0.009
                                                                            [0.004]***     [0.004]**      [0.004]         [0.007]
             credit                                                            0.009          0.020         0.005          0.016
                                                                            [0.003]***    [0.002]***     [0.002]**     [0.004]***
             training                                                          0.006          0.024         0.015          0.010
                                                                              [0.004]     [0.003]***    [0.003]***      [0.004]**
             email                                                             0.006          0.015         0.011          0.008
                                                                              [0.004]     [0.002]***    [0.003]***      [0.004]**
             size	6-10                                                        -0.040         -0.038        -0.021         -0.009
                                                                            [0.006]***    [0.009]***    [0.003]***       [0.005]*
             size	11-20                                                       -0.047         -0.043        -0.010          0.000
                                                                            [0.006]***    [0.013]***    [0.004]***        [0.006]
             size	20-50                                                       -0.051         -0.046         0.000          0.004
                                                                            [0.006]***    [0.011]***      [0.003]         [0.006]
             size	50-100                                                      -0.059         -0.052         0.014          0.019
                                                                            [0.006]***    [0.015]***    [0.005]***      [0.008]**
             size	100+                                                        -0.061         -0.070         0.014          0.031
                                                                            [0.007]***    [0.006]***    [0.005]***     [0.009]***
             age	5-9                                                          -0.042         -0.078         0.091
                                                                            [0.011]***    [0.008]***    [0.004]***
             age10-19                                                         -0.058         -0.111        -0.050         -0.050
                                                                            [0.011]***    [0.008]***    [0.001]***     [0.006]***
             age	20	-	39                                                      -0.065         -0.127        -0.077         -0.077
                                                                            [0.011]***    [0.008]***    [0.001]***     [0.006]***
             age	40+                                                          -0.075         -0.140        -0.106         -0.111
                                                                            [0.013]***    [0.009]***    [0.001]***     [0.007]***
             majority	foreign                                                 -0.004         -0.002         0.000         -0.000
                                                                              [0.005]       [0.005]       [0.002]         [0.009]
             majority	state                                                    0.003         -0.054        -0.021         -0.049
                                                                              [0.012]     [0.013]***    [0.004]***     [0.019]***
             majority	other                                                    0.025         -0.010        -0.004         -0.018
                                                                              [0.019]       [0.011]       [0.002]       [0.009]**
             okun_chg_iunemp_rt                                                              -0.016                       -0.004
                                                                                            [0.025]                       [0.028]
             polulation	growth	rate                                                          -0.079                       -0.038
                                                                                          [0.024]***                      [0.024]
             GDP	growt	rate                                                                   0.004                        0.002
                                                                                          [0.001]***                      [0.001]
             log	GDPpc                                                                       -0.022                       -0.025
                                                                                            [0.066]                       [0.067]
             informality	rate                                                                -0.005                       -0.001
                                                                                           [0.002]**                      [0.001]
             domestic	credit	to	private	sector	(%	of	GDP)                                     0.000                       -0.000
                                                                                            [0.001]                       [0.000]
             gross	fixed	capital	formation,	private	sector	(%	of	GDP)                         0.003                        0.000
                                                                                           [0.001]**                      [0.001]
             foreign	direct	investment,	net	inflows	(%	of	GDP)                               -0.004                       -0.001
                                                                                          [0.001]***                      [0.002]
             openess                                                                          0.000                        0.001
                                                                                            [0.000]                     [0.000]**
             labor	regulations                                                                0.030                       -0.017
                                                                                          [0.010]***                     [0.010]*
             business	regulations                                                            -0.044                       -0.002
                                                                                          [0.013]***                      [0.014]
             institutions                                                                     0.261                        0.070
                                                                                            [0.210]                       [0.073]
             Constant                                                          0.238          0.568        0.036           0.471
                                                                            [0.031]***      [0.559]      [0.015]**        [0.575]

             Observations                                                      92,450       27,890        79,222        23,383
             R-squared                                                          0.083        0.104         0.189         0.174
             Robust	standard	errors	in	brackets	***	p<0.01,	**	p<0.05,	*	p<0.1                                                       	




	                                                                                                                                        36	
Determinants	of	employment	growth	in	high-impact	firms	
	
In	 this	 final	 subsection,	 we	 focus	 the	 analysis	 on	 job	 creation	 from	 a	 small	 subset	 of	 firms	 –	 those	
referred	to	as	‘high-impact’	firms.	While	high-impact	firms	are	seen	to	play	an	especially	important	role	
in	the	process	of	job	creation	over	time	compared	with	either	the	plants	of	large	existing	firms	or	the	
majority	 of	 very	 small	 startups	 that	 tend	 not	 to	 grow,	 to	 date	 there	 has	 been	 little	 research	 on	 the	
characteristics	of	high-impact	firms,	and	even	less	on	their	micro	and	macro	determinants	(Acs,	Parsons,	
and	 Tracy,	 2008)	 With	 the	 framework	 that	 has	 been	 used	 throughout	 this	 study	 we	 analyze	 what	
determines	the	availability	of	high-impact	firms	across	countries.			
	
We	define	a	high-impact	firm	as	a	firm	that	has	had	impressive	job	creation	in	the	three	years	leading	up	
to	 the	 survey	 year.	 Specifically,	 a	 high-impact	 firm,	 is	 a	 firm	 that	 reaches	 an	 employment	 growth	
quantifier	greater	than	15.	The	employment	growth	quantifier	(EGQ)	is	the	product	of	the	absolute	and	
percent	change	in	employment	over	a	three-year	period.	The	EGQ	is	used	to	mitigate	the	unfavorable	
impact	 of	 measuring	 employment	 change	 solely	 in	 either	 percent	 or	 absolute	 terms,	 since	 the	 former	
favors	 small	 companies	 and	 the	 latter	 large	 businesses.	 A	 firm	 with	 10	 employees	 in	 the	 initial	 year	
would	 have	 had	 to	 increase	 its	 number	 of	 workers	 to	 23	 in	 order	 to	 reach	 an	 EGQ	 higher	 than	 15	
whereas	a	firm	with	100	initial	employees	would	need	to	increase	its	labor	force	by	40	workers	in	order	
to	 reach	 a	 EGQ	 of	 15.	 Annex	 Table	 1	 shows	 the	 number	 of	 firms	 by	 country-year	 in	 our	 sample	 that	
obtained	an	EGQ	of	15,	20	and	50.	
	
Figure	14	shows	the	importance	of	high	impact	firms	in	an	economy.	Even	though	these	firms	represent	
a	very	small	share	of	the	number	of	firms	in	the	economy,	they	create	the	majority	of	jobs.	Firms	with	an	
EGQ	of	15	or	higher	represent,	on	average,	5%	of	the	firms	in	the	sample	whereas	they	create	44%	of	
positive	jobs	in	the	economy.	Clearly	these	shares	vary	by	country	and	year,	for	example	the	share	of	
firms	in	our	sample	which	have	an	EGQ	higher	than	15,	varies	between	0	and	20%	whereas	the	share	of	
positive	jobs	created	by	firms	with	an	EGQ	higher	than	15	ranges	from	0	to	91%.	This	wide	variation	of	
the	number	of	high	performing	firms	across	countries	leads	us	to	question	why.	What	factors	determine	
that	a	country	produces	a	high	number	of	high	performing	firms?	
	
Table	8	shows	results	of	negative	binomial	regressions	where	the	dependent	variable	is	the	number	of	
firms	 with	 EGQ	 greater	 than	 15,	 20	 and	 50,	 and	 the	 independent	 variables	 are	 country	 level	 variables	
than	 aim	 at	 exploring	 the	 determinants	 of	 a	 proper	 environment	 for	 high-impact	 firms	 to	 flourish.	
Results	show	that	a	highly	competitive	environment,	proxied	by	the	number	of	firms,	economic	growth,	
and	a	responsive	labor	market	proxied	by	the	Okun	coefficient	are	the	three	most	robust	factors	for	an	
environment	that	produces	high	impact	firms.	Investment	by	the	private	sector,	openness,	flexible	labor	
and	business	regulations,	and	rule	of	law	that	protects	private	rights	are	all	positively	related	with	higher	
number	 of	 high	 impact	 firms;	 however,	 their	 effect	 is	 no	 statistically	 significant.	 Counterintuitively,	
foreign	 direct	 investment	 and	 access	 to	 credit	 have	 a	 negative	 effect;	 however,	 it	 is	 not	 statistically	
significant.	

	

	

	


	                                                                                                                  37	
Figure	14		
High	Impact	Firms	-	Average	Share	of	Firms	and	Average	Share	of	Positive	Jobs	

                                                44.4
                                                                         40.9
                        40


                                                                                                 30.3
                        30



                        20



                        10
                                       5.4
                                                             4.3
                                                                                     2.0

                             0
                                        share of firms HIMPF 15             share of postive jobs HIMPF 15
                                        share of firms HIMPF 20             share of postive jobs HIMPF 20
                                        share of firms HIMPF 50             share of postive jobs HIMPF 50

                                                                                                                  	
	
Table	8		
Determinants	of	High	Impact	Firms	

                                                                               (1)            (2)          (3)
              VARIABLES                                                     himpcf_15      himpcf_20    himpcf_50

              log number of firms                                               1.007           1.058      1.079
                                                                            [0.061]***     [0.067]***   [0.084]***
              okun (difference)                                                 -0.645         -0.580     -1.325
                                                                            [0.172]***     [0.197]***   [0.284]***
              polulation growth rate                                            -0.031         -0.053     -0.047
                                                                               [0.023]      [0.027]**    [0.039]
              GDP growt rate                                                    0.025           0.024      0.021
                                                                            [0.008]***      [0.010]**    [0.014]
              log GDPpc                                                         0.139           0.051      0.157
                                                                               [0.106]        [0.119]    [0.181]
              domestic credit to private sector (% of GDP)                      -0.002         -0.002     -0.006
                                                                               [0.003]        [0.004]    [0.005]
              gross fixed capital formation, private sector (% of GDP)          0.022           0.022      0.015
                                                                              [0.013]*        [0.016]    [0.018]
              foreign direct investment, net inflows (% of GDP)                 -0.039         -0.055     -0.050
                                                                               [0.026]       [0.033]*    [0.034]
              openess                                                           0.000           0.001      0.002
                                                                               [0.003]        [0.004]    [0.005]
              labor regulations                                                 0.010           0.006      0.009
                                                                               [0.048]        [0.053]    [0.085]
              business regulations                                              0.186           0.152      0.190
                                                                             [0.082]**        [0.094]    [0.133]
              institutions                                                      0.270           0.156      0.200
                                                                              [0.157]*        [0.178]    [0.242]

              Observations                                                   90               90             90
              Robust standard errors in brackets *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                       	


	                                                                                                                         38	
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
	

This	paper	is	intended	as	the	first	in	a	series	of	assessments	that	aim	to	understand	better	the	patterns	
and	determinants	of	private	sector	job	creation.	In	this	first	paper,	we	took	an	exploratory	look	at	the	
relationship	between	growth	and	jobs	by	analyzing	patterns	of	job	creation	and	destruction	in	business	
cycles	across	a	large	number	of	global	economies.	The	objective	of	the	exercise	was	modest	–	to	assess	
the	patterns	of	the	growth-jobs	relationship	by	countries,	income	groups,	economic	structures,	sectors,	
and	 firm	 types.	 Three	 separate,	 but	 related	 analyses	 were	 carried	 out,	 looking	 at	 the	 macro,	 sectoral,	
and	firm	levels.	

From	the	descriptive	analysis,	we	found	that	while	growth	is,	of	course,	fundamental	for	job	creation,	
very	different	labor	market	responses	to	growth	emerged	across	countries	and	income	groups.	Taking	
only	 the	 macro	 view,	 we	 saw	 that	 low-income	 countries,	 particularly	 when	 dominated	 by	 agricultural	
and	 other	 forms	 of	 self-employment,	 appear	 to	 have	 job	 creation	 patterns	 that	 are	 unresponsive	 to	
growth.	 However,	 the	 industry-level	 view,	 which	 largely	 controls	 for	 self-employment,	 suggests	 that	
employment	 in	 low-income	 countries	 does	 in	 fact	 respond	 elastically	 to	 growth,	 at	 least	 in	 the	 formal	
sector.	These	findings	highlight	the	important	role	of	structural	transformation	in	shaping	the	growth-
jobs	relationship.	More	broadly,	the	significant	differences	in	the	patterns	of	job	creation	across	income	
groups	and	economic	structures	calls	for	matters	for	considering	how	and	when	we	should	expect	jobs	
growth	at	different	stages	of	the	economic	cycle.	

An	 important	 focus	 of	 this	 paper	 was	 to	 test	 whether	 labor	 market	 responsiveness	 to	 growth	 and	
decline	(as	measured	by	the	Okun	coefficient	or	by	standard	elasticities)	is	associated	with	overall	job	
creation.	 Here	 we	 found	 that	 economies	 where	 formal	 sector	 job	 creation	 was	 more	 responsive	 to	
growth	 cycles	 (i.e.	 they	 create	 jobs	 in	 line	 with	 growth	 and	 shed	 jobs	 in	 line	 with	 decline)	 generated	
more	jobs	overall	than	economies	with	less	responsive	patterns	of	job	creation.	This	was	also	found	to	
be	true	at	the	firm	level	–	firms	which	create	and	shed	jobs	more	fluidly	create	more	jobs	overall.	At	the	
same	 time,	 many	 countries	 (and	 presumably,	 many	 firms)	 expanded	 employment	 significantly	 in	
aggregate	despite	a	relatively	inelastic	response	to	business	cycles;	similarly,	some	countries	exhibited	
weak	overall	job	creation	despite	a	highly	responsive	labor	market.	This	appears	to	be	driven	mainly	by	
structural	 factors	 –	 less	 responsive,	 high	 job-creating	 countries	 consist	 mainly	 of:	 i)	 high	 income,	
extractive	 (mainly	 oil	 producing)	 economies;	 and	 ii)	 high-growth,	 early-stage	 transformation	 (high	
informality)	 economies.	 By	 contrast	 highly	 responsive,	 low	 job-creating	 countries	 appear	 to	 be	 mainly	
transition	economies	in	Central	and	Eastern	Europe,	where	the	long-run	analysis	picks	up	major	declines	
in	employment	from	the	1990s.		

Another	 important	 finding	 in	 the	 paper	 relates	 to	 job	 creation	 in	 technology	 and	 capital	 intensive	
environments.	 The	 results	 from	 both	 the	 macro	 analysis	 (grouping	 of	 ‘high	 technology’	 countries)	 and	
the	sectoral	analysis	indicate	that,	far	from	being	a	simple	substitute	from	jobs,	economies	and	sectors	
that	 are	 capital	 intensive	 tend	 to	 be	 have	 a	 responsive	 growth-jobs	 relationship.	 In	 fact,	 the	 sectoral	
analysis	 in	 manufacturing	 found	 highly	 capital	 intensive	 sectors	 were	 associated	 with	 higher	
employment	 elasticity	 to	 growth	 than	 medium	 or	 low	 capital	 intensive	 sectors	 across	 most	 income	
levels;	 and	 for	 all	 income	 levels,	 highly	 capital	 intensive	 sectors	 generated	 faster	 overall	 employment	




	                                                                                                                   39	
growth	 than	 less	 capital	 intensive	 sectors.	 This	 suggests	 significant	 complementarity	 between	 capital	
and	labor,	a	finding	which	certainly	should	be	probed	more	deeply.	

Finally,	 while	 the	 focus	 of	 the	 paper	 was	 to	 take	 a	 broad	 look	 at	 economic	 growth	 and	 job	 creation	
relationships	 across	 a	 wide	 range	 of	 countries,	 we	 also	 carried	 out	 a	 broad	 assessment	 on	 the	
determinants	 of	 job	 creation	 at	 the	 firm	 level.	 Any	 analysis	 on	 the	 determinants	 of	 a	 fundamental	
economic	outcome	like	job	creation	faces	huge	challenges	of	endogeneity.	Nevertheless,	we	were	able	
to	identify	some	factors	that	are	at	least	correlated	with	job	creation	outcomes.		First,	in	terms	of	firm	
types,	the	analysis	supports	much	of	the	recent	research	showing	that	small	and	(especially)	young	firms	
are	associated	with	greater	job	creation.	More	broadly,	by	far	the	most	important	determinants	of	job	
creation	at	the	firm	level	are	either	firm-specific	characteristics	(including	demographics,	ownership,	and	
firm	behaviors	like	use	of	technology	and	training)	or	macro-economic	and	structural	factors	(including	
growth	 levels,	 investment,	 and	 labor	 market	 responsiveness).	 Beyond	 these	 (and	 another,	 arguably	
structural,	 factor	 –	 institutional	 quality),	 access	 to	 formal	 bank	 financing,	 the	 business	 regulatory	
environment,	 and	 some	 limited	 aspects	 of	 labor	 regulations,	 appear	 to	 be	 relevant.	 Indeed,	 while	
business	 regulatory	 issues	 do	 not	 appear	 to	 be	 among	 the	 most	 fundamental	 factors	 shaping	 job	
creation	 outcomes,	 they	 may	 be	 important	 at	 the	 margin	 –	 the	 evidence	 presented	 in	 this	 paper	
identifies	business	regulation	as	particularly	significant	in	industry	sectors	and	firm	size	classes	that	face	
greater	 volatility	 in	 terms	 of	 profits	 and	 factor	 adjustments.	 Together,	 these	 findings	 point	 to	 the	
importance	 of	 market	 rigidities	 that	 may	 constrain	 the	 ability	 of	 firms	 to	 respond	 to	 growth	
opportunities.	 Finally,	 the	 analysis	 of	 high	 impact	 firms	 suggests	 the	 importance	 of	 the	 competition	
environment	in	the	emergence	of	highly	productive	and	job-creating	firms.			

While	the	analysis	on	determinants	of	firm-level	job	creation	presented	here	is	only	at	a	very	high	level,	
the	 above	 findings	 may	 help	 to	 frame	 a	 potential	 policy	 agenda	 for	 job	 creation,	 including:	 macro-
economic	 fundamentals,	 responsive	 labor	 markets,	 access	 to	 finance,	 competition,	 and	 a	 facilitative	
business	 regulatory	 environment.	 These	 are	 not	 surprising,	 but	 nevertheless	 frame	 a	 set	 of	 issues	 that	
could	be	explored	in	future	papers	in	this	series.	

Indeed,	 bearing	 in	 mind	 the	 exploratory	 nature	 of	 the	 paper,	 the	 results	 are	 promising	 and	 suggest	
fertile	ground	for	further	analysis.	Future	papers	in	the	series	may	consider	two	main	avenues	to	deepen	
this	initial	analysis	on	economy	wide	job	creation:	first,	exploring	how	sectoral	and	enterprise	structures	
shape	patterns	of	job	creation;	second,	assessing	in	more	detail	the	determinants	of	factor	intensity	and	
job	creation	at	the	firm	level.	

On	 the	 former,	 an	 immediate	 follow-on	 to	 the	 findings	 in	 this	 paper	 may	 be	 to	 probe	 job	 creation	
patterns	in	a	set	of	country	case	studies.	Such	an	approach	would	allow	for	more	detailed	quantitative	
assessment,	 including	 linking	 job	 creation	 outcomes	 with	 specific	 policy	 actions.	 These	 case	 studies	
would	focus	on	countries	that	appear	as	outliers	to	the	patterns	discussed	in	this	paper,	or	where	there	
are	particularly	interesting	episodes	of	growth	and	decline	(e.g.	surges	and	slumps).	This	may	allow	us	to	
identify	more	specifically	the	dynamics	job	creation	/	job	shedding	responses,	and	the	timing	of	those	
responses,	 in	 key	 stages	 of	 the	 business	 cycle	 (entering	 or	 coming	 out	 of	 a	 slump)	 impact	 longer-run	
outcomes.	

Another	potentially	valuable	follow-on	from	the	findings	in	this	paper	would	involve	assessing	in	more	
detail	how	sectoral	specialization	impacts	job	creation	patterns.	Such	an	assessment	might	follow	along	
the	 lines	 of	 Loayza	 and	 Raddatz	 (2006),	 who	 found	 that	 the	 sectoral	 composition	 of	 growth	 (and,	


	                                                                                                                40	
specifically,	 relative	 labor	 intensity)	 had	 important	 implications	 for	 the	 impact	 of	 growth	 on	 poverty.	
Another	potentially	valuable	follow-up.		

Further	 down	 the	 line,	 future	 research	 following	 the	 results	 of	 this	 paper	 may	 involve	 the	 challenging	
task	of	incorporating	earnings	into	the	analysis	to	allow	for	a	more	nuanced	understanding	of	economies	
characterized	 by	 high	 levels	 of	 self-employment	 and	 informality,	 as	 well	 as	 identifying	 distortions	 that	
may	lead	to	a	systematic	underutilization	of	labor	in	some	economies.	

Finally,	 much	 work	 remains	 to	 understand	 firm-level	 determinants	 to	 job	 creation.	 Within	 this,	 a	 high	
priority	in	this	series	of	papers	on	private	sector	job	creation	is	to	deepen	our	knowledge	on	the	factors	
which	determine	whether	and	how	a	firm	chooses	to	employ	labor,	particularly	with	respect	to	capital,	
when	facing	a	known	(or,	conversely	an	uncertain)	future	pattern	of	growth.	

                                                          	

	




	




	                                                                                                                 41	
ANNEX A: OKUN’S LAW
	

The	basic	bivariate	model	specification	that	was	used	by	Okun	(1962),	inter	alia,	by	Weber	(1995)	may	
be	represented	by	the	following	set	of	equations:	
            6            ∗
	         (#,% ≡ (#,% − (#,% 	          	         	         	         	         (1)	
	         	
            6             ∗
          "#,% ≡ "#,% − "#,%  	         	         	         	         	         (2)	
	
           6       6
          "#,% = '(#,% + /#,% 	         	         	         	         	         (3)	
	
           6
where	 (#,%   	is	the	logarithm	of	cyclical	output,	the	output	gap;	 (#,% 	 is	the	logarithm	of	observed	or	actual	
             ∗                                                              6
output;	 (#,%   	 is	 the	 logarithm	 of	 potential	 or	 natural	 output;	 "#,% 	 is	 the	 cyclical	 unemployment	 rate,	 the	
                                                                                               ∗
unemployment	 gap;	 "#,% 	 is	 the	 observed	 or	 actual	 unemployment	 rate;	 "#,%              	 is	 the	 potential	 or	 natural	
unemployment	rate;	and	/#,% 	is	a	stochastic	error	term.	The	subscript	i	denotes	country	i	in	year	t.	Okun’s	
coefficient	is	measured	by	the	estimated	value	of	 ' ,	the	impact	coefficient,	such	that	 ' ≤ 0.	Obviously,	
                                                                                                         ∗          ∗
to	estimate	this	coefficient	we	need	time	series	on	the	unobserved	components	 "#,%                         		and	 (#,% .	The	trend	
values	are	found	through	a	linear	regression	using	two	lags	of	the	corresponding	variable	as	Hamilton	
(2017)	 recommends	 not	 using	 Hodrick-Prescott	 (HP)	 filter	 as	 it	 produces	 series	 with	 spurious	 dynamic	
relations	that	have	no	basis	in	the	underlying	data-generating	process	and	suggest	using	variables	lags	
instead	as	a	cleaner	detrending	process.	We	also	use	a	moving	average	of	the	form	 (% ∗ = ((%E. + (% +
(%-. )/3	to	find	the	natural	output	and	employment.	Since	determining	the	natural	rate	of	growth	in	this	
framework	is	non-trivial	for	our	results	we	decided	to	use	the	difference	specification	to	make	sure	that	
the	detrending	of	the	series	was	not	the	driving	force	in	our	results.	However,	we	make	use	of	the	gap	
specification	 to	 check	 the	 robustness	 of	 our	 results.	 Table	 1	 shows	 results	 using	 Okun’s	 coefficients	
estimated	by	the	gap	specifications	using	the	two	detrending	methodologies.		
	
In	 this	 Annex,	 we	 test	 some	 alternative	 specifications	 of	 the	 Okun	 model,	 mainly	 the	 idea	 that	 the	
relation	 between	 unemployment	 and	 output	 growth	 does	 not	 necessarily	 need	 to	 be	 linear.	 Annex	
Figure	 1	 shows	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 fitted	 values	 estimated	 by	 a	 linear	 and	 by	 a	 non-linear	
regression	model	for	the	cases	of	the	United	States,	Ecuador,	Tanzania,	and	Vietnam.	We	see	that	the	
non-linear	model	displays	some	interesting	patterns	that	are	not	accounted	for	in	the	linear	model.	For	
example,	 the	 data	 for	 the	 United	 States	 displays	 a	 convex	 shape	 whereas	 Ecuador,	 Tanzania,	 and	
Vietnam	 have	 a	 concave	 form.	 In	 the	 case	 of	 the	 United	 States,	 the	 rate	 at	 which	 unemployment	
decreases,	 slows	 down	 as	 GDP	 grows	 at	 faster	 rates.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 the	 developing	 countries’	
concave	form,	suggest	that	unemployment	actually	increases	with	low	level	of	positive	growth	and	only	
becomes	 negative	 once	 a	 faster	 rate	 of	 growth	 in	 achieved.	 The	 convex	 form	 in	 the	 US	 is	 probably	
related	 to	 the	 country	 reaching	 its	 natural	 rate	 of	 unemployment,	 as	 once	 it	 is	 reached,	 more	 output	
growth	will	not	lead	to	less	unemployment.	Even	though	these	patterns	are	extremely	interesting	and	
there	is	more	to	be	explored,	the	issue	is	that	we	now	have	two	coefficients,	rather	than	one,	and	how	
to	 we	 explore	 the	 Okun	 coefficient	 as	 an	 employment	 output	 when	 there	 is	 more	 than	 one	 part	 to	
control	for.	However,	it	is	important	to	highlight	that	both	linear	and	non-linear	Okun	coefficients	are	
highly	correlated.	



	                                                                                                                               42	
Annex	1	-	Figure	1		
Non-Linear	Okun	




                       	   	




                       	   	




                       	       	




                       	   	



	                                  43	
	
Annex	2	-	Figure	2		
Distribution	of	Okun’s	coefficient	by	income	group	
              2.5




                                                                                          6
              2




                                                                                          4
              1.5
    Density




                                                                                Density
              1




                                                                                          2
              .5
              0




                                                                                          0
                    -1    -.8       -.6            -.4        -.2   0                          -.3   -.2      -.1   0    .1
                                          okun_b                                                           okun_b
                                                                            	                                                 	
              2.5




                                                                                          10
              2




                                                                                          8
              1.5
    Density




                                                                                Density
                                                                                          6
              1




                                                                                          4
              .5




                                                                                          2
              0




                                                                                          0




                    -.5         0                        .5             1                      -.2   -.1       0    .1   .2
                                          okun_b                                                           okun_b
                                                                            	                                                 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	




	                                                                                                                             44	
Annex	3	-	Table	1		
High	Impact	Firms	by	Country	
      	                                                      share of firms                                share of positive jobs
               country               year   all firms himpcf_15 himpcf_20     himpcf_50      jobs    himpcf_15 himpcf_20 himpcf_50
               Angola                2006          834    3.8           3.1      1.0           5,006    13.8       11.2          3.4
               Angola                2010          618   11.9           8.9      3.9           5,418    47.7       42.2         32.3
               Albania               2007        2,126    9.0           6.4      0.9          12,672    40.7       27.5         10.4
               Albania               2013          736    2.6           2.3      0.5           3,010    38.5       35.2         23.2
               Armenia               2009        1,098   14.1           9.1      3.5          19,905    58.9       52.6         41.6
               Armenia               2013        1,439    4.3           4.1      1.6           7,695    58.1       57.3         28.7
               Burundi               2014          661    5.2           3.0      0.4           6,543    25.8       15.9         11.8
               Benin                 2009        1,577    8.4           6.1      3.1           4,575    44.4       38.8         24.2
               Burkina Faso          2009        1,655    3.2           2.7      1.2          10,116    37.7       36.3         28.5
               Bangladesh            2007      26,829     5.8           4.3      2.7        399,710     69.9       62.6         51.6
               Bangladesh            2013        7,319   11.0          10.2      7.1        344,918     86.5       85.6         79.5
               Belize                2010          759    0.3           0.0      0.0           1,475    8.8         0.0          0.0
               Bolivia               2006        6,086   10.3           9.2      2.9          41,750    44.9       42.3         18.6
               Bolivia               2010        4,063    4.5           4.4      1.0          27,514    37.4       36.9         19.8
               Brazil                2009    292,663     12.2          11.0      6.5      4,655,269     78.8       76.6         69.5
               Botswana              2006        1,166    6.6           5.6      1.0          10,565    16.8       15.7          6.4
               Botswana              2010          675    9.2           7.9      3.7           9,275    79.1       77.0         66.5
               Côte d'Ivoire         2009        8,998    4.0           2.6      1.2          39,355    21.9       17.3         13.6
               Cameroon              2009        1,329    3.4           3.0      2.2           9,245    62.9       59.2         49.9
               Congo, Rep.           2009        1,423    6.1           1.7      1.0           8,775    31.1       23.9         17.3
               Ecuador               2006        6,185    7.6           6.6      3.7          60,147    54.3       51.5         40.9
               Ecuador               2010        7,830    2.8           2.5      1.0          64,564    36.7       34.5         22.8
               Egypt, Arab Rep.      2013    114,226      2.6           2.2      1.8        818,282     42.0       40.4         37.9
               Georgia               2008        3,122   18.9          14.2      9.6        108,718     91.0       89.3         81.8
               Georgia               2013        7,497   11.3          10.7      7.2        117,155     68.2       67.9         64.6
               Ghana                 2007        6,386    6.2           4.8      2.1          50,816    52.3       47.9         39.0
               Ghana                 2013        1,371    4.9           3.3      1.3           7,971    40.6       31.7         18.1
               Guatemala             2006      14,234     7.4           3.7      1.4        101,025     53.5       40.8         28.6
               Guatemala             2010        9,629    2.7           2.5      1.6        105,572     65.8       65.5         58.4
               Guyana                2010          321    7.1           4.9      2.5           3,324    45.1       40.2         26.8
               Honduras              2006        7,653   13.2          12.7      8.1        145,346     80.0       78.9         71.5
               Honduras              2010        5,122    3.4           3.4      0.5          27,545    66.7       66.5         26.4
               Croatia               2013      11,944     3.8           3.0      2.3          54,601    44.4       42.9         35.5
               Jordan                2013        8,396    3.3           2.7      0.6          55,407    47.5       45.3         36.3
               Kyrgyz Republic       2009        1,002    9.9           9.0      1.8          11,652    41.6       40.2         18.7
               Kyrgyz Republic       2013          939    3.8           1.2      0.8           8,131    50.4       38.5         34.4
               Lebanon               2013        6,348    6.2           5.2      2.4          32,671    51.2       47.3         29.9
               Madagascar            2009        1,891    5.5           4.3      2.8          23,571    44.4       42.9         39.7
               Madagascar            2013        2,434    3.0           3.0      2.2          29,154    55.8       55.8         52.7
               Mexico                2006      76,686     4.3           3.5      1.4        515,381     53.3       50.7         36.7
               Mexico                2010      68,465     4.4           2.7      1.3        652,430     63.7       62.1         56.4
               Macedonia, FYR        2009        4,935   12.4           9.6      6.7          43,169    42.3       40.4         32.7
               Macedonia, FYR        2013        3,056    3.0           2.5      1.2          11,789    44.2       40.1         25.8
               Mali                  2010          970    1.1           0.8      0.2           1,729    18.6       17.2          8.4
               Montenegro            2013        1,965    0.0           0.0      0.0           2,422    0.0         0.0          0.0
               Mongolia              2009        2,567   18.5          14.6      5.5          30,445    66.7       61.7         40.0
               Mongolia              2013        4,769    3.8           0.4      0.1          28,673    36.7       10.5          6.8
               Mauritius             2009        4,238    8.6           6.8      3.5          60,949    79.3       77.8         66.1
               Malawi                2009        1,778   11.7           7.4      3.9          26,585    70.6       67.4         58.9
               Malawi                2014        2,924    3.5           3.3      1.3          71,763    86.0       85.7         81.5
               Namibia               2014        7,119    3.1           2.2      0.7          18,026    23.7       22.0         15.8
               Niger                 2009          921    5.1           2.9      0.5           4,010    30.4       23.5         15.0
               Nicaragua             2010        1,878    3.8           2.3      0.7          11,505    49.1       46.3         27.0
               Nepal                 2009      11,930     2.7           2.5      0.2          36,213    19.4       18.2          6.3
               Nepal                 2013        9,877    2.8           2.8      0.1          22,300    34.7       33.6          5.9
               Pakistan              2007      25,114     2.2           1.8      0.5        104,299     52.3       49.7         36.9
               Pakistan              2013      12,549     3.7           3.4      1.9        196,698     64.1       63.0         53.5
               Panama                2006        3,437    4.1           2.7      1.6          18,463    50.2       40.6         31.2
               Panama                2010        5,359    7.7           5.8      4.5          37,763    51.8       46.4         38.5
               Peru                  2006        6,076   18.9          14.5      12.3       159,257     80.0       76.0         71.7
               Peru                  2010      13,712     9.5           8.9      1.7        160,409     71.8       70.0         41.4
               Philippines           2009      33,366     6.3           5.8      2.5        379,664     81.6       80.0         65.5
               Paraguay              2010        2,144   10.7          10.2      5.3          29,250    68.2       67.6         56.3
               Russian Federation    2009      84,647    14.9          14.1      8.5      3,940,826     88.8       88.0         83.8
               Russian Federation    2012      83,316     6.5           5.3      2.6        663,197     48.0       45.9         34.3
               Rwanda                2006          598    8.0           6.4      2.4           5,776    27.1       25.8         13.8
               Senegal               2007        1,714    3.2           2.2      1.0           8,616    24.2       22.1         10.6
               Senegal               2014        2,606    1.6           1.4      0.3          11,287    18.6       17.5         11.7
               Sierra Leone          2009          870    4.4           2.5      0.6           2,704    38.7       35.0         22.4
               El Salvador           2006      10,287     9.0           6.6      2.0          78,474    59.7       53.1         37.0
               El Salvador           2010        4,809    3.1           1.8      1.3          23,478    34.6       23.5         16.7
               Serbia                2013      14,762     0.7           0.7      0.3          51,145    19.3       17.0         10.1
               Suriname              2010          274    1.7           1.1      1.1           1,022    43.4       39.1         39.1
               Chad                  2009          647    7.0           3.9      0.9           3,943    25.8       16.2          7.2
               Togo                  2009        1,382    2.0           2.0      0.0           4,710    6.8         6.8          0.0
               Tajikistan            2013        1,240    6.3           4.1      2.7          11,581    42.4       36.7         32.5
               Trinidad and Tobago   2010        5,852    1.1           0.5      0.4          15,711    12.6        4.7          3.9
               Turkey                2008      43,680    15.4          12.5      6.9      1,220,251     87.0       85.5         79.0
               Turkey                2013    103,852      7.5           7.1      3.2        597,295     56.6       54.7         30.2
               Tanzania              2006        7,293    6.9           5.0      1.8          59,191    49.1       45.1         30.6
               Uganda                2006        3,969    6.5           4.4      1.1          24,237    39.8       34.4         16.0
               Uganda                2013        6,752    2.5           2.5      0.3          17,119    35.8       35.4         16.0
               Ukraine               2008      48,119     7.8           6.3      2.4        445,132     48.0       44.3         33.4
               Uruguay               2006        5,492    7.5           6.1      2.9          37,881    42.0       38.0         23.7
               Uruguay               2010        3,385    2.2           1.9      0.3          17,246    39.8       36.9         18.8
               Venezuela, RB         2006      18,552     7.3           5.8      2.1        162,155     37.6       35.3         24.4
               Venezuela, RB         2010      10,910     3.5           3.5      2.1          56,074    75.3       75.3         69.0
               Yemen, Rep.           2010        5,934    3.2           2.8      0.5          17,279    44.0       41.7         23.8
               Yemen, Rep.           2013        5,273    1.7           1.3      0.6          10,849    52.5       48.2         36.1
               South Africa          2007    120,831      7.0           4.4      1.7      1,288,628     31.2       26.5         13.7



	                                                                                                                                      45	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
	

Acs,	Zoltan	J.,	William	Parsons,	and	Spencer	Tracy.	2008.	“High-Impact	Firms:	Gazelles	Revisited.”	
    unpublished	manuscript	prepared	for	the	United	States	Small	Business	Administration.	

Ahmed,	Masood,	Dominique	Guillaume,	and	Davide	Furceri.	2012.	“Youth	Unemployment	in	the	MENA	
   Region:	Determinants	and	Challenges.”	in	Addressing	the	100	Million	Youth	Challenge:	Perspective	
   on	Youth	Employment	in	the	Arab	World	in	2012.	Geneva:	World	Economic	Forum.	

Ball,	Laurence,	Daniel	Leigh,	and	Prakash	Loungani.	2016.	“Okun’s	Law:	Fit	at	50?”	Revised	version	of	
     NBER	Working	Paper	No.	18668.		

Botero,	J.,	S.	Djankov,	R.	Porta	and	F.	C.	Lopez-De-Silanes.	2004.	“The	Regulation	of	Labor.”	The	
   Quarterly	Journal	of	Economics.	119	(4):	1339–82.	

Caballero,	Ricardo	J.,	Kevin	N.	Cowan,	Eduardo	M.R.A.	Engel,	and	Alejandro	Micco.	2004.	“Effective	
   Labor	Regulation	and	Microeconomic	Flexibility.”	Discussion	Paper	1480.	Cowles	Foundation.	

Davis,	Steven	J.	and	John	C.	Haltiwanger.	1999.	“On	the	Driving	Forces	Behind	Cyclical	Movements	in	
   Employment	and	Job	Reallocation.”	American	Economic	Review,	89(5):1234-1258.	

Davis,	Steven	J.,	John	C.	Haltiwanger,	and	Scott	Schuh.	1996.	Job	Creation	and	Destruction.	The	MIT	
   Press:	Cambridge,	Massachusetts.	

Decker,	Ryan,	John	Haltiwanger,	Ron	Jarmin,	and	Javier	Miranda.	2014.	"The	Role	of	Entrepreneurship	in	
   US	Job	Creation	and	Economic	Dynamism."	Journal	of	Economic	Perspectives.	28(3):	3-24.	

Fort,	Teresa,	John	Haltiwanger,	Ron	S.	Jarmin,	and	Javier	Miranda.	2013.	“How	Firms	Respond	to	
    Business	Cycles:	The	Role	of	the	Firm	Age	and	Firm	Size.”	IMF	Economic	Review.	61:	520-559	

Fox,	Louise,	and	A.	M.	Oviedo.	2008.	“Are	Skills	Rewarded	in	Sub-Saharan	Africa?	Determinants	of	
    Wages	and	Productivity	in	the	Manufacturing	Sector.”	World	Bank	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	
    WPS4688.	Washington,	D.C.:	World	Bank.	

Freund,	Caroline	and	Bob	Rijkers.	2014.	“Episodes	of	Unemployment	Reduction	in	Rich,	Middle-Income,	
    and	Transition	Economies.”	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	No.	6891.	Washington,	D.C.:	World	Bank.	

Geroski,	Paul	A.	1995.	“What	do	We	Know	about	Entry?”	International	Journal	of	Industrial	
   Organization.	13:421-440.	

Gertler,	Mark	and	Simon	Gilchrist.	1994.	“Monetary	Policy,	Business	Cycles,	and	the	Behavior	of	Small	
   Manufacturing	Firms.”	The	Quarterly	Journal	of	Economics.	109(2):	309-340.	

González,	Alvaro	S.,	Leonardo	Iacovone,	and	Hari	Subhash.	2013	“Russian	Volatility:	Obstacle	to	Firm	
   Survival	and	Diversification.”	World	Bank	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	No.	S6605.	Washington,	
   D.C.:	World	Bank.	

Gordon,	Robert	J.	1984.	‘‘Unemployment	and	Potential	Output	in	the	1980’s.’’	Brookings	Papers	on	
   Economic	Activity.	537–564.	



	                                                                                                        46	
Haltiwanger,	J.,	S.	Scarpetta	and	H.	Schweiger.	2006.	“Assessing	Job	Flows	across	Countries:	The	Role	of	
    Industry,	Firm	Size,	and	Regulations.”	World	Bank	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	No.	4070.	
    Washington,	D.C.:	World	Bank.	

Hanusch,	Marek.	2012.	“Jobless	Growth?	Okun’s	Law	in	East	Asia.”	World	Bank	Policy	Research	Working	
   Paper	No.	6156.	Washington,	D.C.:	World	Bank.	

Heckman,	James	J.	and	Carmen	Pages	(editors).	2004.	Law	and	Employment:	Lessons	from	Latin	America	
   and	the	Carribean.	NBER	Conference	Series	Report.	University	of	Chicago	Press,	Chicago	and	London.	

Hendry,	David	F.,	and	Grayham	E.	Mizon.	1978.	‘‘Serial	Correlation	as	a	Convenient	Simplification,	Not	a	
   Nuisance:	A	Comment	on	a	Study	of	the	Demand	for	Money	by	the	Bank	of	England.’’	Economic	
   Journal.	88:	549–563.	

Kaufman,	Roger	T.	1988.	‘‘An	International	Comparison	of	Okun’s	Law.’’	Journal	of	Comparative	
   Economics.	12:	182–203.	

Knoester,	Anthonie.	1986.	‘‘Okun’s	Law	Revisited,”	Weltwirtschaftliches	Archiv	Review	of	World	
   Economics.	122(4):657–666.	

Knoteck,	Edward	S.,	II.	2007.	“How	Useful	is	Okun’s	Law?”	Federal	Reserve	Bank	of	Kansas	City.	

Loayza,	Norman	V.	and	Claudio	Raddatz.	2006.	"The	composition	of	growth	matters	for	poverty	
   alleviation."	World	Bank	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	WPS4077.	Washington,	D.C.:	World	Bank	

La	Porta,	R.,	F.	Lopez-De-Silanes,	A.	Shleifer	and	R.	Vishny.	1999.	“The	Quality	of	Government.”	Journal	
    of	Law,	Economics	and	Organization.	15	(1):	222–79.	

Micco,	Alejandro	and	Carmen	Pages.	2006.	“The	Economic	Effects	of	Employment	Protection:	Evidence	
   from	International	Industry-Level	Data.”	Discussion	Paper	2433.	IZA.	

Mizon,	Grayham	E.	1995.	“A	Simple	Message	for	Autocorrelation	Correctors:	Don’t."	Journal	of	
   Econometrics.	69:	267–288.	

Moosa,	Imad	A.	1997.	“A	Cross-Country	Comparison	of	Okun’s	Coefficient.”	Journal	of	Comparative	
  Economics.	24(3):	335–56.	

Okun,	Arthur	M.	(1962).	“Potential	GNP:	Its	Measurement	and	Significance,”	American	Statistical	
   Association,	Proceedings	of	the	Business	and	Economics	Statistics	Section,	pp.	98-104		

Pakes,	Ariel,	and	Richard	Ericson.	1998.	“Empirical	Implications	of	Alternative	Models	of	Firm	Dynamics.”	
   Journal	of	Economic	Theory.	79(1):1-45.	

Prachowny,	Martin	F.	J.	1993	‘‘Okun’s	Law:	Theoretical	Foundations	and	Revised	Estimates.’’	Review	of	
    Economics	and	Statistics.	75:	331–336.	

Rajan,	Raghuram	G.	and	Luigi	Zingales.	1998.	“Financial	Dependence	and	Growth.”	American	Economic	
    Review.	88(3):559-586.	

Smith,	Gary.	1975.	‘‘Okun’s	Law	Revisited.’’	The	Quarterly	Review	of	Economics	and	Business.	37–54.	
   Winter	1975.		



	                                                                                                       47	
Sutton,	John.	1997.	“Gibrat's	Legacy.”	Journal	of	Economic	Literature.	35(1):40-59.	

Weber,	Christian	E.	1995.	‘‘Cyclical	Output,	Cyclical	Unemployment,	and	Okun’s	Coefficient:	A	New	
  Approach.’’	Journal	of	Applied	Econometrics.	10:	433–445.	

World	Bank.	2013.	World	Development	Report	2013:	Jobs.	Washington	DC:	World	Bank.	




	                                                                                                    48	
