                    “MAKING ICONIC SITES SWACHH INITIATIVE?
           A CLEANLINESS PLAN FOR THE ICONIC SITE OF HARMANDIR SAHIB
                       GOLDEN TEMPLE, AMRITSAR, PUNJAB


    1. Introduction

The Government of India, through its Swachh Bharat “Clean India? Mission has proposed a
multi-stakeholder Initiative focusing on cleaning up 100 places across the country that are
“iconic? due to their heritage, religious and/or cultural significance. As a tribute to
Mahatma Gandhi’s 150th birth anniversary in 2019, the goal of the Initiative is to improve
the cleanliness conditions of these places to the extent that they can be regarded as
“Swachh Tourist Destinations?.

The initiative is being coordinated by the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in
close coordination with other key ministries as well as states, cities and sites managers. For
its first phase, ten iconic sites have been selected to be cleaned up on a learning and
demonstration basis. These are: Vaishno Devi (Jammu and Kashmir), Chhatrapati Shivaji
Terminus (Maharashtra), Taj Mahal (Uttar Pradesh), Tirupati Temple (Andhra Pradesh),
Golden Temple (Punjab), Manikarnika Ghat (Varanasi), Ajmer Sharif Dargah (Rajasthan),
Meenakshi Temple (Tamil Nadu), Kamakhya Temple (Assam), Jagannath Puri (Odisha). The
actions taken at these initially selected 10 iconic places are expected to provide practical
insights and standards to be shared with and further adapted by other iconic places and
cities across India.

This report details the planned actions discussed during the Action Planning Workshop,
held in Delhi on July 8-9, 2016, under the Initiative, for the iconic site of Harmandir Sahib,
the Golden Temple in Amritsar, Punjab.1

    2. Harmandir Sahib: Historical and religious significance




In 1577-8, the Fourth Sikh Guru, Guru Ram Das (1534-1581), excavated a “nectarous tank?
where all Sikhs of the world could worship, on the order of the Third Guru of Sikhism, Guru

1Section 2 is based on general sources and workshop presentations while those that follow are based upon
workshop discussions led by the Golden Temple representatives and Municipal Corporation officials.
Amar Das (1479-1574). The location of the tank, in today’s state of Punjab, India, became
known as the Pool of the Nectar of Immortality, or Amritsar. Shortly after, the Fifth Guru,
Guru Arjan (1563-1606), designed a temple to be built in the middle of the tank. Following
the Sikh tradition of inviting people of all religions to worship together, Guru Arjan invited
a Muslim Sufi Saint, Sai Mian Mir, to lay the first stone of the construction. Guru Arjan also
designed four entrances for the temple – at the north, east, south and west – to symbolize
the religion’s openness to people of all faiths and walks of life. Construction was completed
in 1604, following which Guru Arjan installed the Adi Granth, the holy scripture of Sikhism,
inside the temple. The temple was named the Harmandir Sahib, the “abode of God?, and
became the holiest place of worship (gurdwara) for the Sikh religion. The site is also home
to the Akal Takht, (“the throne of the timeless one?), constituted by the Sixth Sikh Guru,
Guru Hargobind, and regarded as the seat of God’s temporal authority.

In 1764 the temple was rebuilt, and in the early 19th century, the upper floors were
covered with gold, giving rise to its present day, informal name, the Golden Temple. Its
architecture is considered one of the best representation of a harmonious confluence of
Islamic and Hinduistic architectural styles in the world. It is often quoted that its
architecture has created an independent Sikh school of architecture in Indian history of art.

Today, the central temple complex sits within the nucleus of a walled, historical area of the
city covering just over 16 acres. Surrounding the nucleus is a wider zone known as
“Galiara?, covering an area of 35.48 acres. The temple offers various services to pilgrims,
including seven niwas asthans (lodging facilities), which are maintained by Sri Harimandir
Sahib authorities. As per Sikh tradition, as a gurdwara, the Golden Temple is open and free
for all visitors – those of all faiths, and those of no faith. More than 120,000 visitors and
pilgrims arrive at the site every day, totaling around 5 crore visitors per year. The majority
of visitation takes place in the winter period of October to March.
   3. Current status of Swachhta

Despite its historical and religious significance, as well as existing swachhta efforts, the
Golden Temple and its surrounding Galiara area do not present the highest level of
cleanliness expected from such sacred site. This is due to a number of key issues, including,
for instance:

      Stress on existing basic services. The limited basic services (e.g., sanitation, waste
       collection) that do currently exist in the surrounding communities and Galiara area
       are inadequate and are easily overwhelmed by both large influxes of visitors and
       long stays of large groups.
      Distance to public conveniences. The majority of the few existing public
       conveniences are located slightly too far from the main temple site, making them
       difficult to reach and less likely to be used. They are also difficult to properly
       maintain.
      Inadequate use of public spaces. Encroachment and unmanaged, congested traffic
       around the temple area restrict pedestrian flows while deteriorating the overall
       health of the surrounding environment and communities, and thus the quality of the
       pilgrims’ journey to/from the temple.
      Awareness. There is somewhat limited awareness and habits of personal and
       collective responsibility for cleanliness, such as using waste bins.
      Rule enforcement. At the ground level, certain rules and restrictions, e.g., on non-
       motorized vehicle zones, have not been properly enforced.
      Space availability. Issues of limited free land and ground space, as well as
       ownership questions, have undermined the installation of sanitation infrastructure
       and other amenities, such as parking areas to decongest the temple area while
       facilitating visitors’ flows.
      Cost-effective technology. There is a need to identify and implement the most cost-
       effective and efficient technological solutions to avoid wasting resources, such as
       water.
      Lack of adequate planning and area-based site management approach. Despite
       the existence of government schemes and programs, there is a mismatch between
       the supply of funding for cleanliness and the current demand due to lack of proper
       planning. This has led to short-term and ad-hoc provision of services with limited
       results on the ground.

Such issues have not only impacted the experience of the site for both visitors and local
residents but, if not effectively addressed, have the potential to degrade the area’s
ecosystem and the physical temple site itself in the long-term.
   4. Existing cleanliness measures

A number of schemes and efforts are already being implemented by the Shiromani
Gurudwara Prabandhak Committee (SGPC) and the Municipal Corporation in the area of
the Golden Temple and its surroundings to achieve improved levels of cleanliness. These
are summarized in the table below.

INITIATIVE NAME /                   ACTIONS                            OTHER DETAILS
ORGANIZATION
Cleaning of the Golden Temple
Shiromani Gurudwara                    Manual sweeping                   Over 2000 workers
Prabandhak Committee (SGPC)            Floor scrubbing
                                       Electric floor mopping
Cleaning of Galiara
Religious groups, e.g., Dera Sant   
                                   Manual road sweeping                   Tractor trolleys
Baba Bhuri Wale Task Force          
                                   Secondary waste collection (with       Manual brooms
                                   tractor trolleys) twice a day
Sulabh International             Maintenance of 8 public toilets on   Of the 10 toilets, 4 are
                                   Pay and Use model at periphery      operational, 5 are under
                                   of Galiara                          renovation, and 1 is
Fortal, England                  Maintenance of 2 free, public        under construction
                                   toilets at periphery of Galiara
Impact India Foundation          Support to waste collection in
                                   Galiara
General cleaning of the surrounding area
Amritsar Municipal               Road sweeping                           Dumper bin
Corporation                      Secondary waste collection              4 tractor trolleys
                                                                          Manual brooms

In addition, a number of special measures have been put in place by the Municipal
Corporation to further improve the cleanliness of the area surrounding the Golden Temple.
These include:
        Introduction of mechanical road sweeping in the Galiara perimeter (1.60 km). A
           pilot was initiated on 10th July, 2016
        Renovation of 4 public toilets
        Presence of 24/7 Litter Control Teams
        Installation of smart bins and litter control bins at 50 meter distances on the
           major road(s)
        Washing of footpaths once a week
        Creation of a ban on polythene carrier bags
        Creation of a non-vehicular/non-motorized vehicle zone from Hall Bazaar to
           Golden Temple
        Convergence with existing government schemes such as HRIDAY, AMRUT, and
           those of the Punjab Heritage and Tourism Board (PHTB).
       5. Proposed action plan

The overarching objective of this plan is to bring the cleanliness standards of the Golden
Temple and its surroundings up to a level that makes it a model Swachh Tourist
Destination. A five-pronged approach is proposed to keep the broader environment of the
temple clean, comprising of:

   i.     Cleaning of public areas within the temple and its walls. Physical interventions
          include cleaning of the Langar halls and common public spaces inside the temple, as
          well as of the market areas and the main access roads around its walls.
  ii.     Enhancing service delivery and standards in the Galiara area. Interventions
          include the addition and enhancement of public toilets, the installation of drinking
          water stations and hygienic waste collection bins, and the improvement of solid and
          liquid waste treatment facilities and services around the temple walls and in the
          Galiara area.
 iii.     Facilitating visitor access and safe flows at the temple and city gateways.
          Interventions include the establishment of a hop-on hop-off system within 500m of
          the temple area, comprising of a network of five parking areas equipped with public
          facilities for visitors, while creating safe, pedestrian walkways within the Galiara.
 iv.      Rescuing/protecting the temple’s heritage. To ensure long-term adherence to the
          desired higher cleanliness standards, a priority emphasis on continued
          improvement of the broader environment around the site is proposed through the
          regulation of façades and encroachments and the installation of new street furniture
          (e.g., lighting, benches) along the five main access roads to the temple site.
  v.      Public education and enforcement. Following kar sewa traditions, the SGPC and
          Municipal Corporation are partnering to raise awareness and incentivize visitors
          and local communities to exercise personal and collective responsibility of their
          litter and to contribute to keeping the area clean. Enforcement measures are also
          proposed to complement and sustain public cleanliness.

The proposed action plan will be implemented at three levels:

   i.     At the temple complex level (“site? level), activities are centered on cleaning
          temple and public areas of solid and liquid waste in an ecologically sound manner
          with the use of the best tools and safest products, and establishing improved
          sanitation amenities.
  ii.     At the Galiara level, activities are centered on expanding and improving the
          provision of public services, creating the conditions for less traffic
          congestion/pollution and more pedestrian-friendly access routes, rescuing the
          character of the place, and regulating the use of public spaces.
 iii.     At the broader city level, activities are centered on improving overall access to the
          Galiara and temple complex areas through the provision of additional parking areas
          and alternative (cleaner) transportation options. At the city and Galiara levels,
          activities will also involve measures to enhance and protect heritage structures and
          properties other than the Golden Temple.
The action plan will also be implemented in a phased manner in order to ensure that easy
to implement and demonstrative priority issues are addressed first and that physical works
are conducted in the most effective sequence.

The first 3 months will begin with a comprehensive review of all existing Detailed Project
Reports (DPRs) for areas under all three levels of implementation (site, Galiara, city). These
DPRs will be reviewed by the Municipal Corporation together with SPGC and specialists in
sanitation and urban service provision to assess their feasibility, appropriateness, and any
potential synergies and gaps with the activities proposed under this initiative in terms of
funding, implementation, and operation and maintenance. Subsequently, physical
interventions under Phase I will focus mainly on improving cleanliness at the site level.

In the following 6 months, the sphere of intervention will spread more widely to the Galiara
area, and as well as cleanliness measures, activities will include efforts to enhance service
delivery, access and pedestrian safety, starting in 5 of the 21 approach roads to the temple
site.

In the next 9 months, larger-scale interventions will seek to provide improved and
alternative access options from the Galiara area and beyond into the temple complex.
Measures will also be put in place to protect and enhance the cleanliness and visual aspects
of heritage properties and to improve basic infrastructure such as sewerage lines along the
initial 5 approach roads to be upgraded.

In 12 months, parking areas with public facilities and bus stands will be constructed
around the periphery of the Galiara to reduce congestion and pollution near the temple
complex. Activities from Phase II will also be expanded to cover additional approach roads.

Public education and enforcement of cleanliness efforts are cross-cutting and will be
implemented during all phases.

The specific interventions proposed under each phase, their geographical scope, the
agencies responsible for their implementation and a list of the resources required are
detailed in Table 1 below.
Table 1. Summary action plan by Municipal Corporation and SGPC
Action Planning Workshop, July 8 and 9, 2016

ACTION                                     IMPLEMENTATION        PRIMARY                  OTHER SUPPORT           RESOURCE
                                           LEVEL                 RESPONSIBLE              PERSONS/AGENCIES        REQUIREMENTS
PHASE I: WITHIN THREE MONTHS
Review existing DPRs                       Site, Galiara, City   Municipal Corporation,   Swachh Bharat Mission   Expertise
                                                                 SGPC                     and WB
Install improved basic signage             Site, Galiara         Municipal Corporation    PHTB                    Funding and
                                                                 & SGPC                                           expertise
Build public toilets                       Site                  Municipal Corporation    NGOs, Swachh Bharat     Funding (partially
                                                                 & SGPC                   Mission                 funded through
                                                                                                                  IDH)
Provide drinking water                     Site                  Municipal Corporation    Swachh Bharat Mission   Funding
                                                                 & SGPC
Manage solid and liquid waste – install    Site                  Municipal Corporation    Swachh Bharat Mission   Funding and
underground bio compactor near                                   & SGPC                                           expertise
kitchen hall
Establish litter control bins and teams    Site                  Municipal Corporation    Swachh Bharat Mission   Funding
                                                                 & SGPC
PHASE II: WITHIN SIX MONTHS
Manage solid waste, incl. smart semi-   Site, Galiara            Municipal Corporation    Swachh Bharat Mission   Funding and
underground bins and specialized trucks                          & SGPC                                           expertise
for collection
Install electronic signage              Site                     Municipal Corporation    HRIDAY, Swachh          Funding and
                                                                 & SGPC                   Bharat Mission          expertise
Create parking areas                       City                  Municipal Corporation    SMART, HRIDAY, PHTB     Funding, land
Improve sanitation along 5 initial roads   Galiara, city         Municipal Corporation    AMRUT, HRIDAY,          Funding
                                                                                          SMART
Install solar powered street lighting      Site, Galiara         Municipal Corporation    Swachh Bharat Mission   Funding
                                                                 & SGPC
Conduct greening and litter control        Galiara, city         Municipal Corporation                            Funding, CSR
                                                                 & SGPC
Build additional public toilets           Galiara          Municipal Corporation    Swachh Bharat Mission   Funding (partially
                                                                                                            funded through
                                                                                                            IDH)
Install drinking water stations           Galiara          Municipal Corporation    Swachh Bharat Mission   Funding
Galiara project and solid waste           Galiara          Municipal Corporation    NGOs, volunteers,       Funding
management primary collection                                                       Swachh Bharat Mission
Introduce biodegradable bags              Galiara          Municipal Corporation    NGOs, volunteers
                                                           & SGPC
PHASE III: WITHIN NINE MONTHS
Create hop-on hop-off service for 500m    Galiara, city    Municipal Corporation    Dept. of Transport      Funding and
radius                                                                                                      expertise
Standardize policies/guidelines for       Galiara, city    Municipal Corporation,   WB, SGPC                Funding and
facades of heritage buildings and                          PHTB, HRIDAY                                     expertise
signage
Revitalize heritage buildings and         Galiara, city    Municipal Corporation,   PWD, SGPC, WB           Funding and
markets                                                    PHTB, HRIDAY                                     expertise
Construct bio-methanation plant in the    Galiara, city    Municipal Corporation,                           Funding and
vicinity of Galiara                                        PWD                                              expertise
Augment and strengthen existing           Galiara, city    Municipal Corporation,   Swachh Bharat Mission   Funding and
sewage line (9.8 km)                                       Sewerage Board                                   expertise
Enhance water supply line                                  Municipal Corporation,   SGPC
                                                           Sewerage Board, Dept.
                                                           of Public Health
PHASE IV: WITHIN TWELVE MONTHS
Construct bus stands at entry points to   City             Municipal Corporation,   Dept. of Transport      Funding
Galiara                                                    PEPSU PRTC
Clean up railway stations                 City             Ministry of Railways     Dept. of Transport      Funding
Increase green cover, plant native        Galiara, city    Municipal Corporation,
species                                                    SGPC, stakeholders


Figure 2 - Location of existing public toilets and waste    Figure 1 - Proposed location of additional toilets and
collection points                                           waste collection points
Figure 3 – Overall vision by Municipal Corporation and SGPC
Action Planning Workshop, July 8 and 9, 2016
