World Government Summit
High Level Panel
Government of the Future: The Promise of Big Data Applications to Governments
Moderator Guide and Talking Points
Dubai, February 12th, 2017 - 3:00 – 3:55 PM
55 minutes


INTRODUCTION

Ninety Percent of all world data was only produced in the last two years. In 2020, forty-four times more
data will be produced than in 2009. And today, an average person is exposed to as much data in one day
as a person in the 15th century would see her entire life. The term “Big data? refers to the vast amount of
information now being generated and captured in a variety of formats and from a number of different
sources, and which require innovative forms of processing for better analysis and decision making.

Harnessing the power of big data is the next frontier for governments. Big data analytics uses data
science and machine learning for better understanding, tracking and prediction of trends to improve
government delivery of public services in areas like education, procurement, public safety, transportation,
taxation and civic engagement, without compromising citizen rights and privacy. In this high level panel,
ministers and leading business executives will share their vision for how predictive analytics will inform
and transform government decision-making, deliver new services and help solve complex problems
that were once impossible.

The annual World Government Summit brings together some 3,000 world leaders, senior government
officials and experts to Dubai, United Arab Emirates (UAE), around the theme of “Government of the
Future?. It is the highest profile annual global event organized in Dubai. The World Bank is supporting the
Government of the UAE in gathering the global knowledge for this year’s World Government Summit.


PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES

The objective of this high-level panel will be to discuss the state of big data in government and the
opportunities to utilize it to improve the delivery and design of public services. Key themes will include:

    ?   Exploring the role of big data and big data methodologies such as advanced analytics in
        improving the delivery and development of public services (example sectors to explore:
        transportation, financial regulation, public security, environmental services)
    ?   Illustrating how big data, data science and predictive analytics can drive development in a range
        of issues and sectors.
    ?   Showcasing the need to motivate for institutional arrangements (public-private partnerships,
        citizen engagement) to ensure big data is accessible and responsibly used for development
        purposes.
    ?   Promoting a responsible approach towards the use of big data and related technologies in a way
        that they respect privacy rights.

FORMAT/LOGISTICS



                                                                                                          1
The event will be open to the press.

        The day of the event on February 12th, Trevor Monroe, Lead of the Big Data Program at the
         World Bank (+1-202-458-7063, tmonroe@worldbankgroup.org), and Neisan Massarrat, Director
         at SecondMuse (+1-347-981-4977, Neisan.massarrat@secondmuse.com) will meet you at the
         Madinat Jumeirah Resort lobby at 12:00 PM.

        We are asking all panelists to meet at the lobby of the Madinat Jumeirah Resort at 1:00 PM
         for a meet and greet.

        At 2:20 PM we will walk towards the conference hall (Meeting Room TBD)

        A technician will arrive at 2:30 PM to fit your lapel microphone.

        At 2:40 PM the audience will walk in.

        At 2:50pm a vídeo will be showcased in the projection screen up until the start of the high level
         panel at 3:00pm.

        3:00pm, vídeo stops and event starts. Rory steps on stage with panelists.

Audience
    ?    General World Government Summit Audience: Government Officials, Private Sector
         Representatives, CSO Representatives, UN and World Bank Group Staff

Panelists
    1.   Geanina Dinarte, Vice Minister of the Economy, Costa Rica
    2.   Chan Cheow Hoe, Government CIO, Singapore
    3.   Brandon Barnett, Director of Corporate Strategy, Intel Corporation
    4.   Robbie Schingler, Co-Founder and Chief Strategy Officer of Planet Labs
    5.   Deborah Wetzel, Senior Director, Governance, World Bank
Moderator
    1. Rory Cellan-Jones, BBC Journalist

RUN OF SHOW

12:00 pm        Rory Cellan-Jones (BBC), Trevor Monroe (World Bank), Edouard Al-dahdah (World
                Bank) and Neisan Massarrat (SecondMuse) meet to discuss the upcoming panel
                session.
1:00 pm         Meet and greet for speakers and moderator, meet at lobby of Madinat Jumeirah resort
                and walk together to meeting room.
2:20 pm         Rory Cellan-Jones and panelists walk towards conference hall (Room TBD)
2:30 pm         Microphones set up for Rory Cellan-Jones and panelists
2:50 pm         Video presentation starts (10 minutes)
3:00 pm         Rory Cellan-Jones walks on stage with panelists – Rory Cellan-Jones welcomes
                audience and introduces the session (introduction talking points below)
3:06 pm         Introduction of panelists
3:08 pm         Round 1 of questions
3:18 pm         Round 2 of questions




                                                                                                             2
3:28 pm        Round 3 of questions

3:40 pm        Moderator opening the stage for Q&A
3:50 pm        Closing remarks by moderator
3:55 pm        Moderator thanks the audience and directs them to next sessions



TALKING POINTS

1) Welcome Remarks (5 min length) – 3:00 PM
Good day, ladies and gentlemen,

I welcome you to this Panel focused on a frontier area for government - Big Data.

My name is Rory Cellan Jones from the BBC, but you don’t need to be a journalist to observe the
explosive growth of digital information and data around us. It’s not a secret that today we live in a very
different world. Digital information provides unique opportunities for government officials to leverage big
data analytics and real time data to do their job in a more effective way.

Big data has the potential to revolutionize how governments do their job. At the same time governments
are faced with new challenges that put a lot of pressure on us to find new ways of working with the private
sector, serve the citizens, protect countries and address globally pressing issues such as climate change
or food security.

Data combined with analytics can offer significant insights into every aspect of policy formulation and the
design, implementation and monitoring of government interventions. Data analytics can therefore, be a
game changer. Traditional and new data sources such as satellite imagery, mobile phone data,
transaction data and private sector data can be effectively leveraged to gather critical insights and better
understand and forecast on specific issues. And big data allows us to identify insights at the granular and
local level.

Today, we have a unique opportunity to hear from experts who will be sharing their thoughts with us and
specific examples of how big data is already changing the ways governments operate.

I hope that the presenters will share with us their thoughts on how they assess the value of big data in
government and share with us their journeys of leveraging big data in government. I encourage the
participants to ask questions so that all of us leave from here with a better understanding of how data can
help governments do their job in a more effective, data-driven way, and how big data can improve the
delivery of public services.

It is my pleasure to introduce this distinguished panel of [current and former ministers and business
executives].

In the panel we have [state the name and title of each panelist]:
     1. Geannina Dinarte, Vice Minister of Economy, Industry and Commerce of Costa Rica
     2. Chan Cheow Hoe, Government CIO, Government Technology Agency of Singapore
     3. Brandon Barnett, Director of Corporate Strategy, Intel Corporation



                                                                                                              3
    4. Robbie Schingler, Co-Founder and Chief Strategy Officer, Planet Labs
    5. Deborah Wetzel, Senior Director, Governance, World Bank

We will start with some insights from the panelists and then we will open the discussion to the audience
and online questions. Each panelist will have less than 3 minutes per response.

2) Panelist insights
10 min per round of questions x3 = 30 - Pick 3 panelists for Rounds 2 and 3

General Questions
    1. Each of you has been engaged in programs that use big data in different ways towards the
       delivery of public services, reflecting at a macro level, where is innovation happening right now?
    2. What are the biggest opportunities for governments to utilize big data and advanced analytics to
       improve the delivery of public services? Can you give us an example?
    3. What is the role of the private sector in advancing the use of big data to address specific issues
       such as financial regulation, taxation or even transportation?
    4. What are some of the key challenges that you see for governments willing to adopt big data
       towards improved delivery of services.
    5. How can we ensure that big data is used responsibly in a way that it respects privacy rights and
       civil liberties?
    6. There are big differences between developed and developing countries in terms of availability of
       data. Developed countries seem to be in a situation where there is a deluge of data, and a
       number of developing countries are in a data drought, where not enough data is available.
       What do you see as the role of Big Data in terms of bridging the situation of not enough data in
       emerging economies and a data deluge in developed ones?
    7. How should we think about partnerships and their role towards advancing the use of big data and
       advanced analytics?
    8. What is one thought that we should take out of this panel session/conference?


Suggested questions for panelists (each response 3 minutes maximum)

Geannina Dinarte, Vice Minister of Economy, Industry and Commerce of Costa Rica
   1. Can you tell us how the Government of Costa Rica has been utilizing big data to address
      improvements on specific sectors?
   2. What was the driving force for the Costa Rican Government to start thinking more concretely
      about big data and the insights that could be derived from it?

Chan Cheow Hoe, Government CIO of Singapore
   1. Could you tell us about specific cases where big data has been utilized in Singapore?
   2. Are there specific areas that you think are prime to be addressed through big data and data
      analytics?

Brandon Barnett, Director of Corporate Strategy, Intel Corporation
   1. Can you tell us your perspective on where the space of big data currently is and what are some of
      the biggest opportunities ahead?
   2. Do you have any thoughts on how we ensure the responsible use of big data?




                                                                                                           4
    3. How do you think advanced analytics and new sources of big data will play a role in how
       governments operate in the near future?
    4. Are there specific sources of data that are being underutilized or misunderstood?

Robbie Schingler, Co-Founder of Planet Labs
   1. What are some of the latest uses of remote sensing and satellite data towards delivering public
       services?
   2. What do you think about the possibilities of public-private partnerships as vehicles to address
       complex issues that governments and societies face?
   3. What resources or capabilities are generally most needed to make the best use of the data that a
       company like yours produce?
   4. Where do you think the space of big data will be in 3 years?

Debborah Wetzel, Senior Director, Governance, World Bank
   1. What are the implications of big data on topics such as international financial flows, taxation and
      countering fraud?
   2. What are the capabilities that government need to start thinking about to more effectively harness
      the power of big data, analytics and data science?

3) Questions and Answers - 15 minutes

Questions taken from the audience present as well as online through the World Government Summit
platform. Questions accepted for the panelists uniquely.


4) Transition to Closing Remarks - 5 minutes of Closing Remarks

Rory Cellan-Jones to summarize the discussion, thank the panelists and audience, and invite the
audience towards the next session.

BIOGRAPHIES OF PARTICIPANTS

                                               Geannina Dinarte
                                               Vice Minister of Economy, Industry and Commerce of Costa
                                               Rica

                                               At the Costa Rican Ministry of Economy, Industry and
                                               Commerce Ms. Dinarte is responsible for the areas of Small
                                               and Medium Enterprise Entrepreneurship, Consumers and
                                               Institutional Strategic Focus. She is also responsible for the
                                               agenda pertaining to simplification of procedures,
                                               interoperability and open data.

                                               She graduated in Political Science with specialization in
                                               Government and Public Policy at the University of Costa Rica.
                                               She has a Masters in Project Management of Development
                                               Projects from the Central American Institute of Public
                                               Administration (ICAP). Her background is as researcher on
                                               projects relating to economic integration in Central America,
                                               comparative studies on decision making processes, and citizen
                                               security.



                                                                                                                5
Chan Cheow Hoe
Government CIO, Government Technology Agency of
Singapore

As the Government’s CIO, Cheow Hoe oversees Singapore
Government’s central information technology systems and
infrastructure, and drive the development and delivery of
innovative public services for citizens and businesses. Cheow
Hoe has more than two decades of extensive experience in
senior management positions overseeing organisation wide IT
development and systems. He also has a strong track record of
leading IT professionals in global companies and large
corporations, to deliver efficient and effective IT systems and
solutions. His expertise includes leading organisations through
transformational change and connecting IT to the needs of the
organisation.

Before joining IDA, Cheow Hoe served as Group Chief of
Information Technology and Systems at CT Corporation, one
of the largest conglomerates in Indonesia with interest in
financial services, retail, media, travel and entertainment. He
drove the development of corporate IT strategies to optimise
operations within the group of twenty-three companies as well
as orchestrated projects like the consolidation of data center
infrastructure across the multiple companies to achieve
significant cost savings and increased business efficiency.

Brandon Barnett
Director of Corporate Strategy, Intel Corporation


Brandon Barnett is a pioneer in strategy development
through a process involving big data and systems
transformation. His goal is to reveal the hidden forces
that reshape industries and discover actionable levers
that steer transformation for the good of the organization
and society. Currently, Brandon is Director of Corporate
Strategy at Intel Corporation where he drives strategy
across the company in areas ranging from the Internet of
Things to Artificial Intelligence. He leads diverse teams to
adopt big data, ethnography, and complex adaptive
systems techniques to find unseen solutions in uncertain
and rapidly changing ecosystems.

Over his 20 year career, Brandon has worked at the
forefront of technology, driving the advancement of
Moore’s Law in Intel’s most advance manufacturing fabs.
He has led new corporate initiatives as an intrapreneur
and launched startups such as NorthShore Biosciences,
a chip-based sequencing company, as an
entrepreneur. Brandon co-founded the open innovation
Vibrant Data Project (WeTheData.org) to identify the
system levers to create a data economy that benefits
people and communities. His team sponsored the


                                                              6
National Day of Civic Hacking (hackforchange.org), the
US’s largest hackathon combining private and public data
for social good. Brandon works with a variety of US
government agencies to adapt the systems
transformation strategy framework to the country’s most
complex challenges.

Brandon holds Ph.D. and MS degrees in Applied Physics
from the University of Michigan, an MBA from the Oregon
Executive MBA program, and a Sc.B. in Electrical
Engineering from Brown University. His work has been
reported on in the Washington Post, Fast Company, and
the Venture Capital Journal and can be found at
www.systemstransformation.com. Brandon lives in
Oregon with his wife and their triplet boys. He is eager to
collaborate to develop new strategy methods that rise to
the complex challenges we face in the 21st century.


Robbie Schingler
Co-Founder and Chief Strategy Officer, Planer Labs

Robbie Schingler is the Co-Founder and Chief Strategy Officer
of Planet. Prior to Planet, Robbie spent 9 years at NASA,
where he helped build the Small Spacecraft Office at NASA
Ames and was Capture Manager for the Transiting Exoplanet
Survey Satellite (TESS). Robbie later served as NASA’s Open
Government Representative to the White House; and served as
Chief of Staff for the Office of the Chief Technologist at
NASA. He received a MBA from Georgetown University, a
MS in Space Studies from the International Space University,
and a BS in Engineering Physics from Santa Clara
University. Robbie was a 2005 Presidential Management
Fellow.

Deborah Wetzel
Senior Director, Governance Global Practice, World Bank

Deborah Wetzel is the Senior Director for the
Governance Global Practice. Most recently, Ms. Wetzel
was the Director of Strategy and Operations for the
Middle East and North Africa Region of the World Bank
from August 2015 to March 2016. She also served as
World Bank Country Director for Brazil from April 2012 to
July 2015. Prior to her assignment in Brazil, Ms.
Wetzel worked as the World Bank Group’s Chief of Staff
in Washington from 2012 to 2014. She has also served
as Director for Governance and Public Sector in the
Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Network,
directing the Bank's work on taxation, public
expenditures, decentralization, public sector reform and
strengthening governance and anti-corruption. From
2006 to 2009, she led the World Bank’s Economic and
Public Sector Programs in Brazil. During that period she
developed numerous programs with state and federal
governments to help improve the effectiveness of public


                                                           7
expenditures and achieve better results.

Ms. Wetzel began her career at the World Bank in 1986
as a Consultant, joining the Young Professionals
Program in 1993. She also worked at the Centre for the
Study of African Economies in Oxford, England in the
early 1990s. During her career, she has worked in
Central and Eastern Europe, Ghana, Hungary, Ukraine,
Vietnam, Russia, the former Soviet Republics, West
Africa and Zambia. Ms. Wetzel has a D.Phil in Economics
from the University of Oxford and a Masters in
International Studies from Johns Hopkins University,
School of Advanced International Studies. Her BA is from
Smith College. She is the author of publications on fiscal
decentralization, public finance, governance, and sub-
national affairs.




                                                        8
