                                   Table of Contents

   1. Introduction……………………………………………………………………2
   2. PDPs and the Development Challenges……………………………………….2
      2.1 The traditional road to development: structural transformation…………...2
      2.2 The challenges to structural transformation in the 21st century…………...4
      2.3 The role of other sectors…………………………………………………...5
      2.4 A new road to development……………………………………………….7
      2.5 Productive Development Policies…………………………………………7
   3. Public-Private Dialogue Supporting PDPs…………………………………….9
      3.1 The rationale for public-private dialogue………………………………….9
      3.2 PPD prerequisites: public-public and private-private coordination……...10
      3.3 Public-private dialogue in lower income countries and fragile states……11
      3.4 Multi-pronged PPD interventions by the World Bank Group……………12
   4. Executive Working Groups (Mesas Ejecutivas)…………………………......14
      4.1 ME participants and institutional architecture…………………………...15
      4.2 ME meetings typology…………………………………………………...16
      4.3 How can MEs help with coordination failures?.........................................17
      4.4 What does the government provide in a ME?............................................17
      4.5 Steps to operate MEs……………………………………………………..18
   5. Experience with MEs in Peru………………………………………………...22
      5.1 Forestry…………………………………………………………………...22
      5.2 Aquaculture………………………………………………………………26
      5.3 Logistics………………………………………………………………….28
   6. Lessons Learned……………………………………………………………...30
   7. MEs Operational Checklist…………………………………………………..31
   8. Conclusion……………………………………………………………………33
   9. References……………………………………………………………………33

This paper was written by Piero Ghezzi, former Minister of Production of Peru, and
Steve Utterwulghe, Global Lead for Public-Private Dialogue, and Senior Private
Sector Specialist, in the Trade and Competitiveness (T&C) Global Practice of the
World Bank Group.

The publication benefited from comments provided by Professor Charles F. Sabel
(Columbia University), Ernesto Stein (Principal Economist, Inter-American
Development Bank), Syed A. Mahmood (Lead Private Sector Specialist, T&C),
Emiliano Duch (Lead Private Sector Specialist, T&C), and Jade Salhab (Senior
Private Sector Specialist, T&C), who also kindly shared the case-study on clusters
from Tunisia.

The authors would like to thank Ernesto Lopez Cordova (Practice Manager,
Competitive Sector, T&C) for his guidance and support.
Ideas only become publications thanks to superb administrative and editing support.
Our gratitude goes to Imtiaz Ahmad Sheikh (T&C) and Anna Brown for their
precious contribution.


        Public-Private Dialogue for Modern Industrial Policies:
              Towards a Solutions-Oriented Framework



1 Introduction

Modern industrial policies (IPs) or productive development policies (PDPs) are about
identifying and removing constraints to the growth of productive sectors, which
implies providing public goods and fixing market failures related to those sectors. In
order to do this, policymakers need to access the knowledge held by private producers
so they can learn about market failures, binding constraints, and formulate the right
policies to address them. Likewise, private sector stakeholders may need governments
to help solve systemic issues they face.

This publication examines the role public-private dialogue (PPD) mechanisms play in
improving PDPs. It begins by briefly addressing the challenges of structural
transformation, then explaining the rationale for PPD, and finally illustrating the
policy tool that is the Mesas Ejecutivas (MEs), or Executive Working Groups, as
implemented in Peru.

Created in Peru in 2015, MEs are a policy tool designed to implement PDPs utilizing
public-private working groups focused on a specific sector or factor of production.
The MEs identify the key bottlenecks that are holding back a particular sector or
factor. They are aimed at simplifying procedures, adapting and updating laws and
regulations, opening new markets, creating or improving needed government
agencies, providing adequate infrastructure, ensuring sufficient incentives for
innovation, and mediating between parties. The authors acknowledge that various
PPD tools, methodologies, and institutional architectures exist. The aim of this
publication is to enrich the debate and the literature on industrial policies and the
relevant institutional collaborative mechanisms that can help improve their design and
implementation.

The paper will conclude with an operational checklist summarizing key questions,
with general and hands-on tips, intended for practitioners interested in designing and
implementing public-private instruments such as the MEs.


2 PDPs and the Development Challenges

 2.1 The traditional road to development: structural transformation
The conventional development process consisted in structural transformation:
mobilizing workers from (low productivity) traditional agriculture or the informal
sector into (high productivity) modern manufacturing. Because of this, economic
development has historically been synonymous with industrialization; most countries
that developed also industrialized. This naturally resulted in substantial increases in
economy-wide productivity.

Structural transformation has historically been attractive for developing countries for
at least two broad reasons. First, countries could initiate it without necessarily having
reached high levels in the “fundamental? variables that are the most important for
growth and development in the long term: strong institutions, high level human
capital, great capacity to innovate and learn, etc. These are extremely important
variables but they accumulate very slowly. Nevertheless, countries did not need, for
example, German institutions to trigger structural transformation.

Second, developing countries have two characteristics that differentiate them from
developed countries: (i) the large differences in productivity between the most and the
least productive sectors (or even between companies/plants of the same sector); (ii)
the large percentage of employment in low productivity sectors/activities. As a result,
there is, in theory, significant room to increase economy-wide productivity by
mobilizing workers from low to high productivity sectors.

In addition to being a high productivity (and high productivity growth) sector,
manufacturing has historically had four other distinct advantages: (i) unconditional
convergence (Rodrik (2013) has shown that the manufacturing industry tends to close
the gap with respect to the world’s technology frontier at a rate of approximately 3
percent annually, regardless of policies, institutions or geography); (ii) intensive
unskilled labor, abundant in developing countries; (iii) intrinsically rich in the
generation of “capabilities? that allowed the production of increasingly more
sophisticated products, and in a broader range of activities. In contrast, natural
resource activities like traditional agriculture involved repetitive tasks that did not
generate capabilities (and required very sector-specific technical expertise not
applicable anywhere else); (iv) a tradable activity, meaning it could grow without
being limited by the size of the domestic market.

As countries succeeded and moved along the path of structural transformation, and to
the extent that industrial policy was adequate, they could initiate virtuous circles
towards development. Structural transformation-led growth could generate the
resources and capacities that allowed the strengthening of the “fundamental?
variables, determinants of long-term growth.1 The strengthening of these variables, in
turn, implied that growth could be sustained beyond structural transformation.

Indeed, countries that were able to break the middle-income trap started to rely less on
structural transformation and more on within-sector increases in productivity. These
“within-sector? increases in productivity depended on the accumulation of physical


1 For example, structural transformation into sectors where significant learning is possible and
where knowledge generated is applicable to other sectors will increase the economy’s overall
capacity to innovate and to enhance human capital, two of the long-term fundamental
determinants of growth.
and human capital, the strength of institutions and, above all, on the ability to
innovate and to learn to do things better.




 2.2 The challenges to structural transformation in the 21st century

Very few countries have been able to break the middle-income trap, and thus the
process of structural transformation has become more difficult. Diao et al. (2017)
show that, in recent years, structural change has made no contribution to growth in
Latin America. Growth in the region has been mostly the result of within-sector gains
in productivity; the percentage of labor in high productivity sectors has not increased.

This result is similar to a previous study prepared in 2014 by the McKinsey Global
Institute for the Mexican economy. They had two important findings: First, the low
growth in average labor productivity in Mexico (0.8 percent) concealed a huge
productive heterogeneity. It had, at one end, a modern world-class sector with an
annual increase in labor productivity (in companies with more than 500 workers) of
5.8 percent between 1999 and 2009. On the other hand, it had a traditional sector,
with micro-enterprises of 10 workers or less (many of them informal), that had seen
productivity reductions of 6.5 percent per year in the same period. In the middle
ground, there was a group of medium-sized companies with modest annual
productivity gains (1.0 percent). Second, there was growth-reducing structural
change: the percentage of workers employed in microenterprises increased from an
already high 39 percent, to 42 percent. The modern sector, that had experienced
significant productivity gains, had seen its labor share stagnate. In other words, there
had been a reallocation of employment towards low-productivity companies.

This growth-reducing structural change could seem, at first, puzzling. In theory,
workers should have been mobilizing from less productive to the more productive
activities until the marginal revenue product of workers was equalized (Hsieh and
Klenow, 2009). But this did not happen. There are obviously some country-specific
factors that may be relevant, for example, in Mexico the authors of the McKinsey
report include labor rigidities, problems with very restrictive zoning, high energy
costs, and lack of financing. However, the fact that the phenomenon is generalized in
developing countries suggests that there are some cross-cutting factors that also
explain it.

In Africa, the Diao et al study argues that structural change had contributed positively
to growth, but in an unsustainable way. In particular, there has been structural
transformation but a reduction of labor productivity in the modern sector. The authors
contend that this is consistent with a structural shift led by increased demand for
modern commodities (as a result of increases in income from international transfers or
improvements in productivity in traditional agriculture). This generated more demand
for modern products and thus the increase in price. In the absence of autonomous
improvements in the productivity of the modern sector, an increase in employment
resulted in a fall in the productivity of the sector.
Why has manufacturing-based structural change become more challenging? There are
some global changes that make manufacturing less unique as vehicle for
development. First, most of the variables mentioned as potential explanations for the
growth reducing structural change in the McKinsey report are cross-
cutting/horizontal. It is very likely that a significant number of sector-specific/vertical
problems need to be addressed as well.

Second, many developing countries are confronting what Rodrik (2016) has called
“premature deindustrialization?, a process in which the participation of manufacturing
(both in employment and production) begins to decline at relatively low levels of
income. This can be explained by the reduction of international prices of
manufactures as a result of the combination of (labor-saving) technological changes in
advanced countries and globalization. If such price reductions are not offset by
domestic gains in manufacturing productivity, there will be a contraction in both
employment and manufacturing output.

Third, in the past, industrializing countries had relatively low wages compared to
industrialized countries at the time. However, this is not necessarily the case in
countries not yet industrialized. China’s significant presence in the manufacturing
world has left less room for other countries, particularly those at an early stage of
industrialization.

Fourth, vertical disintegration and global value chains in the manufacturing sector2
have led to different phases of the production process occurring in different
companies. Mass producers reduce the risk of having component suppliers that may
become obsolete due to rapid technological change; they focus on what they do best.
In turn, component suppliers are integrated into multiple global value chains.
Incipient industrializers are likely to specialize in the phase of the manufacturing
chain that requires repetitive tasks (assembly of components made elsewhere) and is
more intensive in unskilled labor, in contrast to R&D, design or supply chain
management. This implies more limited opportunities to acquire “capabilities?, one of
the historical advantages of manufacturing.

Fifth, “just-in-time? production and its short learning cycles means that many
manufacturing companies now have a limited number of inventories. This way, they
make problems in the production process costly (and obvious). This induces
companies to make quick adjustments, correcting failures and generalizing successes.
By itself, this characteristic is not a problem for manufacturing, but as we will see
later it is now shared with other sectors.

The fact that development through industrialization has become more challenging
probably implies that countries need to switch from an almost single-minded focus on
manufacturing to relying on several sectors to increase productivity. Natural resource
based sectors and some modern service sectors could, at least partially, compensate
for the potentially reduced role of manufacturing.




2   These two characteristics are highlighted by Sabel, 2016
 2.3 The role of other sectors

At the same time, we are seeing changes in traditional manufacturing, some natural
resources or modern service sectors are experiencing the short-learning cycles (that
allow to correct failures and generalize successes) and the building of capacities that
used to be unique to manufacturing.

Modern agriculture is perhaps the most emblematic. Modern agricultural orchards are
now like factories, however, instead of producing cars, they produce grapes, oranges,
avocadoes, blueberries etc. Through precision agriculture one can control the optimal
amount of water, fertilizers, and pesticides that go to each tree, and in so doing limit,
as far as possible, the impact of the vagaries of nature.

Likewise, modern orchards have substantially increased the density of planting. For
example, while 100 avocado trees were traditionally planted per hectare, more than
1000 can now be planted. This means that, compared to traditional methods, trees
must be watered much more often, with all the proper nutrients, and must be pruned
more frequently and accurately. Planting density and pushing genetic boundaries also
result in an increased risk of diseases and pests, requiring continued monitoring and
the quick adoption of countermeasures.

Modern agriculture also makes use of biotechnological developments to adapt seeds
to local conditions. In adapting to local conditions, domestic seed producers have the
natural advantage. They can make use of their geographic proximity to buyers to
make quick fixes. Also, modern agriculture allows the development of agricultural
equipment adapted to local needs (and the development of the metalworking sector in
general).

Similar changes are taking place in aquaculture, livestock and even modern forestry.
They are all experiencing: (i) increased use of technology, limiting climate impact and
increasing productivity; (ii) short learning cycles that allow for continuous
improvement; (iii) the generation of a network of local suppliers that generate local
capacities; (iv) abundant employment for unskilled labor (even more than modern
manufacturing); and (v) the possibility of exporting which implies its growth is not
limited by the size of the local market (and therefore growth does not significantly
deteriorate the terms of trade).

Mining is undergoing similar developments, with the possible exception of (iv), since
it is not intensive in unskilled labor. In particular, as they increasingly focus on their
core business, mining companies incentivize the generation of autonomous world-
class service providers and the development of local producers of manufacturing
equipment.

Modern services are also experiencing important changes. There is a very significant
increase in knowledge-intensive business services (KIBS). They do not massively
absorb unskilled labor, but they have three advantages: (i) they are exportable, (ii)
they can experience important gains in productivity, and (iii) they have an economy-
wide impact on productivity.
This all leads us to a key insight by Sabel (2012): what really matters for development
is not fundamentally the product per se, but the production process. An avocado
produced by traditional agriculture may not be dramatically different from one
produced by modern agriculture, but the productivity of the resources utilized to
produce it is. As Sabel says, the obstacle to development is not the products
themselves, but the adherence to traditional modes of production. Those traditional
methods are not only low productivity but imply repetitive tasks that do not allow the
acquisition of many “capacities? and whose mastering cannot be put to use in other
sectors or activities.


 2.4 A new road to development
The challenges and opportunities highlighted earlier suggest that the path to economic
development will be different (and more complicated) from what has already been
achieved by countries. If countries are to keep their chances to achieve economic
development relatively intact, they will need to complement manufacturing-based
structural transformation as the main path to development with a combination of three
possibilities:

   a) Find other sectors that have the historical characteristics of manufacturing
      (high and convergent productivity, employment generation for unskilled labor
      and capacity building)

These sectors are likely to be natural resources-based activities and modern services.
It is not that manufacturing will not be a major engine of growth in the future, but
insofar as it has lost part of its traditional uniqueness, it must not (and probably
cannot) be regarded as the only (or even the most important) engine. The
development process will require multiple engines/sectors, including manufacturing,
but also natural resources and modern services.

   b) Achieve significant gains in productivity within sectors

This will need a significant increase in resources allocated to innovation and
technological transfer, and to increase the capabilities to learn (learning to learn). It
will also require that the channels through which innovation maps into productivity
are strengthened.

   c) Increase the pay-off in terms of (earlier and stronger) growth of the
      investment in fundamentals

Fundamentals accumulate very slowly and only impact on growth over time. But
there may be a way to accelerate that impact, for example with human capital. It is
obvious that general-purpose education is an important contributor to this. However,
it is also evident that on-the-job learning is at least as (and perhaps a more) important
contributor to human capital, and with potentially greater impact on growth.
Government policies that partially fund on-the-job training could be one way of
increasing the growth pay-off (in terms of magnitude and speed) of investing in
human capital.
 2.5 Productive Development Policies

New Industrial Policy or Productive Development Policies (PDPs) are about
identifying and removing constraints to the productivity and growth of sectors with
latent or actual comparative advantages. Hence, they should help enhance the chances
of the three possibilities mentioned above, particularly (a) and (b).

Identifying those sectors with latent comparative advantage is exactly what the
process of “self-discovery?, as highlighted by Hausmann and Rodrik (2003), is about,
i.e., to determine what one is good at producing. They say that traditional economic
development policies limit the growth problem to “having good institutions and using
imported technology?, and indicate that this conventional theory is incomplete:

1. It is evident that, within relatively broad categories, much of what is exported is to
some extent arbitrary; it occurs by “happenstance? - who meets whom. The typical
example used by Hausmann and Rodrik is that Pakistan exports hats (knitted or from
textile material) but not bed sheets or bedlinen. Bangladesh, with similar
endowments, exports bed sheets but not hats.

2. The cost of adapting imported technology to local conditions is not lower than (and
in some cases requires almost as much effort as) inventing new technology. Pioneers,
i.e., the people who experiment and discover what the country can do productively,
have a clear role.

3. However, the pioneer does not usually manage to appropriate all the benefits of his
pioneering activity. Once the economic viability of their innovation has been
demonstrated, imitators follow. As a result, compared to a social planner that has the
same information, countries in the aggregate innovate very little and discover fewer
products that have real potential.

The authors conclude that in order to solve the “appropriability? problems associated
with imitators, steps must be taken to compensate the pioneers for these risks.

Sabel (2012) points out that Hausmann and Rodrik were correct in arguing that “self-
discovery? is central to limiting economic development and difficult to overcome, but
that their proposed solution is not optimal, since the difficulty of overcoming the
problems of self-discovery has much less to do with problems of “appropriability?
and much more to do with problems of coordination between a series of public and
private actors. Accomplishing that process of “self-discovery? requires cooperation
among diverse private and public agents to solve complex coordination problems.
Solving those helps mitigate to a very large extent the problems of “appropiability?
envisioned by Hausmann and Rodrik.

In cooperating, public and private agents will need to share information. They will
also learn new information, previously unknown to both of them. This will help to
identify the public goods that the government needs to provide and the market failures
it needs to fix, so that sectors achieve their potential.

Some of those public goods or market failures are horizontal and need to be
implemented at a national level. However, a large percentage are sector-specific and
need to be identified (and implemented) at that level. When it comes to resolving
barriers and providing public goods that the private sector requires, particularly in
incipient industries, it must be done at the sector level. Therefore, PDPs must be not
only horizontal but also vertical.

The next chapter goes into detail into the coordination failures and the need for
public-private dialogue to solve them.




3 Public-private dialogue supporting PDPs

 3.1    The rationale for public-private dialogue

Recent literature concerning Modern Industrial Policies or Productive Development
Policies, and interventions by development institutions such as the World Bank have
stressed the significance of coordination and structured public-private dialogue
mechanisms relating to economic policy as a way to develop and implement IPs.

As discussed above, Rodrik (2004) notes that “the right way of thinking of industrial
policy is as a discovery process—one where firms and the government learn about
underlying costs and opportunities and engage in strategic coordination designed to
elicit information about objectives, distribute responsibilities for solutions, and
evaluate outcomes as they appear?. Devlin (2014) points out that “such alliances
supporting problem-solving dialogue would constitute a more effective way in which
to gather knowledge and understanding among market players to develop IPs than if
governments, alone, were to select the policies and related initiatives?.

Problems associated with productive development are formidable. They have been
heightened by the combination of increased uncertainty and complexity on the
production side and the bigger needs to fulfill environmental, labor, phytosanitary
standards, etc. The solutions to those problems require significant coordination across
numerous actors, but this seldom happens because the public and private sector
habitually work in silos.

There are indeed serious public-private coordination problems. The communication
between public and private sectors can be complicated (capture, mistrust,
informational asymmetries, outright corruption, etc.). But in identifying and carrying
out productive development policies, governments require information that private
stakeholders hold about markets, opportunities, binding constraints, etc. Without such
information, it would be impossible to understand the sector/factor, or to formulate
the right policies to address the market failures. As Rodriguez-Clare (2004) puts it:
“Even the best-intentioned government cannot succeed without a collaborative and
motivated private sector.?

Likewise, private participants know the systemic issues they face but they often
require the public sector to help solve them. The public sector has information and a
broader purview that complements the private one. According to Devlin (2016),
“governments can also have advantages in terms of assessing aggregate phenomena
and proposing strategic directions and objectives, facilitating coordination of
investments, and providing public goods to help firms overcome constraints?. In some
cases, the information is unknown to both of them and will only be learned through
continuous interaction and attempts at implementing solutions.

This iterative adaptation method emanating from the “viable process and institutional
framework of voluntary collaboration between government and business?, as Rodrik
(2004) argues, is the essence of modern IPs, rather than the policy outcome as such.


 3.2 PPD prerequisites: public-public and private-private coordination

PPD presumes that you have at least two main actors who have decided to engage in
fruitful collaboration in order to identify and solve specific problems. Indeed, “it takes
two to tango? (Stein et al., 2016).

Unfortunately, a successful PPD recipe requires more than the usual ingredients,
comprising the government, the private sector, a champion or two, and some
resources. Intangible, or conditioning factors, as Devlin (2017) calls them, such as
leadership, commitment, capacity of the public and private sector, coordination, and
political will, are as, if not more, important.

Cornick (2013) presents a very useful distinction when it comes to public
interventions. While the subject of this paper is focusing on the merits of vertical
interventions (sectoral approach) versus horizontal ones (general investment climate
or competitiveness of a country), Cornick tacitly adds the capacity dimension of the
public sector by differentiating broad and narrow interventions required by the
government. The latter distinction refers to inputs: “Whether achieving the desired
policy impact will require mobilizing a large swath of the public sector, or whether
the policy goals can be achieved through the focused action of one or more public-
sector organizations?. Public-public, or inter-institutional coordination, is not the
public sector’s main strength, so the narrower the intervention, the greater the chance
of achieving positive outcomes.

However, policies sometimes require broad, vertical, and horizontal interventions that
demand a high-degree of public sector coordination. The institutional architecture of
the PPD mechanism will have to be designed in a way that the political leadership, at
the right level of the administration, can ensure the effective and efficient delivery of
results.

When it comes to the private sector, its lack of homogeneity, and subsequently
coordination, can be a notable hindrance to PPD. Small and medium-size enterprises
have different challenges and interests to larger corporations, state-owned enterprises
may have a tendency to control the dialogue, and business associations, when they
exist, may have weak capacity or stifling political party affiliations, etc. (Utterwulghe,
2014). Coordination failures are harmful to all economic activity and sectors, but they
are particularly damaging for incipient and new sectors, which don’t even have the
(already imperfect) traditional channels for interacting with the public sector.
Private-private dialogue is therefore an equally important factor of the PPD equation.
As we have seen, besides the risks of capture and rent-seeking, and the chronic lack of
trust vis-à-vis the public sector (Utterwulghe, 2015), one of the most important
challenges encountered while designing PPD institutions and mechanisms is the lack
of cohesion and organizational capacity of the private sector, especially in middle or
lower income countries.

To go back to Cornick’s intervention model, vertical, or sectoral, policies can show
results more rapidly, benefit a sector or some firms directly, and require less
organizational capacity from the private sector as a whole. This approach should be
more enticing to the private sector, but, according to Fernandez-Arias et al. (2016), it
is also riskier because of the higher possibility of capture and rent-seeking. Indeed,
vertical interventions are particularly risky when they take the form of market
interventions (such as protection or subsidies, as they may improve a sector
profitability without necessarily increasing productivity), but much less so when they
take the form of public goods (Ernesto Stein et al., 2014). Conversely, “horizontal
public inputs are both the least controversial and the least-risky policies, but may fail
to foster active participation unless the private sector is well organized in high-level
associations that can coordinate across sectors?.

With regards to capacity per se, unless development institutions - or governments, but
with the risk of being perceived as meddling and influencing the private sector -
address the issue, it will be hard to implement successful public-private collaboration.
The concept of “open architecture? proposed by Hausmann and Rodrik (2006), which
posits that “it is important that whenever possible the government not predetermine
who it will deal with in terms of sectors or activities?, is indeed not always possible or
desirable. Sometimes, one will have to pick the sectors and private sector players who
have the technical capacity and the willingness to engage in the complex game of
productive development policymaking. This is all the more appropriate in developing
countries, and fragile states, where governments have limited bandwidth and weaker
institutions.

 3.3 Public-private dialogue in lower income countries and fragile states

Recent research emphasizes the enormous potential of industrial policies to support
structural transformation in developing countries. Furthermore, in recent years, as a
direct challenge to the neoclassic market approach, “structuralist economic? studies
have increasingly reiterated the central role that states need to play in order to create
markets, improve the business environment, or alter the structure of economic
activity. Yet, as Gisselquist (2015) points out, few of these studies dedicated to
structural transformation have paid much attention to the realities of state weaknesses
in poorer and fragile states. As discussed previously in this paper, modern industrial
policies, or productive development policies, recognize the need to involve the private
sector in policy design and implementation. However, the state retains a central
position and its capacity to coordinate, self-organize, provide technical inputs, and
deliver, matters.

In regions such as sub-Saharan Africa, where many states are weak and often fragile,
Gisselquist reminds us that the (structuralist) approach to the state is “notably at odds
with that in the literature on state fragility, which highlights the negative economic
effects of state patrimonialism, corruption, economic mismanagement, and weak
capacity?. The political economy of doing business in IDA countries and fragile states
needs to be taken into account when contemplating PDPs in these countries (World
Bank, 2011).

Work by development finance institutions (DFIs), such as the World Bank Group, in
designing and implementing public-private dialogue mechanisms has proven
successful in support of the traditional economy-wide interventions across the world.
But addressing constraints affecting the investment climate through broad horizontal
policy reforms does take time and, as discussed above, requires a higher level of inter-
institutional and private sector coordination. In fragile states, time is of the essence
and ‘quick wins’ can make a difference and restore trust in the authorities. The
experience (Utterwulghe, 2014:2) shows that vertical (sectoral) interventions can be
beneficial in IDA and fragile states in that sector-specific PPDs will deliver results
more promptly and can overcome the inter-institutional coordination Gordian knot by
working specifically with a line ministry. However, as mentioned previously and as
discussed by Stein et al. (2014), this can’t be a blanket approach for all countries and
it needs to be implemented with caution because of the high risk of capture and rent-
seeking associated with vertical interventions, especially the market interventions
types. A more focused approach can also help create more quickly a critical mass of
public and private sector actors who have learned how to dialogue and work together
(discussion with Syed A. Mahmood). If more Ministers need to be involved for cross-
sectoral dimensions, cabinet-level officials could be involved.


 3.4 Multi-pronged PPD interventions by the World Bank Group

Today, DFIs, including the World Bank Group, recognize that a participatory,
inclusive and transparent public-private dialogue mechanism is one of the key
determinants for an effective industrial policy process (OECD 2013). Over the past
decade, the World Bank Group has advised governments and the private sector
globally on designing and implementing structured multi-stakeholder dialogue
mechanisms that ensure sustainable development policy reforms, mostly at the
national and sub-national level. The focus has primarily been on horizontal policies
that could improve the investment climate and the competitiveness of a country as a
whole. More recently, this approach has been complemented by sectoral
interventions, mainly in the garment, agribusiness, and tourism sectors. Variations of
the approach have included focusing on clusters and value chains, such as those
described in the Tunisia example (Box 1).


            Box 1. Tunisia Sector Competitiveness Diagnostics and PPD

The pilot project’s development objective is to identify and help strengthen promising clusters
in a new democratic Tunisia, based on cross-sectoral diagnostics and extensive public-private
dialogue.

  a. The case for cluster-specific PPD interventions

Competitiveness-focused PPDs are better organized around clusters or value chains because:
1. Grouping firms in high-level sectors (e.g. textile-garment) produces vague
recommendations and little mobilization of change agents because the common denominator
is too large, making conclusions too abstract and detached from daily business concerns.
Instead, cluster/value chain specific PPDs are particularly informative on the concrete
constraints firms face in their respective lines of business (which diverge significantly within
sectors) and are more likely to achieve effective and sustainable engagement.

2. Such PPDs not only facilitate consensus around reforms and investments, but they also
create awareness among firms of their own role in enhancing sector competitiveness.

3. The approach can be replicated on any cluster/value chain with motivated stakeholders.
There is no need to limit it to so-called “strategic sectors?.

  b. Methodology

The PPDs were structured along three phases: (i) cluster diagnostics and prioritization of
binding constraints on competitiveness; (ii) elaboration of cluster specific action-plans; and
(iii) implementing short term actions or informing and adapting World Bank projects to meet
PPD recommendations. Four pilot clusters (electronic components, pharmaceuticals,
garments, and IT services) were identified to test the approach.

The methodology carefully wove fact-based analysis with participatory processes in a
strategic sequencing. This was essential to mitigate risks of capture/consolidation of power by
dominant actors.

1. The team started with a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the respective clusters and
the corresponding market trends. Only then did it launch the participatory process (workshops
etc.). This sequencing allowed the team to have an “educated? engagement in the PPD, with a
stakeholder map at hand, and full awareness of predictable assumptions by dominant private
(or public) actors. Without a market-based understanding of the value chain, dominant
stakeholders could direct the PPD towards ready-made conclusions (which are not necessarily
aligned with global market trends or value addition).

2. The PPDs were continuously informed by experts in the respective fields (recruited in
consultation with the PPD participants), which allowed to keep assumptions in check, and
contrast proposed solutions with international experiences.

3. Solutions were also designed in small groups that not only included influential actors but
also champions of change. This reduced the risk of consolidating the status quo and increased
the feasibility of implementation of difficult reforms.

  c. Challenges and lessons learned

1. One of the key lessons learned was that putting the private sector in a co-leading position
was essential to mitigating political risks. Tunisia witnessed six government reshuffles during
the period of the project, causing repeated readjustments and delays. Having the private sector
in the lead allowed the PPDs to survive the unstable context and maintain them on track.

2. Effective PPDs should dispose of investment funds at the end of the consultation process
without time gaps or delays. To that effect, it is better to embed, or closely synchronize, PPD
facilitation with investment operations, in a way that eliminates the time gap between design
and implementation of policy recommendations. That time gap can be too long to sustain the
engagement of stakeholders, and particularly private sector actors.
3. Getting things done through PPD requires a strong prioritization and narrowing down on
concrete issues. The approach directed both public and private stakeholders to discuss the
level of priority of constraints, and agree on three to five top constraints on short and
medium-terms. This methodology smoothed the implementation by directing attention to
transformative actions. Similarly, during the conception of strategies/solutions, work was
organized in small groups focused on top priority issues. This helped secure engagement and
buy-in by key actors.

d. Impact

Some of the most concrete impacts found in the pharmaceutical PPD, for example, include:

1. The administrative reform of the Medicine Authorization (MA) process. This led to the
reduction of delays of the Medical appraisal review (a necessary step to put a product on the
market) from 2.5-3 years in 2013 to 6-9 months in 2017.

2. A decree modernizing the regulatory framework of clinical trials in Tunisia. This was
accompanied by an elaborate action plan and the participation of the Minister of Health in the
World Economic Forum (2016) to promote investments in clinical trials in Tunisia.

3. An achieved consensus on a key reform of the medical pricing process between the
Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, and the Ministry of Social Affairs.
The reform led to the establishment of a more transparent, efficient and inclusive process
incorporated in a single “Medicine Price Committee?. This regulatory reform is currently
being further articulated and expected by the end of 2017.

    e. Sustainability

A common value chain development platform is currently being established to conduct all
cluster/value chain specific PPDs in a cross-ministerial manner. The platform would bring
together various concerned agencies (export promotion, MSME development or regional
development agencies, etc.) and builds local capacity to conduct these PPDs and inform i)
policy reforms; ii) public investments; and iii) support to private sector firms. World Bank-
financed investment projects supporting value chain activities in Tunisia will finance this
platform and the implementation of its recommendations.


Adapting from Rodrick, it is fair to say that institutional innovations and duplications
do not travel well. Iterative adaptation grounded in contextual realities should be the
modus operandi, while taking into consideration proven principles and lessons
learned. The next chapter will look at an innovative and successful institutional and
policy dialogue tool aimed at implementing productive development policies more
effectively in Peru, the Mesas Ejecutivas or Executive Working Groups.


4 Executive Working Groups (Mesas Ejecutivas)
Mesas Ejecutivas (ME) is a policy tool that was designed in Peru to implement PDPs
more effectively3. Its aim is to take concrete actions to enhance the productivity of a
vertical sector (such as forestry, tourism, agro-export, etc.) or a horizontal factor (such

3Mesas Ejecutivas were designed and implemented at the Ministry of Production of Peru when
one of the authors of the report (Ghezzi) was Minister of Production.
as logistics, capital markets, transit, etc.).4 The tool institutionally works as public-
private working groups.

It does not aim to replace ministries or public agencies. Instead, it draws in
participants from across these public entities and the private sector stakeholders of a
sector or factor to define and suggest solutions to problems that cannot be solved
within existing structures. Naturally, as part of its work a ME may reform or create
public sector entities, but the objective is to strengthen and improve the operation of
the public sector, not to generate a parallel structure. Initially, MEs were thought to be
temporary but the experience shows that coordination problems will continue to
appear and the need for the ME will probably not diminish over time.

A ME is a space mainly for action and execution. It focuses on the identification of
the constraints limiting the productivity of a sector (or factor), and in the
implementation of solutions to remove them. It does not focus on high-level dialogue
(although the focus on action can always lead to high-level discussion considerations
that feedback into further action).

MEs try to avoid generic discussions about the competitiveness of the economy. The
majority of the unresolved problems in developing countries are unique to particular
sectors and activities, and can only be identified and resolved at that level.


 4.1 ME Participants and institutional architecture
A typical ME has two levels of participants. A ground level body that is composed of
participants that have better and earlier information on the details of the productive
problems of the sector or factor of the production focus of the ME. This body has
three types of participants:

       Representatives from the private sector stakeholders around the sector/factor.
       Representatives of public sector stakeholders around the sector/factor.
       A dedicated team appointed by the public sector entity in charge of
        coordinating the ME.

Private sector representatives are the principal actors in the ME and they are
designated by the relevant business associations. It is necessary to have a combination
of those with first-hand knowledge of the problems of the sector on the ground, and
those with sufficient perspective to be able to identify its key challenges. It should
certainly include business association managers and professionals that work with
businesses but should not be composed primarily of them, given that their knowledge
of the productive problems is mostly indirect. Crucially, the private sector
representatives need to be able to help the rest of the ME participants, particularly
from the public sector, to better understand the sector or factor. Continuous private
sector participation in the MEs is a precondition for success. Naturally, it will only
happen if the MEs show progress.


4 Even though MEs were originally designed as a tool for PDPs,   they could also be used to
improve the functioning of government in general.
The representatives of public sector stakeholders relevant to the sector or factor have
the formal responsibility to provide the public goods or correct the market failures
that the sector/factor subject of the ME will need.5 Some of these public stakeholders
are regular participants of the ME; others will attend occasionally for specific
problems.

The public entity that coordinates the ME appoints a dedicated team that will be in
charge of running the day-to-day operations of the ME. This team is responsible for
securing the continuous public-private interaction needed to uncover bottlenecks in
the sector/factor productivity, identifying solutions and implementing them. In order
to do so, they have to ensure the public sector stakeholders are receptive to the
suggestions of the private participants (often they are not). Public stakeholders often
become defensive, at least initially, given that necessary improvements are exposed
during ME sessions. Due to this, the dedicated team needs to remain neutral and act as
an honest broker. That neutrality requires that they do not have formal responsibility
of the sector or factor subject to the ME. This neutrality is also the reason why one
representative of the coordinating team needs to be the moderator of the periodic ME
sessions. The dedicated team also needs to be highly capable in negotiating. They
may or may not be public sector officials but will need to have a very good grasp of
public sector management.

These participants of the ground level body attend the periodic ME sessions and
directly scope and understand problems and work on solutions. This proximity
provides them with more contextual information about the private sector productive
challenges.

Because of its direct access to on-the-ground information, most problems are
identified and resolved at the ground level body. However, there are occasions when
they reach a gridlock because the solutions go beyond the purely technical, such as
the capacity for convening, persuading, problem solving, dispute resolution or budget
allocation that only ministers (or above) have. It is on those occasions when a higher-
level body of the ME, which operates at ministerial level (or even head of state),
intervenes. In this sense, both levels are complementary. The dedicated team serves as
a link between the two.


    4.2 ME Meetings typology
MEs have two types of meetings: the periodic sessions and the inter-sessional
meetings. Representatives of the ground level body normally attend the periodic
sessions, which are moderated by a representative of the dedicated team in charge of
running the day-to-day operations of the ME. It is in these sessions when problems
(and progress towards solving them) are presented.

Experience shows that weekly or biweekly meetings may be ideal, for at least two
reasons. First, it allows continuity in the public-private interaction needed to improve
the understanding of the sector/factor. Second, the session of the ME acts as a

5 Some of these public sector representatives can be officials from cross-cutting Ministries like
Finance, Transportation, Housing, Labor, etc. Many of the interventions needed for the sector
need to be undertaken by these Ministries (or entities associated with them).
constant pressure mechanism for its participants, who know that they will need to
report progress. Infrequent sessions could result in decreased interest and
procrastination.

However, not everything has to be completed by the next periodic session; some
actions may require more time. But the principle is the same: fixed deadlines and the
need to report progress to the ME generates a strong incentive to come through.

As important as what happens in the regular periodic sessions of the ME is what
happens between sessions, in the inter-sessional meetings. These are smaller (bilateral
or multilateral) meetings in which the solutions to the problems identified in ME
sessions are worked on and implemented. Often, inter-sessional meetings are held
exclusively among public sector participants, and sometimes these meetings include
members of the higher-level body.

The existence of an efficient dedicated team could well be the single most important
determinant of success of MEs as a tool. This team leads the inter-sessional meetings
and makes sure there is continuous progress from session to session. It significantly
reduces the risk of ME sessions in which the same problems are discussed over and
over again without becoming implementable (let alone implemented) solutions.



 4.3 How can MEs help with coordination failures?
MEs can help with coordination failures in more than one way. By meeting regularly
with private counterparts during sessions, the public sector improves its understanding
of the bottlenecks affecting productivity of the sector/factor of production focus of the
ME. This continuous public-private interaction allows the sharing of information as
well as the learning of new information, previously unknown to all participants of the
ME. Hence, they improve public-private coordination.

MEs also help with public-public coordination given that they include relevant public
stakeholders of the sector/factor. Issues of duplicity (or more) of requirements by
public sector entities, implementation gaps (where, for example, one local
decentralized entity does not implement the national guidelines given by a Ministry or
national entity) or the need for complementary public sector interventions (like
infrastructure), are all made evident in MEs sessions.

Of course, MEs will not solve public-public coordination failures. For example, a
hypothetical ME for Tourism may prioritize certain airports or roads over others, but
nothing can guarantee that the Ministry of Transportation (formally in charge of
building the infrastructure) will have the same priorities. But the fact that the Ministry
of Transportation has a seat on the ME improves the information (bottom up) it has
when making its infrastructure decisions.

MEs may also help with purely private coordination failures. Sometimes the ME can
allow private sector participants to identify common problems or to generate
incentives to formally or informally organize to solve them together. For example, a
forestry ME may allow the private sector around plantations and the sector around
concessions in the forest, in principle two separate businesses, to identify more clearly
their complementarities (in the production of structured wooden floors, for instance).


    4.4 What does the government provide in a ME?

The government, with respect to the private sector, ideally differentiates between YPs
(“your problems?) and MPs (“my problems?).

MPs (from the perspective of the government) are related to the provision of public
goods or the correction of market failures where the government could improve the
productivity of the sector/factor subject of the ME 6 . The objective to increase
productivity can help align the public supply of goods and services and, hence, to
alleviate the coordination failures mentioned in previous chapters. The following are
potential “MPs?:

              Reduction of red tape (norms and implementation)
              Regulation that is adequate to productive reality of the sector (norms
               and implementation)
              Fill in loopholes in regulation (norms and implementation)
              Help with complying with technical requirements to secure access to
               new export markets
              Complementary public sector interventions
              Creation of new public entities (or improve the functioning of existing
               ones) that are appropriate to the productive reality of the sector
              Public infrastructure suited to productive needs of the sector
              Incentives to promote innovation that are suitable to the sector
              Design of sector-specific training programs

In countries where the government is weak there is, by definition, a gap between what
the government wants to do and what it actually does, between norms and their
implementation. For that reason, its job does not end when it enacts a regulation. It
needs to make sure it is complied with on the ground such that it has real effects (not
just on paper). The ME is very useful to monitor effective compliance and the
nuances of what is happening on the ground. This allows for adjustments when
needed. 7

YPs are things such as latent comparative advantages (which should be clearer once
the public sector provides MPs), product design, pricing strategy and competitive
pressures, as well as the private market-provided inputs to production. It is the private
sector’s job to identify attractive business opportunities in which they have the ability
to compete and win, and to exploit them with the right strategies. MEs can turn
potential opportunities into reality, but cannot make the impossible possible.


6 Public goods are clearly the government’s responsibility to provide. Solution of market failures must
be compared to the well-known risks of government failure in these interventions.
7 It may well be the case that an intervention decided by the ME is properly implemented but it is not
having the desired consequences. This information will normally be provided by private sector
participants of MEs. As a result, the intervention needs to be modified with that new information. This
is precisely the recursive feature of this model of implementation that is highlighted below.
 4.5 Steps to operate MEs
Ideally the decision to start operating a ME or a group of MEs needs to be taken by
someone relatively high up in government (President/Prime Minister or cabinet
minister). This is important because the ME will need the support from someone with
the ability to allocate budget, enact regulation, induce cooperation between private
and public stakeholders, and solve disputes when they arise.

Some MEs could be initially requested by the private sector; other MEs could be the
government’s own initiative (provided, of course, that there is private sector demand
for them). Regardless, the government will ultimately need to take the decision on
which MEs to operate. Given its limited bandwidth, it will probably need initially to
prioritize two or three sectors/factors of production. Starting with a few sectors before
expanding the number allows the government to learn, and apply what has been
learned to the next MEs. Over time, more sectors (or factors) can be sequentially
added, in a process that could be called “sequential prioritization?.

Below are the steps needed to operate a single ME:

           a) Define the sector/factor candidate for ME

The obvious initial step is to define the candidate sector/factor subject of the ME, with
the most broadly defined sectors possible, provided they are still narrow enough to be
able to work with them.

The sector/factor subject of the ME needs to be narrow to be able to get into relevant
sector specific details. Regulatory barriers or infrastructure needs need to be common
enough among the actors in the ME. Once this is achieved, the broader the better to
maximize its macroeconomic impact.

Sometimes the private sector will be self-organized around shared problems. This will
make it easier to get the ME going and will naturally be preferable. But other times,
the private sector may not be organized at the beginning of a ME. Experience shows
that the functioning of a ME process generates incentives for the private sector to
organize (formally or informally) over time.

           b) Assess the feasibility of the ME

Not all candidates make it to a ME. The most important determinant of the feasibility
of a ME is whether private sector stakeholders are internally coordinated (see section
3.2), open for pragmatic problem solving, and willing to devote significant time to
work with the ME. It is also important to know if the sector has upside potential
currently constrained by fixable coordination failures.

Almost all sectors could be helped by setting up a ME. However, there are some cases
where the problems facing the sector could be structural (perhaps because its
historical comparative advantage was based on low wages that are no longer low
compared to its main competitors). In those cases, a ME may not be the ideal way to
help the sector.
Based on this, it is important to have preliminary meetings with the most relevant
stakeholders before the ME is formally installed, to make sure that chances of success
are relatively high.


            c)   Launch it (if it is feasible)

Once the ME is launched, frequent regular meetings will be necessary. Frequency will
vary depending on the ME, but experience shows that biweekly or weekly sessions
are ideal so that they act as a constant pressure mechanism for the participants.
Otherwise, there is a risk that momentum (and interest) is lost.


            d) Generate an initial list of the main problems and their potential
               solutions (the “Matrix?)

MEs are part of the family of PDP “recursive? tools that recognize that plannin g and
execution are intertwined 8 . To that extent, MEs do not devote much time to
generating a comprehensive list of problems and their potential solutions that must be
implemented. Instead, initial sessions of a ME are dedicated to generating a
preliminary list of problems and their potential solutions. Solutions that, more likely
than not, will be revised during execution.

In generating that initial list, MEs make use of the obvious complementarity between
their public and private sector participants. Normally the private sector actors are
good at identifying their most pressing problems, but they are less good at identifying
potential solutions. At the same time, public sector officials (as a group) are better at
identifying potential solutions, but normally lack the detailed contextual knowledge of
the sector/factor of production.

The initial list needs to go through some preliminary filtering to focus on the real
problems. Often the private sector will ask for a tax exemption or a subsidy to
compensate for an inefficiency, for example, they may want a subsidy because of high
logistical costs or poor public infrastructure relevant to the sector. However, the ideal
solution is unlikely to be the tax exemption.

Sometimes, the list of problems presented by the private sector may contain
“problems? that are not such, or at least are low priority. For example, they may want
a norm that declares the sector as a “national priority?. In that case, the litmus test is
to ask whether that would improve in practice the day-to-day operations of the sector.
In most cases, the answer is that it is merely declaratory.

The filtering of solutions and problems that takes place in this step is purely
preliminary. It is only during implementation that the real filtering takes place.


            e) Prioritize problems from the initial list and start to solve them

8 According to Sabel and Jordan (2015), “a recursive model of implementation … uses the output
of one round of review and revision as the input for the next round of implementation?.
MEs should rapidly move into trying to solve some three or four problems from the
initial list (as opposed to try to enhance or to excessively refine the list). Those
problems should be a combination of either particularly important or ones that can be
fixed relatively rapidly (ideally both). This allows generating positive momentum and
energizes (both private and public sector) participants who see their efforts paying off.
This, in turn, enhances the chances of further success.

           f) Based on execution, polish the initial list of problems and solutions

As mentioned above, it is during implementation that the ME goes deeper into the
problems and is able to fine-tune the solutions. As a result, the list of problems and
solutions (the “Matrix?) is live and improved during execution.

Solutions are sometimes identified during the regular sessions; others are identified
during inter-sessional meetings (when task forces deep dive into the problems) and
presented afterwards during ME sessions.

It is normally the continuous interaction between private and public participants that
leads to the solutions, often unknown to them beforehand. In that sense, beyond the
“information-sharing? in a ME there are significant amounts of what Fernandez Arias
et al. (2016) call “learning-sharing?.

The ME allows to institutionalize that learning-sharing process; a process that takes
place when both parties are trying to find the solutions to problems, and also when
implementing the desired solutions.

Experience shows that many “good solutions? to problems fail at the very end of the
chain, when implementation takes place. Very often, ground floor public sector
officers in charge of implementation distort it or simply do not apply them in practice.
The inclusion in the ME of participants closer to the ground helps to identify those
problems during execution.

The ME needs short learning cycles to make quick corrections when policies are not
having the intended consequences or when, in general, new information arrives. The
relatively high frequency of the ME sessions and the monitoring mindframe that it
encourages help those cycles to be indeed short.


           g) Start solving other problems from the list and incorporate new
              problems to the list as they arise

Over time and once the ME has been able to make significant progress in some of the
initial problems (or because they will take longer as they need time to mature), it can
start solving other problems from the list.

The learning process that the ME encourages will increase its bandwidth and its
ability to solve more (and more difficult) problems. However, it will increasingly be
the case that the regular participants of the ME (those from the ground level body)
will hit a wall. This will happen when solutions require budget allocation or a political
decision to move forward that are beyond their control. In those cases, the
participation of the high level body participants is required.

Obviously, the live nature of the “Matrix? implies that new problems will be
incorporated into the list. Sometimes those problems are new; at other times it will be
because the learning process that the ME facilitates allows the identification of
problems that participants had been unable to articulate (or even to identify).

The entire process is very agile and iterative. It is recursive, rather than linear, where,
in an initial phase, all problems and their respective solutions are perfectly identified,
and in a second phase, those solutions are executed. Instead, an initial diagnosis of
problems and potential solutions is made, and three or four of them are executed
initially. With the information from implementation the solutions are fine-tuned and
the original list is, hence, polished. Also, as the bandwidth increases, the ME starts to
implement solutions to other problems on the original list and that implementation, in
turn, allows fine-tuning of their solutions. New problems are also incorporated as they
appear. The ME goes back and forth continuously between the list of problems and
the implementation of their solutions.




5 Experience with Mesas Ejecutivas in Peru

In the period between December 2014 and May 2016, the Ministry of Production of
Peru created eight Mesas Ejecutivas. Six of them were sectorial/vertical:

                    •    Forestry (December 2014)
                    •    Aquaculture (May 2015)
                    •    Creative Industries (August 2015)
                    •    Textile (September 2015)
                    •    Gastrononomical (December 2015)
                    •    Agroexports (April 2016)

And two were Tranversal/Horizontal:

                    •    Logistics (February 2016)
                    •    High-Impact Entrepreneurship (May 2016)

All MEs operated continuously until July 2016, when a new government came in.
Some had immediate success and hit the ground running; others were slower to take
shape. But all MEs had an impact (in different degrees). The crucial difference was
the private sector participants’ ability to identify the main bottleneck to their sector’s
productivity growth and the feasibility to implement them9.

The new government tried to change the methodology (for example, by significantly
reducing the frequency of meetings and not having a dedicated team). As one would
9A more detailed description of the main achievements of the different MEs until July 2016 can
be found in Ministry of Production of Peru, 2016
have expected, that change did not work. Due to private sector demand, the Forestry
ME was reinstalled (including new actors) at the Ministry of Agriculture in February
2017. The Agroexports ME was reinstalled, also at the Ministry of Agriculture in
April. There are expectations that new MEs will be installed over the next few
months.

In this section, we will focus on the achievements of three MEs until July 2016. We
also update progress in the forestry ME since February 2017.


 5.1 Forestry
The sector has two major subsectors: plantations and forest concessions in the
Amazon jungle. In plantations, 800 to 1000 trees are planted per hectare. They are
usually harvested from years six to 20 (depending on the species). In forest
concessions, approximately 4-5m3 of wood (well below the environmentally
sustainable level of 25-28m3) is extracted per hectare every 20 years.

Peru’s comparative advantages appear evident. Out of 7.9 million hectares of
concessioned forest land, less than two million are operational. In addition, the Andes
and Amazon hold approximately nine million hectares of “potentially reforestable?
land. In the Amazon alone there are four million hectares that could be planted.
However, less than 40,000 hectares have been reforested for industrial/commercial
purposes.

Land is also relatively inexpensive. It can be obtained at between $1,000-2000 per Ha
vs. $5,000-10,000 in neighboring countries. But perhaps the most important factor is
climate: Wood in clonal plantations grows yearly at 50m3/Ha (the highest in the
world together with Brazil), vs. 25m3 in Chile and 5m3 in Finland.

Despite its huge diversity and potential, Peru sells only approximately US$150
million worth of forest products abroad per year (and imports US$1.2bn), compared
to Chile’s US$5.5bn. Exports have been stagnant over the past 15 years.

A number of government entities are engaged throughout the sector’s value chain in
industry regulation, oversight or policymaking. The two most important government
agencies dealing with the forestry sector are: SERFOR (Servicio Nacional Forestal y
de Fauna Silvestre), which is in charge of policies and guidelines for the sector, and
OSINFOR (Organismo de Supervision de los Recursos Forestales), which takes
charge of supervision and overseeing compliance. Other entities include MinAm
(Ministry for the Environment), Minagri (Ministry for Agriculture), Regional
Governments, Ministry of Production, etc. Training and technical assistance
organizations are also involved, including technological innovation centers (CITES),
universities, etc.

Because the forestry value chain embraces various government agencies, as well as
private companies, setting up the Forestry Mesa Ejecutiva helped address
coordination issues within the public sector and between public and private sectors.
The ME prepared a preliminary industry diagnosis and identified three types of
barriers: (a) poor regulation and overwhelming red tape, (b) lack of innovation and
low productivity, and (c) insufficient financing.

After a few months of operation, it was able to regulate the Law for Forestry and
Wildlife in September 2015. This had not been possible in more than four years (the
law had been originally approved in July 2011) because of the large number of actors
involved. These regulations allow, for example, those who have possession but not
titling of their land to market their timber legally and use the possession certificate to
request “contracts for the transfer of use for agroforestry systems? susceptible to
mortgages. In addition, landowners can now register their forest plantations in three
days, where it used to take six to 12 months. Wood from forest plantations can also
now be extracted without a permit. The process used to last from four to eight months.

For concessions in the Amazon, procedures were simplified, and forest production
can now be used as a guarantee for loans, while non-timber products and tourism have
also benefitted. Likewise, following issuance of new guidelines from SERFOR, it is
expected that the first tender for forest concession in 13 years will soon be launched,
and the selection processes will be much shorter than in the past.

A new mechanism for accessing forest concessions, known as the “Abbreviated
Procedure?, has been created. In this case, it is not necessary for a regional
government (GORE) to call for tender for certain types of land; private companies can
submit their proposal and be granted the concession. Two regions (Ucayali and
Loreto) launched this procedure in May 2017.

Perhaps one of the most relevant achievements is that the ME helped the newly
created SERFOR to strengthen as an institution, as it learned quickly about the sector.
This is obviously an ongoing process. Normally, new public sector agencies take a
few years to fulfill the minimum requirements to do their job properly. That process
has been significantly sped up in the case of SERFOR, which is, by now and in large
part thanks to the ME, an extremely competent public entity.

In terms of management, OSINFOR and SERFOR now coordinate their data and
publish on their websites information on concessions, operating permits, surveillance
and sanctions, among other things; the procedures backlog substantially decreased
from several years’ worth to almost nothing; the export permitting scheme was
dramatically streamlined; the five-year audits’ management information system was
rolled out, and improved regulation of infringements and sanctions. The Forestry
Court was also formed, an action that had been pending for eight years.

In addition, construction of the facilities for the newly established Pucallpa Forestry
CITE are likely to begin shortly to foster innovation in production processes, transfer
technology to small and medium enterprises, and attract qualified foreign experts. Its
laboratories will award quality certifications and the CITE will help to standardize
manufacturing, improve wood drying and cutting (currently far from ideal), and
significantly reduce the time for testing trials for wooden structured floors.

Due to the nature of the business, forest plantations ideally require financing for 10
years or longer, and provide long grace periods. This type of financing has not been
generally available for plantations. Financing for primary forest concessions was
likewise restricted. Also, in the past, concessions were never accepted as collateral.

To begin addressing the issue of access to capital, a $200 million fund enabled the
Development Finance Corporation (Cofide) to provide seed second-tier funding (i.e.,
through private or public financial institutions with a 70/30 breakdown) that is
expected to spur larger private financing. Recent loans have been granted at low
single digit rates in comparison to having no long term financing before the ME was
launched. Conditions keep improving, and getting access to reasonable (albeit not
subsidized rates) is very good. But it is also transformational, as it allows banks to
begin to understand the forestry sector and to increase their exposure to it directly.

The challenges for the ME are clear. In plantations, there are two: to further reduce
the cost of financing and to increase the supply of readily available land suitable for
foresting. To that end, efforts are under way to prepare a forestry land cadaster with
San Martin and Huánuco regions (states). Other regions (Loreto, Madre de Dios,
Ucayali) are expected to join later. SERFOR is preparing a single integrated and
systematized database.

SERFOR has already launched, for the first time ever, guidelines for concessions for
plantations, which will help keep attracting large investors. Existing plantations imply
fully owning the land. Concessions for plantations will provide an alternative where
the private sector can plant but ownership remains in hands of the regional
governments.

In forest concessions in the Amazon, over-regulation still exists. One clear problem is
the forest authority at the regional (state) level is in charge of initial inspections at the
origin (the forest) to make sure timber extracted is legal. But the authority does not
have the ability to fulfill those functions properly. This deficiency impacts on the
legality of the productive chain as there is no certainty about the legality of the timber
at the origin.

When OSINFOR inspects wood later in the chain it does not necessarily recognize
what the regional government has declared as legal (claiming mostly well founded
concerns about corruption). As a result, it can generate criminal sanctions throughout
the chain and could generate the closure of destination markets for all domestic
producers.

It is clear that there has been, and there is, illegal timber trading, but in addition, a
weak state (in this case weak local authorities at the regional level) imposes
significant costs to private sector production.

The solution found at the ME is that OSINFOR will join local authorities to make
inspections at the origin. This will significantly reduce uncertainty. ME private sector
participants agreed that that was the ideal solution. OSINFOR refused for months
given that it was not formally in its mandate but has agreed to do those early
inspections following favorable opinion from SERFOR. This is a very important
development that most likely would not have been possible without the ME. It is now
in the process of implementation.
It is also necessary to improve management in regional offices, involving them in the
certification of guides, and to clean up the process of concessions and put to tender
what was never concessioned. Forest operators must also improve their productivity:
Brazil extracts 20-27 m3 per hectare compared to our 4-5 m3 (and we only take
commercial advantage of 30-50 percent, compared to 70-90 percent in Finland).

It is crucial to understand the obvious complementarity between plantations and forest
concessions in the Amazon. Plantations are extraordinarily attractive, but if we
neglect the forest, it could lead to forest fires, and replacing the Amazon with
plantations. In order to avoid this, the forest must be given value, granting it to
responsible operators. This is by far the best way to protect it, and to strongly support
legal timber10. The consolidation of the legal timber industry would also allow the
development of “mixed? products, such as glued boards or structured floors.

In the first year-and-a-half of operation of the Forestry Mesa Ejecutiva, the industry
made very significant progress. One participant mentioned that more was done in the
ME than what was achieved in the previous 200 years of Peru’s republican history.
But much more remains to be done, particularly at the regional and local government
levels.

The change of government at the end of July 2016 resulted in some institutional
upheaval. This included moving the ME from the Ministry of Production to the
Ministry of Agriculture at the request of the private sector.

But it also brought some positive surprises. The new ME included smallholders,
previously underrepresented. This was facilitated by the conformation of CONAFOR
Perú, an association that encompasses 14 associations of small and medium size
holders in the Amazon. The new ME also increasingly includes authorities of the six
regional governments relevant to the sector. This significantly helps the process of
monitoring developments in the field, using short learning cycles and making
corrections when necessary.

Formalization has become an important objective of the ME especially for
CONAFOR Perú. This makes eminent sense. Due to the threat of drastic charges
against illegal timber, the costs of informality have increased. However, for them to
be able to pay the costs of switching to the formal sector, they need to become more
productive. The measures being developed at the ME (including recognizing in the
law the existence of very small holders, an obvious loophole) are heading in that
direction.

Investors and reforestation companies have also started a process to found, for the
first time, a business association that represents their interest. By allowing the private
sector to know each other better, the ME helped create that association.

The Forestry ME has become relevant in a number of dimensions crucial for
development: economically, socially, politically and environmentally.

10 The main environmental threat to the Amazon rainforest is deforestation due to fires set up
originally for agriculture and livestock breeding. It is precisely because of this activity, that there
is currently a vast amount of available “reforestable? land for plantations. Those fires are not set
up in areas concessioned to responsible operators.
 5.2 Aquaculture11
Also in early 2015, the Aquaculture Mesa Ejecutiva was set up to identify and resolve
barriers to growth in that sector. Peru’s aquaculture industry has promising potential,
and quite clear comparative advantages stemming from plentiful water (naturally in
the sea, but also in the Amazon and Andes mountains), sunny skies, a flexible labor
market and cheap energy. Aquaculture exports have grown annually by almost 25
percent, though starting from an extremely low base. Peru still lags far behind its
more successful neighbors, with exports of approximately $250 million (Ecuador,
with very similar underlying conditions, exports 10 times that amount).

The ME identified regulatory hurdles, bureaucratic roadblocks, and barriers to
investment in research, development and innovation (R + D + i), as well as food
health issues. One of the most important steps forward with respect to regulatory
issues was the enactment of the Aquaculture General Law in August 2015, and its
regulations, adopted in March 2016. The most important change to the rules results
from having adopted an aquaculture-centered vision of the industry, rather than a
fisheries approach, as reflected in the following developments:


        Unnecessary requirements were removed, such as wastewater discharge
         permits to be obtained from the National Water Authority.
        Research is now permitted on up to 20 percent of the concession without need
         for additional authorization.
        Applying for a marine reserve now requires posting a warrant bond to fight
         speculation in water areas good for aquaculture and help eradicate reserves
         that are endlessly franchised.
        An Aquaculture Register was set up in the Public Registries so aquafarmers
         can use their registered title as loan collateral.
        Obtaining a concession, which could previously take up to two years, now
         takes six months and efforts are under way to bring the waiting time down to
         90 days. Moreover, the cost of franchising is now 70 percent lower.  

As for management and bureaucratic obstacles, OEFA, ANA, Produce and Sanipes’
duplicate procedures have been removed.

To encourage innovation, three new public aquaculture innovation and technology
transfer centers -or CITEs- are planned in Piura, San Martin and Puno. Cayetano
Heredia University (UPCH) already runs a private CITE in Tumbes region. A
US$117 million World Bank (WB) loan has started to operate under the National
Fisheries and Aquaculture Innovation Program – PNIPA, and Innovate Peru has set
up a competitive funding scheme specifically focusing on aquaculture.  



11The achievements of the Aquaculture and Logistics MEs borrow heavily from what was
reported by Ministry of Production of Perú, 2016.
The National Fisheries Health Agency (Sanipes), operating since late 2014, has
brought substantial changes to food health. As was the case of SERFOR in the
Forestry ME, support from the Aquaculture ME has helped Sanipes to get very
quickly up to speed.  
Sanipes provides public services. It includes food health permits and certifications,
laboratory assays, market opening, and other things that are indispensable for growing
the aquaculture industry.

Sanipes is essential for obtaining sanitary agreements to open new export markets. It
is called on to play a similar role to that of the National Agricultural Health Service
(Senasa) for agricultural exports. Initially, it has targeted new markets, for example, it
managed to open the Chinese and Brazilian markets for Peruvian frozen prawns and
shrimp, and is negotiating a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for aquaculture
products with the US FDA.

Additionally, some processes were simplified; for example, authorizations that
previously took 45 days and were valid for one year now take 12 days and are valid
for three years. Sanipes is also strengthening its infrastructure by:

      Remodeling and certifying its laboratories in Lima.
      Opening three new laboratories (Piura, Tumbes and Puno).
      Remodeling its seven existing decentralized offices.
      Opening seven new decentralized offices.
      Acquisition and implementation LC Mass-to-mass equipment.
      Implementing the TRACES system.
      Getting accreditation. In 2014, Sanipes had a single international
       accreditation. Today it boasts six.  


 5.3 Logistics

During its operations between February and July 2016, the Logistics Transversal
Mesa Ejecutiva managed to address and unlock several logistical barriers to the
development of value chains and added drive to the main engines of economic
growth.  

Logistic processes include all the operations needed to ensure goods are delivered,
from the delivery of raw materials to product delivery to customers. Logistics
involves processes as diverse as volume planning, designing goods’ origin and
destination networks, groupage and intermediate storage or distribution, multimodal
transport, customs inspections and fees, and packaging, filling and quality control.
The ultimate goal is to ensure timely product availability.   Government members of
the Logistics ME include officials from the ministries of Production (Produce);
Transport and Communications (MTC); and Foreign Trade and Tourism (Mincetur),
and also from the Public Transport Infrastructure Investments Regulator (Ositran) and
APN, the National Port Authority. Industry is represented by the National Society of
Industries (SNI), the Exporters Association (ADEX), the Foreign Trade Society of
Peru (COMEX), the Lima Chamber of Commerce (CCL), the National Confederation
of Private Business Institutions (Confiep), the Peruvian Association of Port Operators
(Asppor) and the Association for Infrastructure Advancement (AFIN).

The logistics chain, therefore, includes functions of various ministries and their
agencies. The Transversal Logistics ME has helped to address coordination issues
among them (and between them and industry) given the transversal nature of
logistics’ operations across industries and government roles.

The Logistics ME prepared a comprehensive diagnosis and identified four types of
barriers: (a) inadequate port services by Callao Port’s North Pier concessionaire; (b)
inefficient traffic management; (c) dangerous roads, and (d) regulatory and red tape
issues.

In a little over five months, the ME managed to coordinate various industry guilds to
seek solutions to the problem of failure to meet contract-based service and
productivity target levels (NSP is the Spanish acronym) the APM Terminals
concessionaire had consistently failed to meet since 2012. The concessionaire
committed to purchase the equipment needed to meet NSP indicators at an
approximate cost of US$9.8 million before VAT (IGV is the tax acronym in Peru). In
addition, the Port Authority prepared its draft APM Terminals Operating Regulations
to clarify and improve the rules governing the port concessionaire’s duties so as to
meet the required NSPs. The improved regulations should fill existing voids and the
lack of adequate information that result in unauthorized charges, in addition to
improving key customer services including: (a) direct unloading and dispatch of
clamshell solid bulk freight; (b) functions of the pre-operation and operation boards;
(c) management of damaged and lost freight; (d) ship damage management, and (e)
use of operational areas for loading and shipment of containers and general cargo.

As for the inefficiencies in traffic management, waiting time for inbound trucks at
APM Terminals was cut from six hours to two, thanks to a pilot project prepared by a
team consisting of representatives from the Ministry of Interior (MININTER),
Provías, the National University of Trujillo (UNT), the National Police (PNP) and the
Provincial Municipality of Callao (MPC), and led by the Port Authority.

To address various regulations and red tape problems, the Working Group called on
various public agencies to coordinate efforts quickly and directly. At the request of
the ME, Senasa prepared a Contingency Plan for Lima and Callao in case of a system
crash of the Foreign Trade One Stop Shop (VUCE in Spanish), now live in Lima and
Callao, and expected to be implemented soon throughout Peru. Before the
contingency plan was in place, a VUCE system crash resulted in delayed inspections
because the agency would not accept document hard copies.

The Occupational Safety and Health Law (LSST) required giving occupational safety
and health induction to anyone entering warehouse premises even if already trained at
another warehouse, with the resulting increase in warehousing costs. The ME invited
the National Labor Inspection Office (Sunafil) to rule that one-year certification
induction courses could be taught covering all warehouses across the country,
provided they addressed all the existing risks at the participating companies. This
measure saved money and time for warehouses and carriers, the warehouses’ main
clients.
Meetings with Sunat, the tax and customs administration, coordinated several red tape
and regulatory changes within its mandate, including the publication for Working
Group members’ comments of the amended General Customs Law Regulations.

Sunat - Customs has drafted the “Inspection protocol for frozen, chilled, fresh, and
cold chain freight? guiding inspections and actions at checkpoints for goods aimed at
cold chain transport and thus requiring certain special treatment to protect them from
inspection-related damage. The formerly mandatory Nautical Chart has been replaced
by an affidavit, saving the three days previously needed to get a Primary Zone
extension from the Callao Maritime Customs Intendent’s Office.

To reduce error rates in the documentation submitted by users for final exports and
correcting them, Sunat - Customs committed to do more training on the main reasons
for rejection (scanning errors, bills of lading, etc.) and standardize customs officials’
information requests.

To streamline carriers’ port operations, Sunat has agreed to accept automated scale
tickets in lieu of bills of shipment for merchandise bound for bonded customs
warehouses. This procedure would eventually be extended to all cases (and not only
apply to transport to a temporary storage or bonded warehouse) and would streamline
filling out of bills of lading, as all processes would be automated.

Finally, work was needed to achieve a comprehensive solution to the problems of
transport and road realignment in Callao and Metropolitan Lima. The Working Group
was coordinating with representatives of transport associations, MTC, Provías and the
Metropolitan Municipalities of Lima and Callao, and seeks to solve issues carriers
face, due to the need to comply with the Weights and Measures Regulations approved
by MTC. Efforts are likewise under way to take account of objections made by the
Andean Community to the Regulations under the General Customs Law.



6 Lessons Learned
The experience of running Mesas Ejecutivas provides some useful lessons:

1. More important than having long periods of consultation and studies with the private sector
is to start solving problems from the beginning. This enables “positive momentum? that
encourages continuous participation which, in turn, increases the probability of solving more
problems.

2. MEs need to be demand-driven. Obviously the public sector may take the initiative to
create a ME, but it should not be created if there is not real demand from the private sector. A
crucial ingredient of a successful ME is to have a capable and committed group of private
sector participants; their continuous participation can be used as a metric of success when it is
still too soon to show tangible results. The existence of private sector champions will help in
gaining overall public attention for the sector. Beyond their commitment, the private sector
participants in the ME need to be able to understand and articulate the main problems of the
sector/factor.
3. There should be eventually no limit to the number of MEs but, instead of a big bang
approach where many MEs are launched at the same time, it is preferable to start with just a
few, probably a combination of those that can “hit the ground running? and/or those with
biggest overall potential. Over time, as the public sector bandwidth expands, then increase the
number of MEs.

4.The key differentiating factor between the MEs that can “hit the ground running? and those
that cannot appears to be how proactive and well organized the private sector is participating
in the ME and how feasible it is to remove the bottlenecks limiting the sector’s productivity.
Experience shows that a ME success requires perseverance and the ability to show results and
get things done.

5. Experience shows that because the private sector is so interested in the success of the ME,
and because misleading information can eventually be detected, private sector participants
provide truthful information (or that at least they believe it is correct) to the public sector
during ME sessions and inter-sessional meetings.

6. Even well-meaning ground level public sector officials will be naturally reluctant to the
installation of MEs. They will see them, at best, as interfering with their regular day-to-day
work and, at worst, as an indication of their own poor performance. But over time they will
realize that the learning process that MEs encourage will help them become better at what
they do. It is important to ensure that they “own? the achievements of the ME. The MEs
require solving coordination problems within the public sector; this is difficult to achieve.
Beyond other incentives (or punishments) to secure cooperation, public sector participants
should not feel overshadowed by the team that coordinates the ME. This coordinating team
needs to be an honest broker between private and public stakeholders.

7. MEs require relatively frequent sessions. Experience shows that weekly or biweekly
sessions are ideal to keep constant pressure on everyone to deliver. Private sector participants
very happily attend frequent sessions as long as the ME achieves results.

8. As important as the regular sessions are the work inter-sessions, which are bilateral or
multilateral. Progress made in these meetings is reported in the regular sessions. It is difficult
to believe that MEs would be as effective if it were not for the inter-sessions meetings.

9. There has to be a day-to-day team dedicated to securing progress between sessions.
Sometimes, the dedicated team needs to coordinate the implementation of solutions found in
the regular sessions. But more often than not they will need to find solutions during inter-
sessional meetings. The fact that there is a dedicated team to make sure there is continuous
progress could well be the single most important determinant of success of MEs as a
technology.

10. The focus on productivity of MEs is a useful disciplinary device. The private sector, when
asked for the solution to their problems, will automatically prefer a subsidy or a tax
exemption over the more “time-consuming? solutions aimed at increasing productivity. This
makes sense for the private sector to ask, but it does not necessarily make sense for the ME to
focus on that. For a subsidy one does not need a ME. The objective should be to increase
productivity, not to compensate low productivity with a subsidy.

11. Transparency is an intrinsic part of a ME by virtue of the way it is constructed.
Transparency is crucial due to the traditional mistrust that exists in society regarding public-
private dialogue. It will reduce the risk of capture (because of manipulation of private
information or outright corruption).
12. MEs must receive support from the very top of the government. Otherwise, they will
sooner or later hit a wall. However, it is not an absolute necessity to have them depending on
the President or Prime Minister, which is the standard solution. Indeed, one remarkable
feature of MEs is that they were not part of a fully designed top down government program.
The MEs in Peru started to operate first and, over time, support from the very top came
through.

13. In policymaking there is a tendency to build institutions for delivering. It is only a slight
exaggeration to say that MEs work the other way round. They start delivering using a
relatively simple institutional set up and capabilities already present at the Ministry of
Production, and the positive momentum generated by delivering helped “within-government-
institutionalization? of MEs as a tool. More so than writing it into law, continuous
commitment from the private sector is likely to be the best guarantee that the ME will survive
the necessary political cycles. It also strengthens public sector institutions that learn how to
do their job better.

14. MEs not only strengthen public sector institutions, but also help the private sector to self-
organize better, and to move from generic claims or requests into more down-to-earth realistic
ones.

15. Even though MEs were originally designed as a PDP tool, its methodology encouraging
public-private collaboration and the use of short learning cycles to make adjustments can be
utilized for a variety of problems involving public sector management.




7 MEs operational checklist
This chapter is a generic checklist with initial questions to start a public-private
dialogue process using the ME methodology, and a summary of the general and
operational tips for those who may wish to implement MEs. It is very difficult to have
all the conditions fulfilled from the outset, but certainly some minimum requirements
are necessary. Over time it will be necessary to build all of these conditions and adapt
to the local conditions and stage of development of the country.

    A. Initial Questions
    1. “The Convener?
    - Is there a convener high up in government willing to move forward with a ME?
    - Is the convener capable of inducing cooperation?
    - Is the convener capable of resolving disputes?
    - Is the convener capable of enacting regulation?
    - Is the convener capable of allocating budget?

    Alternatively, the convener could have very solid access to someone who can do all of the
    above.

    2.   Public Sector
    -    Is there a public sector bureaucracy in charge of the sector/factor subject of the ME?
    -    Is the public sector willing to participate?
    -    Are they capable of delivering?
   3.    Dedicated Coordinating Team
   -     Do they have knowledge of public sector management?
   -     Do they have negotiating skills?
   -     Are they capable of delivering (problem solving)?

   4. Sector of factor subject of the ME
   - Is the sector well defined and macro-economically relevant?
   - Is the ME tool ideal to identify/remove barriers affecting productivity of the sector?

   5.    Private sector stakeholders
   -     Are they self-organized?
   -     Are there visible private sector leaders?
   -     Are they willing to commit time?
   -     Are they capable of articulating their problems?
   -     Are they open to pragmatic problem solving?

   B.    General tips (chapter 6)
   1.    Get things done
   2.    Be demand-driven
   3.    No limit to number of MEs but start slowly
   4.    Not all MEs are equal
   5.    Private sector has incentives to be truthful (if subsidies excluded from discussion)
   6.    Public sector initially reluctant but will get ownership
   7.    High frequency of meetings
   8.    Importance of inter-sessions
   9.    Dedicated teams
   10.   Focus on productivity
   11.   Transparency
   12.   High level support
   13.   Bottom-up “institutionalization?
   14.   Private sector organization
   15.   MEs useful beyond PDPs

   C. Operational Tips (Section 4.5)
   1. Define the sector/factor candidate for ME
   2. Assess the feasibility of the ME
   3. Launch the ME
   4. Identify the main problems and solutions
   5. Prioritize problems and start solving 3-4
   6. Polish the initial list of problems and solutions
   7. Solve other problems




8 Conclusion
In this paper, we have taken the view, as Rodrick (2004) did more than a decade ago,
that new industrial policies or PDPs are about enticing public-private collaboration to
allow economic self-discovery. That discovery process is no longer the sole realm of
governments, as structuralist economists would argue. Recent academic literature and
research have highlighted the role played by business actors in policy debate and
design.

Structured public-private dialogue mechanisms have shown the benefits of private
actors’ involvement in policymaking to help improve PDPs. This eliciting process by
which public and private actors enter into strategic collaboration, brings forth
information about market constraints that help create better policies to address them.

While we acknowledge that many different PPD policy tools exist, we decided to
present the very practical and results-oriented case of the Mesas Ejecutivas in Peru to
emphasize the impact that well-structured public-private collaborative instruments
can have on productive policies.

The checklist offered at the end of the paper is meant to help and inspire practitioners
as they design their own tool to improve PDPs, while adapting the lessons and general
principles to the realities of their operational environment.



9 References
Cornick, Jorge, 2013, “The Organization of Public-Private Cooperation for
Productive Development Policies?, Washington, DC, Inter-American Development
Bank, Working paper series IDB-WP-437.

Devlin, Robert, 2014, “Towards Good Governance of Public Private Alliance
Councils Supporting Industrial Policies in Latin America?, Washington, DC, Inter-
American Development Bank, Technical Note IDB-TN-615.

Devlin, Robert, 2016, “Modern Industrial Policy and Public-Private Councils at the
Subnational Level?, Washington, DC, Inter-American Development Bank, Technical
Note IDB-TN-1122.

Devlin, Robert, 2017, “Good Governance of Public-Private Dialogue Councils
Supporting Industrial Competitiveness?, Washington, DC, Trade & Competitiveness
Global Practice, World Bank Group, Workshop on Economic Transformation,
Diversification, and Industrial Competitiveness.

Diao, Xinshen; Margaret McMillan and Dani Rodrik, 2017, “The Recent Growth
Boom in Developing Economies: A Structural Change Perspective?, NBER Working
Paper No. 23132

Fernandez-Arias, Eduardo; Sabel, Charles; Stein, Ernesto and Trejos, Alberto, 2016,
“Two to Tango, Public-Private Collaboration for Productive Development Policies?,
Washington, DC, Inter-American Development Bank.

Ghezzi, Piero, 2017, “Mesas Ejecutivas in Peru: Lessons for Productive Development
Policies?, Global Policy (forthcoming)
Gisselquist, Rachel, 2015, “State Capability and Prospects for Close Coordination –
Consideration for Industrial Policy in Africa?, Helsinki, United Nations University-
World Institute for Development Economics Research.

Hausmann, Ricardo and Dani Rodrik, 2006, “Doomed to Choose: Industrial Policy as
Predicament?, Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University.

Hausmann, Ricardo and Dani Rodrik, 2003, “Economic Development as Self
Discovery?, Journal of Development Economics 72(2).

Hausmann, Ricardo; Dani Rodrik and Charles Sabel, 2008, “Reconfiguring Industrial
Policy:  A Framework with an Application to South Africa?, CID Working Paper
No. 168 May 2008.

Hsieh, C. and P.J. Klenow, 2009, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
and India?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4).

Ministry of Production of Peru, July 2016, Mesas Ejecutivas: A new tool for
Productive Diversification.

OECD, 2013, Paris, “Sustaining Employment Growth: The Role of Manufacturing
and Structural Change?, United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Industrial Development Report.

Rodriguez-Clare, Andres, 2004, “Microeconomic Interventions after the Washington
Consensus?, Washington, DC, Inter-American Development Bank.

Rodrik, Dani, 2016, “Premature Deindustrialization?, Journal of Economic Growth.

Rodrik, Dani, 2013, “Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing?, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 128.

Rodrik, Dani, 2004, “Industrial Policy in the Twenty-first Century?, Kennedy School
of Government, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University.


Sabel, Charles, 2016, “Thinking about industrial policy as industry becomes less
central to development?, prepared for Relations between Productive Development
Policies, Jobs, Wages and Human Resources brainstorming session, Lima, Peru,
January 22, 2016.

Sabel, Charles, 2012, “Self-Discovery as a coordination problem? in Export Pioneers
in Latin America, edited by Sabel, Charles; Eduardo Fernandez Arias; Ricardo
Hausmann; Andrés Rodriguez-Clare and Ernen.

Sabel, Charles and Luke Jordan, 2015, “Doing, Learning, Being: Some Lessons
Learned from Malaysia´s National Transformation Program?, Competitive Industries
and Innovation Program.

Stein, Ernesto, et al., 2014, Rethinking Productive Development: Sound Policies and
Institutions for Economic Transformation, Washington, DC, Inter-American
Development Bank.

Utterwulghe, Steve, 2014, “Fostering Private Sector Development in Fragile States.
Why Public-Private Dialogue is Part of the Recipe?, Maastricht, The European Centre
for Development Policy Management (ECDPM).

Utterwulghe, Steve; Gjerloeff, Mette, 2014, “Public-Private Dialogue in Fragile and
Conflict-Affected Situations?, Washington, DC, World Bank.

Utterwulghe, Steve, 2015, ‘“It’s the Trust, Stupid!’ The Influence of Non-
Quantifiable Factors on Policymaking?, Washington, DC, World Bank Group, Private
Sector Development Blog post.

World Bank, 2011, “Conflicts, Security and Development?, Washington, DC, World
Development Report.
