Report No: ACS22441



Middle East and North Africa
Towards Privilege Resistant Economic
Policies in MENA
Shielding policies from privileges and discretion:
Measurement, policy instruments and operational
implications


June 2017




GTC05
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World
Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views
of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not
guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank
concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/
The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce
portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information
to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-


                                                                                                         Page | 2
8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the
Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail
pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                       Page | 3
 Towards Privilege-Resistant Economic
              Policies in MENA


Shielding policies from privileges and discretion:
Measurement, policy instruments and operational
                 implications




       Middle East and North Africa Region

                     June 2017




                                             Page | 4
         Towards Privilege-Resistant Economic Policies in MENA
Acknowledgements                                                                8

CHAPTER 1: SCOPE AND MOTIVATION OF THE REPORT                                   9

I. Motivation                                                                   9

II. Objectives and Scope of the Work                                       14

II. A Working Analytical Framework                                         19

IV. From Conceptual Framework to Measurement                               24

V. A New Measurement Tool: Country Dashboards                              31

CHAPTER 2: FROM CONCEPT TO MEASUREMENT: ASSESSMENT OF POLICY AREAS          38

I. Citizen Engagement in Policy Formulation                                38

II. Trade and Customs                                                      44

III. Business Regulation Practices                                         48

IV. Public Procurement                                                     53

V. Allocation of Public Land                                               60

VI. Investment Incentives                                                  65

VII. Access to Finance                                                     72

VIII. Competition Policy                                                   86

IX. Conflict of Interest Restrictions                                     110

X. Financial Disclosure                                                   114

XI. Freedom of Information                                                118

XII. Summary: The big picture                                             123

CHAPTER 3: FROM MEASUREMENT TO ACTION                                      126

I. Going Forward: An operational agenda                                   126

II. Operationalizing the Privilege Resistance Agenda                      128


                                                                     Page | 5
Annex 1: Questionnaires                                                 133

Annex 2: The dynamics of change: a literature review                    170

Annex 3: A model of change for privilege-resistant policy making        176

References                                                              185




                                                                   Page | 6
                                      Executive summary

Renewing the social contract, one of the pillars of the new World Bank strategy for the Middle
East and North Africa, requires to generate a new development model that is built on greater
trust; openness, transparency, inclusive and accountable service delivery; and a stronger private
sector that can create jobs and opportunities for MENA’s youth. Unemployment rates in the
MENA region are among the highest in the World, especially for young graduates. Recent
analytic work trying to explain weak job creation and insufficient private sector dynamism in
the region point to formal and informal barriers to entry and competition. These barriers
privilege a few (often unproductive) incumbents who enjoy a competition-edge due to their
connections or ability to influence policy making and delivery.

Policy recommendations to date in the field of governance for private sector policymaking
have been too general and too removed from concrete, actionable policy outcomes. This report
proposes -for the first time- to fill this policy and operational gap by answering the following
question: What good governance features should be instilled in the design of economic
policies and institutions to help shield them from capture, discretion and arbitrary
implementation?

The objectives of this report are two-fold:
    moving the debate and the rhetoric on privilege, capture and cronyism towards a more
     tractable and operational frame—beyond analytically documenting these issues, focusing
     on concrete and specific policy-design features that could limit opportunities for capture;
    focusing on the systemic measurement of the various dimensions of policymaking that
     could lead to discretionary and unfair behavior; in short by applying the motto of “what
     gets measured gets done? to the private sector governance realm and offering a menu of
     policy entry-points for policy makers to start addressing the capture issue.

The report proposes an innovative conceptual framework that encapsulates the governance
features that could shield policies from capture, discretion and arbitrary enforcement that
limits competition. Based on this framework, a check-list of policy features in a wide range of
policy areas relevant to private sector development policy is proposed, notably in terms of: (i)
the process of policy-making (ex-ante); (ii) the actual policies, regulations and their
implementation (e.g. business regulations, procurement, financing, trade); and (iii) competition
policy and other attributes like open-business and transparency measures that help identify,
and prevent or deter anti-competitive market behavior and outcomes (ex-post).

The report benchmarks eight countries along the proposed framework and checklist of
indicators, pointing, for each country, to policy gaps and poor governance features that make
these countries prone to capture and discretion. The report offers a menu of operational and
technical entry-points to engage the capture agenda in a concrete way, one that may be more
politically tractable in some of our client countries.

                                                                                        Page | 7
                                     Acknowledgements


This report was prepared by a team led by Syed Akhtar Mahmood and Meriem Ait Ali Slimane
and including: Edouard Al Dahdah, Georgiana Pop, Heba Mahmood Mokhtar Shamseldine,
Francesca Recanatini and Stephanie Trapnell. Najy Benhassine -for the Trade and
Competitiveness Global Practice- provided overall guidance to the team; as did Renaud
Seligmann -for the Governance Global Practice- as the topic spans both areas and beyond.

The team would like to thank the following colleagues for their contribution to the design of the
questionnaires that led to the data collection and the construction of the country dashboards:
Martha Martinez Licetti, Melissa Johns, Gael Raballand, Mariem Malouche, Laurent Gonnet,
Paul Prettitore, Gokhan Akinci, Sepehr Fotovat, Federica Saliola, Tania Ghossein, Graciela
Mirales and Iulia Cojocaru, Edouard Al Dahdah. Ivan Nimac, Harald Jadlika, Yassin Sabha,
Baria Daye and Philippe de Meneval.

The team would also like to thank colleagues who helped with in country data collection:
Abeer Shalan, Carole Khouzami, Stefanie Ridenour, Joey Ghaleb, Nawal Filali, Zenaida
Hernandez Uriz and Julia Barrera.

Specials thanks to the peer reviewers who provided guidance at different stages of this report:
Joel Hellman, Stuti Khemani, Ishac Diwan, Melissa Johns and Peter Ladegaard.

The team extends special thanks to Patricia McCall and the INSEAD Center for Economic
Growth for their support.




                                                                                        Page | 8
                 Chapter 1: Scope and motivation of the report

                                              I.      Motivation

I.A. The Evidence Base

1.      Renewing the social contract, one of the pillars of the new World Bank strategy for the
Middle East and North Africa, requires to generate a new development model that is built on
greater trust; openness, transparency, inclusive and accountable service delivery; and a stronger
private sector that can create jobs and opportunities for MENA’s youth. Unemployment rates
in the MENA region are among the highest in the World, especially for young graduates.
Recent analytical work trying to explain weak job creation and insufficient private sector
dynamism in the region point to formal and informal barriers to entry and competition. These
barriers privilege a few (often unproductive) incumbents who enjoy a competition-edge due to
their connections or ability to influence policy making and delivery.

2.      Unemployment rates in the MENA region are among the highest in the World,
especially for young graduates (ranging between 15 and 25%). Recent analytic work trying to
explain weak job creation and insufficient private sector dynamism in the MENA region1 all
point to various formal and informal barriers to entry and competition. These barriers
privilege a few (often unproductive) incumbents who enjoy a competition-edge due to their
connections or ability to influence policy making and delivery.2

3.      A number of recent studies have explicitly addressed the issue of state-business
relationship in the region. In particular, detailed empirical studies on private sector policy
capture have been done for Egypt and Tunisia exploiting rich data bases on politically-
connected firms (Diwan, Keefer, and Schiffbauer 2013; Rijkers, Freund, and Nucifora 2014).
These studies have demonstrated that weak economic policies can be undermined in various
ways in order to privilege a few and that this has adverse effects at both economy and sector
levels, in terms of less firm entry, higher market concentration and slow growth performance.

4.   World Bank (2009)3 provides rich evidence on how a few politically connected firms
in MENA countries, by capturing the processes of policy formulation and implementation,

1
  These include: Rijkers, Freund, Nucifora (2014); Schiffbauer, Diwan and Keefer (2013); “ Jobs or Privileges:
Unleashing the Employment Potential of the Middle East and North Africa.? (World Bank, 2015a); “More Jobs,
Better Jobs: A Priority for Egypt?, World Bank (2014); “Jobs for Shared Prosperity: Time for Action in the
Middle East and North Africa?, World Bank, 2014; “From Privilege to Competition: Unlocking Private-Led
Growth in the Middle East and North Africa? (World Bank, 2009). Also closely related is the study “ Why Doesn’t
MENA Export More? A Firm Level Perspective? (World Bank, 2014).
2
  Annex 1 summarizes the findings and recommendations of these studies.
3
  World Bank, From Privilege to Competition: Unlocking the Private-Led Growth in the Middle East and North
Africa, 2009.

                                                                                                     Page | 9
acquire rents and privileged access to resources, and tilt the playing field in their favor. The
report argued that “the success of private sector development policies rests in great part on
more effective, predictable and equitable implementation of these policies by the relevant
public agencies.? It also argued for building capacity in the private sector to contribute
constructively to policy debate and play an active role in the entire policy cycle from
identifying to evaluating reforms.

5.     A subsequent report, World Bank (2015)4, takes the analysis further by marshalling a
rich set of data (such as firm census databases for several MENA countries) 5 and
demonstrating how policy capture, by creating privileged access to resources, limited
competition, an uneven playing field adversely affects productivity and job creation. The main
findings/conclusions of the report are summarized in the box below.

Box 1: Policy capture, firm dynamics, productivity growth and job creation in MENA (key
findings of World Bank, 2015, Jobs or Privileges: Unleashing the Employment Potential of the Middle
East and North Africa)

Over the last two decades, MENA experienced modest per capita GDP growth with low productivity
growth. The structure of the economy changed with a decline in the labor share in agriculture.
However, aggregate productivity growth was mostly driven by productivity growth within sectors. The
MENA countries have not been able to absorb their fast-growing labor force into the higher-
productivity activities. Unemployment and underemployment remain high and most workers are
employed in small-scale and low-productivity activities.

So why is job creation low, both in numbers and in quality? The relation between firm characteristics
and job creation is no different in the MENA region. As elsewhere, younger firms and more productive
firms grow faster and create more jobs in MENA. For example, in Tunisia, 92% of net job creation
(during 1996-2010) was in firms less than five years old and with less than five employees; in
Lebanon, it was 177% between 2005 and 2010. A dynamic economy, where firm entry and exit is high,
would thus contribute to productivity. However, in MENA firm turnover has been low. Slow within-
firm productivity growth and misallocation of labor and capital across firms together explain the low
productivity growth in MENA.

These phenomenon, i.e., low rates of firm turnover, productivity growth, and job creation, are in turn
the result of policies that constrain competition. This is demonstrated by four case studies presented in
the report. For example, a case study of FDI in Jordan shows that domestic manufacturing firms
(suppliers) did not benefit from FDI spillovers, and suggest that a more liberal entry regime for FDI in
Jordan’s service sector will generate employment growth among domestic firms. Another case study
finds “policy uncertainty? being perceived by firms as a “severe? or “major? obstacle to growth. Firms


4 World Bank, 2015, Jobs or Privileges: Unleashing the Employment Potential of the Middle East and North
Africa.
5
  The analysis combines these data sources with two novel data sets that identify the first-tier politically connected
firms in the Mubarak and Ben Ali regimes in the Arab Republic of Egypt and Tunisia, respectively.

                                                                                                          Page | 10
attribute much of this to discretionary practices that generate uncertainty in policy implementation. The
study finds a negative impact of such discriminatory policy implementation on productivity growth and
private sector dynamism (specifically the entry of new firms) in MENA.

Past industrial policies in MENA were captured by well-connected businesses and did not reward firms
based on performance. Nor did they safeguard or promote competition. The policy environment
created privileges rather than a level playing field. These privileges insulated firms from domestic and
international competition and subsidized their operations via preferential and sometimes exclusive
access to cheap inputs (electricity, land, and so forth). Using the theoretical framework proposed by
Aghion et al. (2001), the study argues that such policies, by creating artificially low costs for a small
number of firms and thus generating a larger than normal cost gap between them and other firms. Such
huge cost gaps reduced the incentive to be more productive for all firms. The lowest cost firms had
such a large cost advantage that they did not fear catch up from others. The others were so far behind
and, moreover, had “policy card deck? stacked so much against them that they also saw little hope of
catching up and diverting market share to them. Since the “low cost firms? had low productivity and no
incentive to improve, and some of the others who had the capacity to become more productive had no
incentive to do so, aggregate productivity stagnates.

I.B. The Conceptual Base

6.     The WDR 2017 on Governance and the Law provides a powerful framework to
understand governance malfunctions like discretion, capture, collusion and privileged
treatment. It defines governance as the process by which state and non-state actors design and
implement policies. The setting where different groups and actors interact and bargain over the
design and implementation of policies is the policy arena. It is the setting where governance
manifests itself.

7.      The WDR identifies the distribution of power as a main determinant of how the policy
arena functions. During policy bargaining processes for the selection and implementation of
policies, the unequal distribution of power—power asymmetry—can negatively affect policy
effectiveness. Powerful individuals or groups who believe the outcome of certain policies risk
decreasing their current or future power can use their power to block or distort the adoption of
these pro-development policies, or undermining their implementation. The negative
consequences of power asymmetries are reflected in capture, clientelism, and exclusion.

8.      Exclusion occurs when individuals or groups are systematically sidelined from policy
decisions that affect their interests. Individuals and groups with less relative power, such as
small and medium enterprises, often have more difficulties bargaining for their interests and
policy preferences than more powerful large firms. Exclusion then has concrete implications
for inclusive economic growth.




                                                                                               Page | 11
9.      Capture happens when powerful groups have the ability to influence policies and make
them serve their narrow interests. For example, powerful and well-connected firms who
operate in less productive sectors of the economy may advocate for policies to protect their
economic power, obtain preferential treatment, and block competition—with a toll on resource
allocation, innovation and productivity.

10.     Clientelism is a third manifestation of power asymmetries. It occurs when goods and
services are exchanged in return for political support. One type of clientelism takes place when
public officials exchange votes from citizens in exchange for short-term benefits—such as
transfers or subsidies. Accountability becomes up for sale. A second type of clientelism takes
place when politicians become responsive to those groups that wield greater influence—for
instance, favoring the interests of telecoms providers over consumers. In exchange for their
political support, service providers may extract rents through the diversion of public resources,
or engage in other corrupt practices, undermining equity.

11.     The WDR 2017 shows that power asymmetries are the underlying reason why bad
policies persist, good policies are not chosen, or if and when adopted, are not implemented
evenly and effectively, and sometimes not at all. It demonstrates that policy effectiveness
ultimately depends not only on what policies are chosen, but also on how they are chosen and
implemented.

12.     In the area of private sector development, power asymmetries leading to capture,
clientelism and exclusion manifest themselves in multiple forms:

        Explicit or informal regulatory barriers to entry in some sectors that protects
         incumbents and/or discretionary allocation of permits and licenses to connected
         investors in order to privilege a few and limit competition.
        Complex regulatory environment and discretionary enforcement of regulations that
         privileges non-productive skills like “connections to government officials?.
        Government interventions of all sorts (sector policies, land policies, finance policies,
         incentives and subsidies, trade barriers, etc.) that are distorted or captured to benefit a
         privileged few.
        Regulatory compliance enforcement that is used by (captured by) government
         agencies to protect dominant incumbents (e.g. tax audits, inspections of all sorts—
         labor, municipal, etc.).
        Weak competition framework and weak enforcement capacity that limits the ability
         of governments to identify non-competitive behavior and dismantle monopolistic
         positions.




                                                                                          Page | 12
13.     However, power asymmetry is not the only reason for such policy ineffectiveness.
There exist a myriad of technical and capacity weaknesses that make a policy system
vulnerable to capture, clientelism and exclusion, leading to discretion, arbitrariness, and
privileges for the few.

14.    The discussion of privileges may be related to the concepts of deals that Hallward-
Driemeier, Khun-Jush and Prichett (2010) has written about, and a typology of privileges may
be considered somewhat similar to the typology of deals that these authors introduced. HD-K-
P make three important distinctions in their paper: a) between rules and deals, or policies and
policy actions, with the former being the policy on paper (de jure) and the latter being the de
facto implementation by front-line officials that can be influenced through deals; b) between
closed deals that benefit a few and open deals that benefit many; and c) between ordered deals
where the outcomes of the deals are predictable and disordered deals where they are not.

15.     Our definition of privileges may be related to the HD-K-P typology. We define
privileges at two levels, i.e., the ability of a few politically-connected actors to influence de
jure policies (rules) and de facto policy actions (closed-ordered deals). This may be termed as
“top-level cronyism?. Open-ordered deals, accessible to many non-connected firms, are not
considered as privilege in our framework; instead they reflect systematic favoritism, albeit to
many. Open-disordered deals are also not considered as privileges; they are also available to
many players but are somewhat unpredictable and episodic, often associated with petty
corruption.

16.     Access to privileges may not always be certain for well-connected firms. Even without
any significant political change, such as regime change, there may be situations where
privileged firms can’t take their privileges for granted and there remains a risk that these may
be taken away at a later date. Alternatively, access to privileges in one area, such as
government land, may not guarantee privileges in other areas, such as customs administration.
We may thus think of two dimensions of the “predictability of privilege?: a) across time, an d
b) across policy areas. The most privileged are those who enjoy high predictability on both
dimensions. The (relatively) worst are those whose predictability is low on both fronts.




                                                                                       Page | 13
                        II.    Objectives and Scope of the Work

17.     Addressing capture will require a good understanding of why and how it emerges and
what opportunities exist to minimize its impact within a given political economy context. A
frequent critique of applying a political economy lens to development in general, and private
sector led growth in particular, is its defeatism – the “go home and cry? scenario.

18.      The focus of political economy analysis on institutions, the incentives they generate,
and the effects these incentives have on development outcomes implies that reformers who
want to move from “bad? to “good? equilibria face an especially difficult, if not impossible
task. They would need to reverse the path: changing outcomes means changing incentives,
which in turn means changing institutions or even creating new ones, and it is known that
institutions cannot be changed or created overnight – they are “sticky?.

19.      This is especially the case when the fundamental institutions – authoritarianism,
oligarchy -- reflect highly unequal distributions of power in the society. In such situations,
institutional change necessitates major shakeup of relations between the main actors of
society, of underlying power configurations. This might not be feasible and not even desirable.
What is possible in these cases, however, is a more granular understanding and awareness of
barriers to change, even if at the end, little can be done in the present configuration, while
waiting – literally – for the “right time?.

20.     Indeed, certain moments in time – political economists speak of “critical junctures? –
are especially promising for lasting change. These openings are unique events or series of
events that lead to the realignment of incentives and lift preexistent constraints on action.
Many factors bring about such critical junctures: domestic and international conflict,
geopolitical shifts, economic booms or crises, the discovery of new natural resources, global
changes in economic conditions, major episodes of technological innovation or changes of
political regimes. These openings may create unique opportunities for reforms that could lead
to higher development equilibria.

21.    However, in the absence of such catalytic events, and given existing power
configurations and constraints to change, it still remains possible to improve outcomes at the
margin. Moreover, a critical mass of interventions that generate such marginal outcomes may
make it easier to exploit the “critical junctures? if and when they appear. It is these
incremental changes that this report focuses on.

22.     A recent and growing literature points to windows of opportunity within a given
political economy setting where incremental improvements are possible with substantial
cumulative effect over time. Rodrik (2014) has argued that while the actions of powerful
interest groups, families, and individuals may be pernicious, these are not necessarily

                                                                                     Page | 14
deterministic. He makes the case that new policy approaches can lead to new outcomes, even
in the absence of changes to the overarching structure of political power. Within the broader
political economy landscape, he argues there are opportunities to maneuver and make changes
on specific technical issues at the margin.6

23.    World Bank (2016) argues that an appropriate mix of political mobilization and
transparency measures can bring about significant change even within a challenging political
economy landscape.7 Levy (2014), based on case studies of successful change in a diverse set
of countries, discusses how virtuous cycles of change could be triggered even in weak overall
governance settings through an initial set of interventions that are feasible in a given context. 8
He thus argues for the need to “work with the grain?, with an emphasis on instituting desirable
functions, not insisting on good-practice forms that may have worked well elsewhere.

24.      The 2015 World Development Report, Mind, Society and Behavior, points to the need
to understand the motivations and behavioral characteristics of different players, such as
politicians and government bureaucrats, and how these affect their decisions and actions (or
lack thereof). 9 According to the WDR, which draws upon a rich body of literature on
behavioral economics, such an understanding helps design policy interventions and reforms
that stand a chance of success even in seemingly un-tractable situations.

25.     The windows of opportunity mentioned earlier are often generated within government
due to the intrinsic desire on part of the bureaucracy or political leaders to do some good even
within a policy environment distorted by forces that lead to capture, clientelism and exclusion.
(Annex 4 provides a conceptual framework to illustrate such dynamics)

26.     In the same vein as this literature, this work aims at identifying entry-points for
operational interventions that can reduce opportunities for discretion and unlevelled playing
field in key areas of private sector policy making, within a given political economy context. In
doing so, it goes beyond the studies referred to in the introduction. While these provided useful
empirical evidence on the existence of policy capture and its deleterious effects, they have not gone far
enough in identifying the poor governance features that create scope for unfair treatment and discretion
in various policy areas. Building upon earlier studies such as these, this study addresses more
directly the challenge of operationalizing the good governance agenda.

27.    It will provide guidance to the formulation of policies and governance reforms to
address the issue of privilege-driven public policy for business. It will serve as a bridge

6
  Dani Rodrik, When Ideas Trump Interests: Preferences, Worldviews, and Policy Innovations, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Volume 28, No. 1, Winter 2014.
7 World Bank, Making Politics Work for Development: Harnessing Transparency and Citizen Engagement , 2016.
8 Brian Levy, Working with the Grain: Integrating Governance and Growth, Oxford University Press, 2014.
9
  World Bank, World Development Report, Mind, Society and Behavior, 2015

                                                                                               Page | 15
between the rich analytic work of the past five years in the MENA region and operationalizing
good governance work in the policy areas that affect private sector development in these
countries. While focused on the MENA region, the methodology and insights derived from the
study are likely to have broader geographic relevance.

28.    Policy recommendations to date in the field of governance for private sector
policymaking have been too general and too removed from concrete, actionable policy
outcomes. This work intends to fill the policy and operational gap by:

                moving the debate and the rhetoric on privilege, capture and cronyism towards a
                 more tractable and operational frame, focusing on policy-outcomes design and the
                 quality of service delivery in the regulatory area, the quality of policy
                 implementation, and private sector policy outcomes;

                being more concrete, operational, and specific on the technical changes needed at
                 the policy and institutional levels; and

                focusing on the systemic measurement of the various dimensions of policymaking
                 that could lead to discretionary and unfair behavior; in short by applying the motto
                 of “what gets measured gets done? to the private sector governance realm.

29.        This work involved the following:

      i.       Developing a framework that encapsulates the governance features that could shield
               policies from capture, discretion and arbitrary enforcement that limits competition;
   ii.         Developing a check-list of these policy features in selected areas of private sector
               development policy (detailed list below);
  iii.         Benchmarking where MENA countries stand in each of the above area, in terms of
               how much of these policy and good governance features are prevalent;
  iv.          Offering operational guidance on how this policy agenda can be moved forward.

30.        It is important to be explicit about what this study does not do:

                It does not provide additional analytical evidence on the issues that are constraining
                 private sector growth—it has as a starting point the existing evidence and rather
                 focuses on the question “what can be done??;

                It does not provide analytical evidence that transparency, accountability,
                 stakeholder participation and other attributes of good governance reduce
                 opportunities for capture, discretion and policy distortions that mute competition;


                                                                                             Page | 16
          It does not seek to provide evidence on the overarching political economy
           ecosystem including the political system, channels of influence (such as collective
           action by businesses);

          It does not measure the levels of capture, clientelism, exclusion, discretion,
           arbitrariness and corruption.

31.      Rather, as illustrated in Figure 1.1, the focus of this work is on the policies and
institutions, their design and implementation (symbolized by the middle rectangle in the
figure) rather than the political context upstream or the measurement of the actual symptoms
of policy ineffectiveness.

Figure 1.1: The ecosystem of capture, discretion, and arbitrariness




32.    This report adds value in a number of ways: a) It presents a new set of indicators that
enables granular assessment of the vulnerability to privilege-seeking of both individual policy
areas as well as the overall policy regime; b) The indicators are couched in concrete
operational terms (such as existence of policies, laws, systems and practices); thus, the move
from measurement to identification of actions is relatively straight forward; c) The indicators
capture both de jure and de facto dimensions and the report brings out the need to look at both;
d) The report discusses interactions between different policy areas that may help in identifying
potential synergy between different intervention areas and the sequencing of reform actions in

                                                                                      Page | 17
specific country contexts; and e) It brings together insights from different strands of literature
to provide a fairly comprehensive picture of the privilege-resistance agenda.

33.     The benchmarking of the degree of privilege-resistance (or its flip side, i.e.,
vulnerability to capture) may create demand for change, while the granular and operational
nature of the exercise may facilitate actual action in response to such demand. Many
operational interventions implied by this report are not novel and have been implemented in
different countries. However, these interventions may not have been viewed through the
“privilege-resistance? lens, and thus their potential to address privilege may not have been
fully realized. By providing this lens, the report hopes to catalyze a better packaging of
interventions that may make a substantial dent in privilege-seeking systems.

34.     The report is likely to be of interest to a wide audience. Governments will find the
methodology useful for identifying vulnerabilities in their policy areas and may use it for self-
assessments of the privilege-resistance of various policy areas. Moreover, while this report
does not provide in-depth country assessments, it provides enough country-specific
information for individual governments to initiate a discussion within the country on a
privilege-resistant policy agenda and identify a set of initial operational interventions. As
mentioned above, governments themselves may expand on the assessment by applying the
report’s methodology to collect more in-depth information on the policy areas covered, or on
additional policy areas.

35.      Non-governmental stake-holders, including businesses, who would like to see a move
from a privilege-driven policy regime towards greater competition may find the report’s
findings useful as an advocacy tool, both to raise awareness of the issue and to push for
concrete operational interventions. Development partners may find the report useful in
developing approaches within their programs to support privilege-resistant policy making as
well as design specific programs and interventions. It may also help in improving coordination
between donors operating in individual countries in order to create a critical push for the
agenda. Within the World Bank Group, as discussed in the last chapter, the report will help in
identifying entry-points for operational interventions, including opportunities for collaboration
in this area across global practices and other units.




                                                                                        Page | 18
                           II.     A Working Analytical Framework

36.     This report adapts the WDR 2017 conceptual approach to the process of policymaking
and policy implementation for the private sector. It proposes a working framework that
captures three dimensions of policy-making in the private sector area (summarized in Figure
1.2) below:

        i.       The process of policy formation (left rectangle)—including bargaining
                 between concerned actors, for the identification, selection and adoption of
                 policies; who is included in this process; who is excluded; and the barriers to
                 entry to the policy arena;

       ii.       The quality of the policies and of their implementation (middle rectangles)—
                 whether regulatory policies (e.g., licensing, permits, sector regulations, trade
                 policy and customs), or more active policy interventions (for instance
                 investment incentives, SOEs, access to land);

      iii.       The set of rules that restrict anti-competitive market behavior; these include
                 competition policy frameworks and public accountability mechanisms; the
                 latter restricting conflict of interest and encouraging financial disclosure and
                 right to information, hence creating disincentives to privilege seeking and
                 giving.

37.     Capture, collusion, exclusion, discretionary treatment and noncompetition in the
marketplace take place within the process of policy formation (left column in Figure 1.2). The
impact of these forces, is most explicitly felt in individual policy areas, both in the policies and
regulations as written on paper as well as in the manner they are implemented in practice
(middle column in Figure 1.2). These policies include both: a) regulatory policies, service
delivery and compliance; and b) government interventions, incentives and support to
businesses.

38.     Weaknesses in the individual policy areas create non-competitive outcomes in the
marketplace. It then falls on competition policy to address these deficiencies to enhance the
level of competition in various markets and curb anti-competition behavior by powerful
incumbents (right column in Figure 1.2). Where the competition policy framework is weak,
such deficiencies remain unaddressed. This generates a vicious cycle as the persistence of a
non-competitive marketplace increases the power of rent-seeking incumbents and their ability
to influence subsequent government decisions. The following sections discuss further the three
columns in Figure 1.2.



                                                                                          Page | 19
   Figure 1.2: A Conceptual Framework for Analyzing Discretion and Capture


                                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                   Shielding government interventions and policy-making
                                                                                                     from discretion, capture and privileged treatment

       … in the process                                                                                                                                 … in identifying, revealing
                                                                                                       …. in the delivery of government policies,
       of policy design                                                                                                                                      and dismantling
                                                                                                              interventions and services …
                                                                                                                                                        anti-competitive positions
          Transparency, inclusion and consultation in




                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                   

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                        Access to information and constraints to




                                                                                                                 Regulatory policies,




                                                                                                                                                            access to business ownership information
                                                                                                                                                            Open-business, private sector transparency and
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Access to information and data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              enforcement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Competition and anti-trust policy, and
                                                                                                                 service delivery and
                                                                                                               compliance enforcement
                                                        evidence-based policy-making
          policy-making




                                                                                                              Government interventions,
                                                                                                                   incentives and
                                                                                                                support to businesses
         

                                                        




          Ex-ante:                                                                                                                                              Ex-post:
       policy-making                                                                                           Policy implementation and            dealing with competition issues
                                                                                                                       enforcement                  and distorted market structures




The process of policy formation

                                                                                                          39.     Policies, laws and regulations affect the distribution of
                                                                                                          power and resources. They may generate new sources of
                                                                                                          rents, or eliminate existing ones. Support or opposition to
                                                                                                          such policies and regulations depend on the distribution of
                                                                                                          gains and losses and may be passive or active, depending on
                                                                                                          the power of the groups affected, the extent of their
                                                                                                          mobilization and their willingness to spend political capital in
                                                                                                          pursuit of their interests. Such political economy dynamics

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page | 20
often create a wedge between a technically optimum solution and the solution (policies, laws,
regulations etc.) actually adopted and implemented.

40.     This problem is accentuated if a government does not have a tradition of evidence -
based policy making. Information plays an important role here. Within a given political
economy context, lack of information and data often constrains evidence-based policy-making
by government. This creates space for interest groups to advocate policies and regulations that
diverge from the technically optimum. The problem is exacerbated by poor information flows
within government. Poor flows of information from government to businesses often creates
asymmetry of information within the business sector. Well-connected businesses may get to
know about government’s policy and regulatory plans in advance and prepare to advocate,
while others are caught unguarded. Box 2 includes examples of features characterizing good
policy formation processes.

       Box 2: Examples of features of good policy-formation processes
          • Governments give advance notice of planned policy and regulatory changes,
              shares draft policies and regulations with stakeholders through an inclusive
              consultative process and takes into account stakeholder feedback
          • Policies and regulations are based on solid technical analysis. Results of such
              analysis are made public
          • Policies and other reforms in specific areas follow from broader strategies and
              are consistent with other relevant policies



41.     Evidence-based policy-making also needs to be inclusive so that the evidence reflects
the issues, opportunities and constraints relevant to, and views expressed by, a broad range of
businesses. Inclusivity is enhanced by better disclosure of information by government because
this allows a broad range of people to take informed decisions in their businesses as well as
participate effectively in the policy-making process. This includes information on government
contracts or other government commitments that have fiscal or revenue implications, such as
tax incentives or power purchase agreements. Governments may also publicly disclose
economy-wide and sector statistics, such as on tax, customs, wages and industrial production.
Information such as these often confer market power and thus their wide-spread availability
helps create a level playing field for market players. There is a continuum of disclosure
scenarios ranging from limited disclosure to a small number of people to free disclosure to the
general public. Many different types of disclosure may be considered along this continuum.

42.    Governments are often non-transparent about their policy and regulatory intentions.
New policies, laws, regulations and standards are often announced without prior discussion
with stakeholders on the rationale and content of the initiatives. Apart from creating
unpredictability and lack of ownership, such initiatives often lead to low quality outputs

                                                                                        Page | 21
because they are not informed by the experience and knowledge of stakeholders. Sometimes,
even within government, lower-level officials charged with implementation are unaware of the
changes, leading to implementation gaps.

43.    The content of policies, laws, regulations and standards may or may not contain
provisions that promote transparent and rule-based interactions between economic actors.
Even where such provisions exist on paper, their administration or enforcement may fall short,
or favor some beneficiaries over others. The disclosure of the outputs of state action is key to
empowering citizens to hold governments accountable. Information related to outputs—who
benefited from the policies (e.g., which firms received tax incentives, land use rights, building
permits, etc.)—is vital to help citizens gauge whether state resources are being allocated fairly.

Government policies, interventions and regulatory services

                                  44.     The second important dimension is the quality of the
                                  design and implementation of specific policies and other
                                  government interventions aimed at private sector
                                  development. Here a particularly important factor is the
                                  prevalence of rule-based decision-making and service
                                  delivery, where any discretion follows well-defined rules.
                                  There is a range of possible scenarios. At one end of the
                                  continuum are cases where a government official confers a
benefit such as tax incentives, or performs a regulatory function such as issuing a construction
permit, in a discretionary manner with no reference to any predetermined criteria. Businesses
whose applications have been rejected do not know the reasons. No information is shared,
even within the office, on the recipients and amount of incentive granted to each. The scope
for discretion is reduced, although not fully eliminated, when a pre-determined set of criteria
exists, even if not always followed. At another end of the spectrum are cases where clear rules
or templates for decision-making are consistently followed. Disclosure of information, even if
only to a limited number of people, may encourage objective rule-based decision-making with
any discretion disclosed to relevant parties. Examples of such features are provided in Box 3
and are discussed in greater detail in Section IV.

       Box 3: Examples of features of non-discretionary government policies,
       interventions, and regulatory services
             Regulations do not prevent entry and competition and do not entail excessive
                discretionary decisions
             Regulatory enforcement follows well-defined criteria (for example, selection
                of enterprises to be inspected is based on risk-based mechanisms; inspectors
                follow checklists when inspecting companies)
             Award of privileges, such as investment incentives or industrial land, follow
                well-defined criteria and information on the awards is widely shared

                                                                                          Page | 22
                 There are good business-to-government feedback mechanisms on the quality
                  of reform implementation and regulatory delivery
                 The important sectors are not subject to any policies or regulations that are
                  onerous, costly or time-consuming, or that frequently change, thereby
                  creating “policy uncertainty?
                 If state-owned enterprises operate in the markets, they do not receive any
                  preferential treatment not available to other firms that may limit competition

Identifying, revealing and deterring anti-competitive behavior

  45.     Many markets in the MENA countries are not fully functioning and private sector

                                   participation is limited. This is because restrictive product
                                   market regulations and sector specific constraints created by
                                   government policies limit entry or affect firms’ capacity to
                                   compete in specific sectors; and because ineffective
                                   enforcement of competition rules allows for anticompetitive
   business         practices.     Based on currently available Global Competitiveness Review
Indicators, five out of twelve MENA countries score in the bottom decile in terms of intensity
of local competition and the effectiveness of competition (antimonopoly) policies among 148
countries. Even countries where competition frameworks have been enacted more than 10
years ago face challenges; this is the case of Tunisia, Morocco, Algeria and Jordan. Enhancing
the competition policy framework and its enforcement is a critical agenda in the region.

46.     In addition to other weaknesses in the competition policy framework, which prevent
the detection of anticompetitive behavior, existing rules often enable significant distortion
(e.g., exemptions for cartels without any well-defined criteria for such exemptions). As in the
other policy areas to be studied, here too the aim of the exercise will be to identify the room
for such discretion in the competition policy framework (see examples in Box 4 below).


        Box 4: Examples of features of strong government ability to assure competition
         There is an effective competition law and a functional Competition Authority in
           place; relevant questions:
                Can the Competition Authority’s decisions be vetoed by line Ministr ies or
                    any other body of the Executive Branch?
                Who allocates the budget of the competition Authority (e.g. Parliament,
                    Government, self-financing through merger filling or fines, other)?
                Is the Competition Authority governed by a single chairman or a
                    collegiate body)?
         There is transparency in private sector operations (Open Private Sector)
         The ownership and beneficiaries of private sector operations are disclosed



                                                                                              Page | 23
                  IV.    From Conceptual Framework to Measurement

47.     The above framework illustrates the need for developing tools and measures for
different policy areas that help determine where countries stand on the various dimensions of
governance for private sector policymaking. As described above, there are various elements
and features of policies, regulations and institutions that may reduce the risk of discretion,
unequal treatment, and arbitrariness for private sector firms. These features will vary by
specific policy area, and will likely include elements such as openness and transparent
practices, accountability for results, and the design of regulations and policies that promote
competition.

48.     This work therefore focused on analysis and the development of measurements. In
terms of measures, the exercise considered the policy areas listed below. Taken together, the
policy areas studied portray the principal elements of a framework to shield government
regulatory and promotional policies from the effectiveness-sapping consequences of
administrative discretion and capture by vested interests. The list of policy areas studied is not
comprehensive but does represent some of the most important channels through which
privilege is granted to businesses, or the process of privilege seeking is affected. These are the
principal channels or entry points where a set of measureable actions can be identified and
taken by policymakers to ultimately strengthen the private sector economic and job growth
performance.

                                Table 1.1: Policy areas studied

                   Overall process of policy-formation
                   Regulatory policy areas
                        Customs and trade policy
                        Business regulation
                   Active policy areas
                        Public procurement
                        Allocation of public land
                        Investment incentives
                        Access to finance
                   Competition policy and practice
                   Public accountability mechanisms
                        Conflict of interest restrictions
                        Financial disclosure
                        Freedom of information

49.    The stock-taking applied to each policy area consisted of three phases:



                                                                                        Page | 24
       Phase 1: developing the framework and the diagnostic methodology (on selected
        policy areas)
       Phase 2: data were collected in eight MENA countries - Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria,
        Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Kuwait, Oman, and four comparator countries (France, Italy,
        Portugal and Spain); in addition to the qualitative data specially collected for this
        study, secondary quantitative data was also used.

50.    The diagnostic methodology developed for benchmarking countries is a critical element
of this exercise.    The methodology relies on questionnaires or checklists of indicators,
pointing, for each country, to policy gaps and poor governance features that make these
countries prone to capture and discretion. The checklists assesse where MENA countries stand
in each of the above areas, in terms of how much of the privilege-resistant policy governance
features are prevalent or not.

51.      In practice, the policy checklists take the form of questionnaires (available in Annex 1)
that ask binary questions about the existences and features of specific policies, regulations and
institutions. The questionnaires cover “de jure?? (laws on paper) and “de facto? (the reality of
implementation) aspects. The questionnaires cover several policy areas as described hereafter
with a focus on the notions of transparency, fair opportunity, access to information
accountability and integrity. These questionnaires aim at identifying the breaches for privilege
at different levels of interactions of the private sector with the government and its
administration. They can identify opportunities for high level capture, such as in the case of
public procurement, access to public land and incentives or petty privileges in the case of tax
collection.



The categories of privilege-resistant features in the core policy areas

52.      From the point of view of privilege-resistance, the critical feature of a policy area is the
set of mechanisms that promote rule-based decision making (including discretion that is
justified but based on rules). The centrality of this is depicted in Figure 1.4, which also shows
the other features of policy areas covered by this study. Two sets of factors strengthen rule-
based decision making by creating accountability mechanisms that reveal violations of rule-
based protocols. These are grievance/redress mechanisms, and integrity mechanisms
addressing fraud and corruption. Further reinforcement is provided by transparency
arrangements, such as consultation with stakeholders and sharing of information with the
public. All these features operate more effectively if underpinned by a strong policy, legal and
institutional framework.




                                                                                           Page | 25
                  Figure 1.4: The categories of privilege-resistant policy features




                                                                                              Public information
              consultation
              Stakeholder




                                                                                                   sharing
                                    Rule-based (non-discriminatory)
                                           decision-making




                               Grievance redress                    Integrity
                                 mechanisms                        mechanisms




                                 Policy, legal and institutional framework




53.     The rule-based decision making feature can be captured through appropriate questions
in different policy areas. For example, other things remaining the same, the award of
investment incentives may be more rule-based if the grants are based on a review or screening
process by the authorities in charge of incentive administration, and if this is based on a set of
criteria published in advance. Similarly, when customs declarations for imports are
electronically processed, there is less likelihood of discretionary treatment. Some features may
expand the space for discretionary treatment, for example, “hidden requirements? for
obtaining business registration or construction permits, or no requirement for tax inspectors to
explain the reasons for inspections. Table 1.2 provides examples of questions used in this
study to capture policy features, such as the above, that relate to rule-based decision making.

         Table 1.2: Examples of questions that reflect rule-based decision making

    Policy area                  Examples of questions to reflect rule-based decision making
    Customs and trade policy     Are customs declarations electronically processed for imports - at least at
                                 the main ports?
    Business regulation          Are there informal requirements for obtaining business registration, in
                                 addition to the official ones?
                                 Are there hidden "procedures" for obtaining construction permits in

                                                                                                                   Page | 26
                                   addition to the official ones?
                                   In practice, do the authorities follow risk-based approaches to planning
                                   tax inspections?
                                   Is the purpose of the tax inspection visit clearly stated?
    Investment incentives          Are investment incentives granted based on a review or screening process
                                   by the authorities in charge of incentive administration? If so, is this
                                   based on a list of criteria published in advance?
    Allocation of public land      Is public industrial land allocated to the private sector
                                     through auctions or tenders?
                                     after a cost benefit or business plan analysis?
                                     after a due diligence process?
    Public procurement             By regulation:
                                    do public opening of tenders follows a defined and regulated
                                        procedure?
                                    are records of proceedings for bid openings are retained?
                                    are records of proceedings for bid openings are available for
                                        review?
                                    is security and confidentiality of bids is maintained prior to bid
                                        opening?



54.     Grievance/redress mechanisms allow aggrieved parties to express their grievances,
triggering fair and adequate responses by government, including justifications for negative
decisions. However, the mere existence of a grievance mechanism is not enough. It is vital that
government agencies take the mechanisms seriously and make a sincere, and fair, attempt to
address the grievance. All grievances are not expected to be justified or possible to resolve; in
such cases, good practice is for the agency to explain to the aggrieved party the reasons for not
taking the expected remedial measure. Time is of essence here; in other words, the
effectiveness of grievance mechanisms is enhanced if there are limits on how much time
government agencies can take to address grievances and inform businesses about decisions.
Table 1.3 contains examples of questions used in the study to capture this dimension.

    Table 1.3: Questions to reflect mechanisms for grievance, complaints and redress

    Policy area                 Examples of questions to reflect mechanisms for grievance, complaints
                                and redress
    Customs and trade           By regulation:
    policy                       is there a possibility to appeal decisions?
                                 is there an official timeframe for appeal?
                                 is there a possibility of recourse to independent jurisdiction in the final
                                   instance?
    Business regulation         By regulation, are there appeal mechanisms regarding construction permits?
                                In practice, are the appeal mechanisms used and are effective?
                                By regulation, are there grievance reporting and redress mechanisms
                                regarding tax inspections?
                                In practice, are there grievance reporting and redress mechanisms regarding
                                tax inspections?
    Investment incentives       Does the law allow the affected investor to appeal to a higher authority once

                                                                                                      Page | 27
                          a decision has been taken based on the application on incentives by the
                          administrating authority?
                          Does this happen in practice?
   Allocation of public   By regulation:
   land                    does the industrial land authority provide arguments and explanations
                             when it renders a negative decision?
                           is it possible to appeal a negative land allocation decision?
                          Is there an independent body to which applicants can appeal against the
                          decision of the industrial land authority?
                          By regulation, is the appeal committee required to render a decision within a
                          specific timeframe?
   Public procurement     Does the regulatory framework:
                           provide for the right of participants to ask for an independent review in a
                             procurement process?
                           establish timeframes for issuance of decisions by the administrative
                             review body?



55.    Integrity mechanisms, by detecting and addressing fraudulent and corrupt behavior,
increase the costs of discretionary treatment and thus strengthen incentives for rule-based
decision making. For example, in the case of public procurement, if the regulatory framework
covers fraud and corruption, provides a definition of what is considered fraud and corruption,
and spells out the individual responsibilities and consequences for government employees
found guilty of fraud or corruption in procurement, it may increase the likelihood of
procurement decisions being based on rules rather than discretion. A number of questions
were asked in different policy areas to capture such features (Table 1.4).

    Table 1.4: Questions to reflect mechanisms for detecting fraudulent and corrupt
                                        behavior

   Policy area            Examples of questions to reflect mechanisms for detecting fraudulent
                          and corrupt behavior
   Customs and trade      Are there financial incentives for customs officials to discover fraud?
   policy                 If yes, what are the incentives for customs agents to discover fraud? No
                          incentive; a flat incentive; a percentage of the fine?
                          Is the incentive to discover fraud capped?
   Public procurement     Does the regulatory framework cover fraud and corruption?
                          Does the regulatory framework provide a definition of what is considered
                          fraud and corruption?
                          Does the regulatory framework spell out the individual responsibilities and
                          consequences for government employees, and private firms or individuals,
                          found guilty of fraud or corruption in procurement?
                          Is there a secure, accessible and confidential system for the public reporting
                          of cases of fraud, unethical behavior and corruption?


56.    Furthermore, the incentives for rule-based decision making is strengthened by
transparency measures that involve sharing of information and consultation with stakeholders.

                                                                                                  Page | 28
Studies in several areas have shown the power of information and transparency in influencing
decisions by various actors, including government officials, and thus improving outcomes (for
example, Stiglitz 2001). For example, it has been demonstrated that requirements on pollution
disclosure can help reduce pollution levels, fiscal transparency and participatory budgeting can
lead to better outcomes in terms of both allocation of public resources and the efficiency of
their use, and cross-country indicators of performance can trigger actions by governments in
poorly performing countries (as evidenced by the reform momentum generated by the WBG’s
Doing Business indicators). Such evidence has triggered growing interest in the WBG on
governance related benchmarking, e.g., in the social sectors.10

57.     Similar considerations apply to the policy areas covered by this study. Thus, other
things remaining the same, customs officials are less likely to go for unduly discretionary
valuation of imports if tariff data are publicly available. More generally, their scope for
arbitrary behavior will be restricted if the customs code, and trade clearing procedures and
formalities are also publicly available, preferably on a web site. Similarly, rule-based decision
making may be encouraged in the case of business regulations if the compliance requirements,
such as procedures to be followed, fees to be paid and documents to be provided, are clearly
stated and made publicly available.

58.     Another set of transparency measures relates to publication of the decision outcomes.
Examples include a publicly available annual report on allocated public industrial land. This
practice will be sustainable if buttressed by law, i.e., if the relevant authority is required by law
or regulation to publish such a report. Another example is the practice of publicly sharing
information about investment incentives granted during a year. Such a practice, again
buttressed by law, may increase the likelihood of such incentives being granted in a rule-based
manner. Taking another example, a public procurement process may be conducted according
to cost and quality-based selection rules. However, in order to assure that the process is fair
and any discretion is aimed at achieving an efficient allocation of resources, the minutes of the
decision process may be recorded, kept on file and shared with bidding firms. In some cases,
where public disclosure does not threaten citizens’ (or firms’) privacy, it may be appropriate
for the service provider to publicly disclose policy outcomes, such as identification of winning
bids and firms.

59.    Finally, transparency is enhanced when there is a practice of consulting stakeholders on
important matters, such as draft laws, regulations and rules. Here too a legal requirement to
carry out such consultations may be important, especially in countries where such consultation


10  Nonetheless, it is important not to overstress the power of transparency. It has been argued in the literature that
it is not transparency per se but the confluence of transparency and political engagement that often brings about
change.


                                                                                                           Page | 29
traditions are weak. Information on the outcomes of the award process, including on non-
awards (such as number of rejections and reasons) may be disclosed to key ministries in the
government and/or key oversight bodies such as parliamentary committees. Examples of
questions that capture these dimensions of transparency for various policy areas are provided
in Table 1.5.

                     Table 1.5: Examples of questions to reflect transparency

 Policy area               Examples of questions to reflect transparency (consultation and information
                           sharing)
 Customs and trade         Are tariff data publicly available on a web portal accessible to all?
 policy                    Are trade clearing procedures and formalities publicly available on a web portal?
                           Is the customs code publicly available?
 Business regulation       By regulation, are the "requirements" for obtaining business registration specified
                           on a web portal or at the regulator’s office?
                           By regulation, are the "fees" for obtaining construction permits publicly available
                           on a website or national gazette?
                           By regulation, are the tax compliance requirements published and accessible on a
                           web portal or at the relevant authority?
                           In practice, do the relevant agencies inform applicants about decisions or delays in
                           providing construction permits within a specified timeframe?
 Investment incentives     Does the law require consultation at the time of formulation of the relevant laws,
                           regulations and decrees relating to incentives?
                           De facto, is an interested/affected investor given an opportunity to comment on the
                           relevant laws, regulations and decrees relating to incentives prior to their
                           finalization?
                           Does the Government maintain a central database/inventory of investment
                           incentives that provides a comprehensive list of incentives being offered to
                           investors? Is the inventory published in a publicly available source?
                           Does the government publicly share information about incentives awarded in the
                           past, including budgeted and awarded funds per year, as well as the number of
                           beneficiaries?
 Allocation of public      Is the land authority required by law or regulation to publish a report of allocated
 land                      public industrial land every year?
                           De facto, does the land authority publish a report of allocated public industrial
                           land every year?
                           Is this report available to the public either on a web portal or in a national
                           gazette?
 Public procurement        Is there an integrated information system that provides at a minimum, up-to-date
                           procurement information, including contract award information?
                           Is this information system accessible to the public at no or minimum cost?

60.     Finally, strong policy, institutional and legal frameworks help enhance resistance to
privilege seeking and granting. For example, this may happen in the case of public
procurement if there exists an oversight body which has its own budget and is free of conflict
of interest (e.g., not involved in procurement operations by law and in practice), and if there is
an institutionalized multi-year procurement planning exercise. In the case of public land
allocation, a public industrial land allocation system and a dedicated, independent
management authority may help narrow the scope for privilege seeking. In the case of

                                                                                                     Page | 30
investment incentives, the lack of a good policy framework increases the likelihood of
discretionary award of incentives. A good incentive policy would clearly articulate the
principles of the award process, and have provisions for publishing information on the
incentives offered and for periodic government review of the incentive regime in order to
assess the results and reform the regime if needed. A number of questions reflected such
features were included for various policy areas to capture the presence of such policy,
institutional and legal frameworks.


                V.      A New Measurement Tool: Country Dashboards


61.    The above discussion related to the core policy areas covered by this study. The
features of the foundational areas --policy formation process, competition policy and public
accountability mechanisms- are explained and discussed in detail in Chapter 2 and cover eight
countries in the Middle East and North Africa: Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Kuwait,
Morocco, Oman and Tunisia. For some policy areas, these countries have been benchmarked
against European comparators: France, Italy, Portugal and Spain.

62.     Such systematic country assessments in different policy areas have generated synthetic
country dashboards that may be viewed as quick diagnostic tools. These help identify sub-
policy areas that have left space for privilege, discretion and arbitrariness and need to be
reformed in order to level the playing field for the private sector. For each country, the policy
areas are graded as to their degree of vulnerability to privilege seeking.



63.     Data collection methodology: The data underlying these dashboards has been collected
up from May to July 2015 through topic-experts’ interviews in each country. Topic- experts
(inside and outside the World Bank Group) were mobilized in the following policy areas: trade
and customs, public procurement, access to public industrial land, access to finance, business
regulation, incentives policy. Data regarding North African countries have been collected by
the competition team of the world Bank and remaining countries’ data have been collected
through experts interviews. . Data regarding public accountability mechanisms have been
collected by the Governance practice for half the countries and completed by experts’
interviews for the other countries. Citizen engagement data are sourced from the World Bank’s
Global Indicators of Regulatory Governance in 2016.

64.     The data do not result from firms or government officials’ surveys and do not reflect
respondents’ perceptions. The treatment of data is not statistic and the questionnaires included
binary questions that led to scores of 0 for a negative feature and 1 for a positive feature i.e.
either the law or agency in question exists or not; either there is a publicly available data base

                                                                                        Page | 31
or not. Furthermore, collected data went through a round of verifications by world Bank staff
knowledgeable about the countries and policy areas.

65.     Scoring methodology: For each policy area, the composite score is the averages of the
binary scores obtained for all questions. Then the composite score determines the degree of
resistance to privilege in the policy are and in the country in question. Four intervals have been
created following the rules described hereafter. This arbitrary segmentation is a first try to rank
the countries according to the resistance of their policies to privilege, discretion and
arbitrariness. Another way of segmenting the countries would have been to rank them
according to their distance to the average (above or below) or their distance to the frontier (the
best performer). One extreme option would have been to use the O-ring theory and consider
that a negative answer for a key feature of one sub-policy area would annihilate the entire sub
policy area (let’s say the absence of a Central Bank’s regulation regarding lending to related
parties that would annihilate the entire section on lending to related parties in the finance
policy area and reduce that score to zero.

                              Legend of the country dashboards

Color code               Characterization of the sub-policy area
                         Very prone to privilege 0.75 < composite score < 1
                         Prone to privilege 0.5 < composite score < 0.75
                         Moderately prone to privilege 0.25< composite score < 0.5
                         Rather privilege proof 0 < composite score < 0.25

66.     Caveats and limitations: The database used for the country dashboards consists of
indicator values for different dimensions of the policy areas studied for the eight MENA
countries and four European comparator countries. These values are essentially binary
numbers, which indicate whether or not certain features (e.g., institutions, policies or
practices) exist for these policy dimensions. The values are based mostly on the knowledge,
and sometimes on the judgements, of experts familiar with the respective policy areas in the
countries. The experts were also provided with detailed guidance on how to carry out their
assessments. Nonetheless, binary scoring has its limitations. Some degree of subjectivity
creeps into the assessments and often there are gray areas that can’t be adequately captured by
such scoring. Therefore, the data in the following dashboards are only indicative as they result
from a first data collection exercise and can be improved through subsequent data collection
rounds.

The obtained dashboards might provide a rosier picture of countries’ privilege -
resistance. The data reflect only the policy areas that are covered through the questions
asked. Other sets of questions would have led to other results. In this first attempt to

                                                                                         Page | 32
diagnose and assess the privileges resistance of countries, the questionnaires or
checklists aimed at covering the essential breaches through which discretion,
arbitrariness and therefore privilege and preferential treatment could occur. The
questionnaires might be skewed toward the “de jure? aspect of policies -i.e. laws and
regulations, on paper- more than the “de facto? aspect i.e. the reality of their implantation
on the ground and how. This could provide a rosier picture of the reality of privilege-
resistance policies. For instance, in chapter two, we will see that the de jure situation in
terms of incentives is often better than the de facto one. A deeper look into each country
through another round of analysis could go further into the de facto situation.
67.    Another limitation of this data collection exercise is the fact that the questionnaires are a blend
of de facto and de jure questions, sometimes assessing policies on paper and sometimes their
implementation. One area of improvement of the diagnostic exercise is to separate these two aspects
and assess more deeply the extent to which policies are well, or fully, implemented on the ground and
what are the flaws and gaps in order to draft precise recommendations. Deep dives in several MENA
countries will be conducted later to deepen the understanding of privilege issues in each context.




                                                                                               Page | 33
                              Algeria
Public Procurement                                        Citizen engagement

The institutional and regulatory frameworks               Transparency of rule making
Fair Opportunity                                          Public consultations
Transparency, confidentiality and access to information   Impact assessment
Grievance, complaint, recourse
Integrity and accountability                              Access to Public Industrial Land

Trade and Customs                                         Institutional and regulatory framework
                                                          Transparency, publicity and scrutiny
Tariffs structure and transparency                        Grievance and recourse
Import restrictions and special regimes                   Enforcement: tax collection
Electronic processing of declarations and connectivity
Fines                                                     Business Regulation
Brokers
Customs procedures and ethics                             Business registration
Laws and appeals                                          Permits and licenses: Construction permits
                                                          Tax Inspections
Incentives policy
                                                          Finance
Legislative framework
Consultations                                             Related Parties and PEPs
Administration and governance of incentives               Corporate Governance
Transparency and access to information                    Insider trading

                                                          Public Accountability Mechanisms

                                                          Access to Information
                                                          Conflict of Interest
                                                          Asset Disclosure




                                Egypt
Public Procurement                                        Citizen engagement

The institutional and regulatory frameworks               Transparency of rule making
Fair Opportunity                                          Public consultations
Transparency, confidentiality and access to information   Impact assessment
Grievance, complaint, recourse
Integrity and accountability                              Access to Public Industrial Land

Trade and Customs                                         Institutional and regulatory framework
                                                          Transparency, publicity and scrutiny
Tariffs structure and transparency                        Grievance and recourse
Import restrictions and special regimes                   Enforcement: tax collection
Electronic processing of declarations and connectivity
Fines                                                     Business Regulation
Brokers
Customs procedures and ethics                             Business registration
Laws and appeals                                          Permits and licenses: Construction permits
                                                          Tax Inspections
Incentives policy
                                                          Finance
Legislative framework
Consultations                                             Related Parties and PEPs
Administration and governance of incentives               Corporate Governance
Transparency and access to information                    Insider trading

                                                          Public Accountability Mechanisms

                                                          Access to Information
                                                          Conflict of Interest
                                                          Asset Disclosure




                                                                                                       Page | 34
                              Jordan
Public Procurement                                        Citizen engagement

The institutional and regulatory frameworks               Transparency of rule making
Fair Opportunity                                          Public consultations
Transparency, confidentiality and access to information   Impact assessment
Grievance, complaint, recourse
Integrity and accountability                              Access to Public Industrial Land

Trade and Customs                                         Institutional and regulatory framework
                                                          Transparency, publicity and scrutiny
Tariffs structure and transparency                        Grievance and recourse
Import restrictions and special regimes                   Enforcement: tax collection
Electronic processing of declarations and connectivity
Fines                                                     Business Regulation
Brokers
Customs procedures and ethics                             Business registration
Laws and appeals                                          Permits and licenses: Construction permits
                                                          Tax Inspections
Incentives policy
                                                          Finance
Legislative framework
Consultations                                             Related Parties and PEPs
Administration and governance of incentives               Corporate Governance
Transparency and access to information                    Insider trading

                                                          Public Accountability Mechanisms

                                                          Access to Information
                                                          Conflict of Interest
                                                          Asset Disclosure



                              Kuwait
Public Procurement                                        Citizen engagement

The institutional and regulatory frameworks               Transparency of rule making
Fair Opportunity                                          Public consultations
Transparency, confidentiality and access to information   Impact assessment
Grievance, complaint, recourse
Integrity and accountability                              Access to Public Industrial Land

Trade and Customs                                         Institutional and regulatory framework
                                                          Transparency, publicity and scrutiny
Tariffs structure and transparency                        Grievance and recourse
Import restrictions and special regimes                   Enforcement: tax collection
Electronic processing of declarations and connectivity
Fines                                                     Business Regulation
Brokers
Customs procedures and ethics                             Business registration
Laws and appeals                                          Permits and licenses: Construction permits
                                                          Tax Inspections
Incentives policy
                                                          Finance
Legislative framework
Consultations                                             Related Parties and PEPs
Administration and governance of incentives               Corporate Governance
Transparency and access to information                    Insider trading

                                                          Public Accountability Mechanisms

                                                          Access to Information
                                                          Conflict of Interest
                                                          Asset Disclosure




                                                                                                       Page | 35
                             Lebanon
Public Procurement                                        Citizen engagement

The institutional and regulatory frameworks               Transparency of rule making
Fair Opportunity                                          Public consultations
Transparency, confidentiality and access to information   Impact assessment
Grievance, complaint, recourse
Integrity and accountability                              Access to Public Industrial Land

Trade and Customs                                         Institutional and regulatory framework
                                                          Transparency, publicity and scrutiny
Tariffs structure and transparency                        Grievance and recourse
Import restrictions and special regimes                   Enforcement: tax collection
Electronic processing of declarations and connectivity
Fines                                                     Business Regulation
Brokers
Customs procedures and ethics                             Business registration
Laws and appeals                                          Permits and licenses: Construction permits
                                                          Tax Inspections
Incentives policy
                                                          Finance
Legislative framework
Consultations                                             Related Parties and PEPs
Administration and governance of incentives               Corporate Governance
Transparency and access to information                    Insider trading

                                                          Public Accountability Mechanisms

                                                          Access to Information
                                                          Conflict of Interest
                                                          Asset Disclosure




                              Morocco
Public Procurement                                        Citizen engagement

The institutional and regulatory frameworks               Transparency of rule making
Fair Opportunity                                          Public consultations
Transparency, confidentiality and access to information   Impact assessment
Grievance, complaint, recourse
Integrity and accountability                              Access to Public Industrial Land

Trade and Customs                                         Institutional and regulatory framework
                                                          Transparency, publicity and scrutiny
Tariffs structure and transparency                        Grievance and recourse
Import restrictions and special regimes                   Enforcement: tax collection
Electronic processing of declarations and connectivity
Fines                                                     Business Regulation
Brokers
Customs procedures and ethics                             Business registration
Laws and appeals                                          Permits and licenses: Construction permits
                                                          Tax Inspections
Incentives policy
                                                          Finance
Legislative framework
Consultations                                             Related Parties and PEPs
Administration and governance of incentives               Corporate Governance
Transparency and access to information                    Insider trading

                                                          Public Accountability Mechanisms

                                                          Access to Information
                                                          Conflict of Interest
                                                          Asset Disclosure




                                                                                                       Page | 36
                               Oman
Public Procurement                                        Citizen engagement

The institutional and regulatory frameworks               Transparency of rule making
Fair Opportunity                                          Public consultations
Transparency, confidentiality and access to information   Impact assessment
Grievance, complaint, recourse
Integrity and accountability                              Access to Public Industrial Land

Trade and Customs                                         Institutional and regulatory framework
                                                          Transparency, publicity and scrutiny
Tariffs structure and transparency                        Grievance and recourse
Import restrictions and special regimes                   Enforcement: tax collection
Electronic processing of declarations and connectivity
Fines                                                     Business Regulation
Brokers
Customs procedures and ethics                             Business registration
Laws and appeals                                          Permits and licenses: Construction permits
                                                          Tax Inspections
Incentives policy
                                                          Finance
Legislative framework
Consultations                                             Related Parties and PEPs
Administration and governance of incentives               Corporate Governance
Transparency and access to information                    Insider trading                              -

                                                          Public Accountability Mechanisms

                                                          Access to Information
                                                          Conflict of Interest
                                                          Asset Disclosure



                              Tunisia
Public Procurement                                        Citizen engagement

The institutional and regulatory frameworks               Transparency of rule making
Fair Opportunity                                          Public consultations
Transparency, confidentiality and access to information   Impact assessment
Grievance, complaint, recourse
Integrity and accountability                              Access to Public Industrial Land

Trade and Customs                                         Institutional and regulatory framework
                                                          Transparency, publicity and scrutiny
Tariffs structure and transparency                        Grievance and recourse
Import restrictions and special regimes                   Enforcement: tax collection
Electronic processing of declarations and connectivity
Fines                                                     Business Regulation
Brokers
Customs procedures and ethics                             Business registration
Laws and appeals                                          Permits and licenses: Construction permits
                                                          Tax Inspections
Incentives policy
                                                          Finance
Legislative framework
Consultations                                             Related Parties and PEPs
Administration and governance of incentives               Corporate Governance
Transparency and access to information                    Insider trading

                                                          Public Accountability Mechanisms

                                                          Access to Information
                                                          Conflict of Interest
                                                          Asset Disclosure




                                                                                                           Page | 37
 Chapter 2: From Concept to Measurement: Assessment of policy
                            areas
                   I.      Citizen Engagement in Policy Formulation


68.     The extent to which governments inform citizens about upcoming regulations, solicit
inputs from them in the drafting of regulations and assess the impact of proposed regulations
on the basis of evidence, has an important bearing on the quality of regulatory regimes. Such
disciplines in the regulatory design phase has important implications for privilege seeking and
vulnerability of policy regimes to such influences. Transparency and stakeholder engagement
in individual policy areas is analyzed in other sections. This macro-analysis is important
because transparent and consultative practices in individual policy areas may be short-lived in
the absence of an overall government commitment to such practices. This section focuses on
one an important aspect of policy formulation, i.e., the overall process of rule-making.

69.     This section is based on the 2016 WBG Global Indicators of Regulatory Governance
which measure citizen Engagement in rule-making. This global exercise established
benchmarks for more than 180 economies along several dimensions of the regulatory design
phase, including: a) prior notification of upcoming regulations and publication of draft
regulations; b) solicitation of comments from citizens on the drafts; c) reporting of results of
the consultations; and d) carrying out impact assessments of proposed regulations. Prior notice
on upcoming regulations reduce regulatory surprises and provides different stakeholders with
adequate time to prepare for an assessment of the draft regulations when they are published.
The publication of these drafts in an accessible manner accompanied by an inclusive
consultation process allows a wide range of stakeholders to become aware of the contents and
voice their opinion. For example, they can examine if the regulations, as written, would create
opportunities for privilege-seeking and, if so, push for more privilege-resistant drafting of
regulations.

70.     These transparency-enhancing processes are strengthened if complemented by
accountability measures. An important test of a government’s commitment to consultative
practices is the practice of reporting back on the consultation results. Governments are not
expected to incorporate all comments received from stakeholders, especially since comments
can be contradictory. However, the requirement to report back enhances accountability.
Additional discipline is provided when impact assessments of proposed regulations are
conducted. Other things remaining the same, an impact assessment lowers the probability of
regulations being written in a way that accords undue privileges to a select few. By taking a
thorough look at the outcome and impact chain, such assessments may reveal loopholes that
make the proposed regulations vulnerable to privilege-seeking.


                                                                                      Page | 38
71.     A high degree of transparency, a commitment to consultation and the discipline of
evidence-based regulatory design are not uncommon in developed countries. This is shown in
the following figure which has the composite scores from the Global Indicators of Regulatory
Governance benchmarking exercise for four developed European countries (the comparators)
and the eight MENA countries covered by this study. While there is some variation among the
four comparator countries, the main difference is between the MENA countries and their
developed European comparators – the former predictably performing much worse in
engaging citizens in rule-making. Also striking is the difference within the MENA region.
Two clear groups emerge. Three countries, Tunisia and Morocco in the west, and Jordan in the
east, score near the average for the entire sample of 12 countries, i.e., including the European
countries. The other five, Algeria, Egypt, Kuwait, Lebanon and Oman, score very low. In the
following sections, we go deeper into these findings by looking at the individual dimensions of
regulatory design.

            Figure 2.1: Citizen Engagement in Rule Making in MENA Region


                                      Citizen Engagement in Rule Making
           1.10
                                                                                                                         0.967
           1.00                               Indicator                Mean                             0.933   0.933
           0.90
           0.80
           0.70
                                                                                              0.567
           0.60
                  0.500                                                               0.500
           0.50
           0.40
                                                                            0.300
           0.30
           0.20                       0.133
                                                0.067
           0.10
                            0.000                         0.000    0.000
           0.00
                  Tunisia   Algeria   Egypt     Kuwait    Oman    Lebanon   Jordan   Morocco Portugal   Italy   France   Spain




Prior notice and the publication of drafts

72.     Five countries in the MENA region, Tunisia, Morocco, Egypt, Kuwait and Jordan, give
prior notice of upcoming regulations by publishing their draft text. Of these, Kuwait is the
only country that does not publish the entire text of the proposed draft regulation. In contrast,
Algeria, Lebanon and Oman do not publish the text or summary of proposed regulations
before their enactment.

73.     Performance, however, varies among the different countries (see Figure 2.2). Morocco
is the only country where the rulemaking body is required by law to give notice and publish
draft regulations at least 15 days before enactment. Thus, while in the other four countries
ministries or regulatory agencies do publish the text or summary of draft regulations, the lack
of a legal requirement renders these practices less than robust. In Morocco, Tunisia and

                                                                                                                                 Page | 39
Jordan, the notices and draft regulations are posted on a unified website. In Jordan, draft
regulations are also published on a ministry website. Egypt informs citizens through public
meetings or direct distribution to interested stakeholders.

74.     In all five countries with the exception of Kuwait, the entire legal text of the proposed
draft is published. Furthermore, anyone can access the text of proposed regulations except in
Egypt and Kuwait. In Morocco, the law also sets the time period for the proposed text to be
available for public consultation. These nuances indicate that even when countries do share
draft regulations, the degree of transparency may vary. In this case, for example, while both
Egypt and Morocco share drafts, the practice is substantially less transparent in the former
(Figure 2.2).

               Figure 2.2: Publication of Draft Regulations in MENA Region

                                                         Publication of draft regulations
                                           100
                   Index score (max=100)




                                            80


                                            60


                                            40


                                            20


                                             0
                                                 Tunisia Morocco Algeria   Egypt    Lebanon Jordan   Kuwait   Oman

                                                                       Publish regulations




The quality of consultations on draft regulations

75.     The degree of stakeholder engagement goes down as we move from the publication of
drafts to the quality of consultation on the draft regulations (Figure 2.3). In all countries, with
the exception of Algeria, Lebanon and Oman, ministries or regulatory agencies request
comments on proposed regulations. In Lebanon, stakeholders do not formally get access to the
drafts and there is no scope for them to shape regulations by providing inputs. However,
powerful stakeholders, such as well-connected businesses, may influence rule-making through
informal channels. Since other stakeholders don’t get their voices heard, there is greater
likelihood that regulations will be framed such that a select few are favored. The situation
could even be worse in Oman where, since drafts are not published, less influential
stakeholders may be completely unaware of proposed regulations, let alone provide any
comments.


                                                                                                                     Page | 40
76.    There are some variations among the countries that do seek comments from
stakeholders. In only one country, Morocco, the rule-making body is required by law to
request comments and there is a specialized government body that receives the comments.
This somewhat enhances the robustness of the consultation process. There is also variation in
the means used to obtain comments. Jordan and Egypt, for example, utilize public meetings
and targeted outreach to business associations and/or other stakeholders (and, in the case of
Jordan, also official correspondence via letters) but there is no website through which
comments are requested. Tunisia uses a unified web site, as does Morocco, and also targeted
outreach. Kuwait only uses targeted outreach which could potentially leave out many less
influential stakeholders from the consultation process. The practice of conducting public
consultation and reporting back on its results across the 8 MENA countries is reflected in
Figure 2.3.

        Figure 2.3: The Quality of the Consultation Process in the MENA region

                                                    The quality of the consultation process
                                             100
                  Index of score (max=100)




                                             80

                                             60

                                             40

                                             20

                                               0
                                                   Tunisia Morocco Algeria   Egypt Lebanon Jordan Kuwait      Oman

                                              Request comments on draft regulations    Report consultation results



77.    As mentioned above, the culture of transparency is enhanced when there are also strong
accountability mechanisms in place. An important measure of accountability is reporting back
on the consultations. Such reporting back, even in summary form, reveals the variety of
comments and stakeholder concerns and the manner in which government has responded. This
puts pressure on governments to demonstrate that they have addressed the comments
adequately. The MENA countries perform very poorly on this score. While five countries do
invite comments on draft regulations (albeit with many weaknesses in the consultation
process), only two, Morocco and Jordan, report back on the results of the consultation (Figure
2.3). However, there are weaknesses in Jordan. Unlike in Morocco, reporting back is not
required by law and the reports are not published on a website, rather customized responses
are provided to certain audiences.

The Provision of Impact Assessment


                                                                                                                     Page | 41
78.    Only Tunisia provides impact assessments of proposed regulations (Figure 2.4). In
Tunisia, these impact assessments are required by law and conducted only after the
consultation. However, the assessments are kept internal and are not distributed to the public.
Thus, although the assessments typically cover a range of impact – such as impact on the
public sector and administrative costs, on the environment and on social outcomes including
employment – they may not be of good quality.

           Figure 2.4: Provision of Impact Assessment of Proposed Regulations


                                                   Provision of impact assessment
                Index score (max=100)




                                        100
                                        80
                                        60
                                        40
                                        20
                                          0
                                              Tunisia Morocco Algeria   Egypt   Lebanon Jordan   Kuwait   Oman




Conclusion

79.    It is clear from the above analysis that countries in the MENA region still have a long
way to go in terms of having a transparent and participatory approach to policy-making,
underpinned by a strong sense of government accountability. There is variation within the
region with some pockets of good practice. However, the robustness of such good practices
can be questioned.

80.     The country-specific findings suggest a three-fold grouping of countries in terms of
how they perform on the following dimensions, i.e., prior publication of draft regulations,
quality of consultations, reporting back on consultations and carrying out impact assessments.

   Morocco and Tunisia appear to have the best performance with several good practices in
    the first two areas. They need to complement these by improving or initiating the practice
    of impact assessments of regulations. Tunisia, notably, is the only country which carries
    out impact assessments of proposed regulations. However, it does not report back at all on
    consultation results, which is a serious weakness from the point of view of accountability.
    In addition, there is further scope for improvement in the other three areas. For example, in
    Tunisia, some of the good practices are not legal requirements unlike in Morocco where
    there is a legal requirement to publish draft regulations, request comments and report on the
    results of the consultations. The absence of a legal requirement in some instances raises
    questions about the sustainability of such good practices in Tunisia.

                                                                                                                 Page | 42
   Jordan and Egypt and Kuwait come next. In terms of the overall score (Figure 2.1), these
    three countries underperform with respect to Morocco and Tunisia, and their performance
    is also less uniform across the dimensions listed above compared to each other. Jordan does
    relatively better with regard to publication of draft regulations and, along with Morocco,
    reports back on the results of consultation. However, it does not conduct any kind of impact
    assessment, which is a detriment to the quality of proposed regulations. Egypt provides
    notice of upcoming regulations by sharing their text in public meetings and through direct
    distribution to interested stakeholders. It carries out consultations on proposed regulations
    but typically in a targeted manner with selected groups.

   The other three countries, Algeria, Lebanon and Oman, demonstrate little commitment to
    transparent and participatory approaches to rule-making. Algeria, Lebanon and Oman score
    zero on publication of draft regulations. They neither carry out public consultation nor
    conduct any impact assessment.

81.      These findings provide some preliminary indications of the reform priorities in these
countries. For Morocco and Tunisia, the main priority will be to consolidate the good practices
that currently exist. Thus, for Tunisia, putting these practices on a solid legal footing by
making them legal requirements appears to be an important agenda. Also both countries
should consider introducing or improving the practice of impact assessments. This is a major
discipline that is currently weak in both countries. For Jordan, Kuwait and Egypt, there could
be a strategic choice to make. These countries may focus on the areas where they already have
some good practices (such as publication of draft regulations, and conducting public
consultation) and improve these areas further. An alternative approach would be to focus on
areas where they performing very poorly at present (such as conducting impact assessments
and reporting back on consultation results) and improve their performance in these areas. For
Algeria, Lebanon and Oman, the agenda is much more challenging because of their poor
performance across the board. Further analysis is required to come up with an appropriate
reform strategy for these countries.

82.     When it comes to enacted regulations currently in force, data show that affected parties
can request reconsideration or appeal adopted regulations in only three countries – Jordan,
Lebanon and Tunisia. However, neither of these economies have a requirement in place to
periodically review regulations and check whether they are still needed or should be revised.
Nevertheless, in all of the 8 MENA countries, laws and regulations that are currently in effect
appear to be easily accessible. They are available in a single place, typically on unified
websites in Algeria, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco and Tunisia. They are also widely printed in
official gazettes across the region.



                                                                                       Page | 43
                                     II.      Trade and Customs


83.     Importing and exporting are important operations in the lifecycle of a firm and unfair
treatment in the process of importing inputs or exporting goods can be very costly, sometimes
threatening the very survival of the business. Thus, an enabling environment for the private
sector should guarantee trade and customs policies that are simple and legible, leaving little
room for undue discretion that leads to arbitrariness and privileges.

84.     The assessment of trade and customs policies in the selected MENA countries, and
their resistance to privilege, covers seven dimensions: i) tariff structure and transparency, since
the more complex and opaque is the tariff structure the more room there is for discretionary
interpretation, arbitrariness and privileges and as the higher is the highest the tariffs, the more
incentive there is to commit fraud and avoid those high tariffs; ii) import restrictions and
special regimes, as more restrictions and exceptions create rents, thus both increasing
incentives to seek privilege as well as opportunities to grant them;11 iii) Electronic processing
of declarations and connectivity, since electronic processing favors transparency and clearing
procedures available to the public on a web portal are a good way to reduce arbitrariness
because every firm knows what it is supposed to pay; iv) Fines and the incentives to discover
fraud; v) The obligation to go through brokers, as they can be intermediaries for corruption;
vi) Customs procedures and ethics, and vii) grievance mechanisms allowing for corrective
mechanisms in case of unfair treatment.

               Table 2.1: Privilege Resistant Trade and Customs Questionnaire

 Privilege Resistant Trade and Customs Questionnaire
 Tariffs structure and transparency
 Verifies that tariff data are publicly available and up to date. It also assesses the tariff structure and
 the room/incentive for cheating the system.
 Import restrictions and special regimes
 Assesses the mechanism for granting import licenses and the existence of clear and transparent
 criteria as opposed to de facto hidden requirements. It also assesses whether physical inspections
 regime are burdensome.
 Electronic processing of declarations and connectivity
 Assesses the degree of electronic processing as opposed to human processing and the electronic
 centralization of bookkeeping.


11This is particularly true of non-tariff barriers which are often introduced in a discretionary manner to
provide protection to favored groups or even individual businesses.
                                                                                                    Page | 44
 Fines
 Assesses whether the scale of fines is publicly available and whether it provides custom agents’
 incentives for discovering fraud.
 Brokers
 Assesses whether brokers could be agents of corruption
 Customs procedures and ethics
 Assesses the quality of customs internal procedures and sanctions for corruption.
 Laws and appeals
 Verifies whether it is possible to appeal decisions in a specified timeframe and with and
 independent jurisdiction.

85.     Before comparing countries, it is important to distinguish the main objectives of
customs: revenue collection, trade facilitation or a controlling function for security reasons. In
resource-rich countries of the region, the main objective of customs is not a revenue collection
one but much more a security imperative. Trade facilitation is now scarcely the main function
of customs.

86.     Morocco performs the best and Kuwait the worst in this policy area (Figure 2.5). The
other five countries (no data are available for Oman) are bunched close together in the overall
privilege-resistant score for trade and customs, with their scores ranging from 0.64 to 0.77.
Kuwait’s performance is uniformly poor across all the broad dimensions covered but
particularly so in terms of tariff structure and transparency (Figure 2.5). Their customs do not
have a strong fiscal role and do not handle large amounts of trade which can explain their
ranking. Morocco, the best performer, has a uniformly good performance but it particularly
stands out in the area of trade restrictions and special regimes.

          Figure 2.5: Overall Index of Privilege Resistance in Trade and Customs

                           Trade & Customs Indicator Privilege Resistance
                    1.00                                                  0.91
                             0.75     0.71     0.77              0.73
                    0.80                                                           0.64
                    0.60
                                                        0.42
                    0.40
                    0.20
                    0.00
                            Algeria   Egypt   Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Morocco Tunisia
                                                Indicator         Mean


87.    Algerian customs’ main objective is not to generate revenues but rather to control
borders with a security imperative. In this regard, customs are better equipped than their

                                                                                             Page | 45
counterparts in the region, with headquarters connected to the main border-posts, regulations
in place and relatively enforced with a well-functioning internal sanctions and appeal
mechanisms. However, this well-functioning administration does not seem to pay much
attention to service delivery to the private sector by requiring paper declaration and not
making public, for instance, the scale of infringement. Moreover, a recent decision by the
government to introduce new import licenses (probably due to a protection imperative) with
no clear criteria for granting them opens the door to arbitrariness and privileges.

88.      Among customs agencies where revenue collection has been a major objective, Tunisia
ranks particularly low due to major possibilities for privileges and special treatments in a
context where lack of discipline, poor grievance mechanisms and cronyism has developed in
recent years (Rijkers et al. 2015). Two other countries ranking in the middle, i.e., Lebanon and
Egypt, have room for improvement in terms of transparency as well as reducing bargaining
power of officials to grant import licenses, especially given that Lebanon is known for the
institutionalized privileges in terms of import licenses (cf. competition section).

Tariff structure and transparency

89.     Moving on to specific dimensions of the trade and customs regime, Egypt exemplifies
a common pattern in the region with regard to tariff structure and transparency (Figure
2.6). It has a large number (12) of tariff bands and high tariff peaks. The multiplicity and
complexity of tariff bands leaves room for interpretation and discretion from the customs
authority, and also increases the incentive for private firms to game the system.

                  Figure 2.6: Index of Tariff Structure and Transparency

                                    Tariff structure and transparency
                   1.00
                           0.83                                        0.83
                   0.80                       0.75             0.75            0.75
                                      0.67
                   0.60

                   0.40
                                                       0.17
                   0.20

                   0.00
                          Algeria    Egypt   Jordan   Kuwait Lebanon Morocco Tunisia


Import restrictions and special regimes

90.   Tunisia’s customs regime exemplifies poor performance on another dimension, i.e.,
import restrictions and special regimes (Figure 2.7). It is characterized by the existence of

                                                                                       Page | 46
non-automatic licenses and numerous import regimes, which leaves much room for privileges
and possible collusion.12 Moreover, Tunisia is deficient in making public the complex import
processes. Appeals against customs decisions are non-existent in practice despite their
possibility on paper. However, it could be related to the fact that sanctions in customs and
among brokers for non-compliance or collusion has been virtually non-existent in the last few
years - only one custom agent was sanctioned in the last four years and no broker license was
removed in the past five years despite well-known increase in customs fraud (Ayadi et al.
2013). Import processes are complex and with built-in leeway for negotiations so that, in a
context of low discipline, fraud and smuggling has started to prosper. After having
implemented some important reforms before the revolution (but colluding with the Ben Ali
family to a large extent, see Rijkers et al 2015), the performance of Tunisian customs has
deteriorated significantly after the revolution, crippled with increasing corruption and
collusion.13

                 Figure 2.7: Index of Import Restrictions and Special Regimes

                                        Import restrictions and special regimes
                                                                                   1.00
                                 1.00
                                 0.80             0.63    0.69
                                                                                            0.62
                                 0.60    0.50
                                 0.40                             0.25     0.21
                                 0.20
                                 0.00




Electronic processing and connectivity

91.    In terms of electronic processing and connectivity (Figure 2.8), Tunisia ranks at the
bottom with Kuwait. The absence of electronic processing of customs declarations is another
loophole that opens the door to human interaction, arbitrariness, discretion and even

12 The World Bank Group’s Systematic Country Diagnostic for Tunisia (World Bank 2015b) states: “ Tunisia has
relatively low non-tariff measures (NTMs) frequency and coverage ratios, but it has highly bureaucratic and
potentially discretionary procedures. Firms have repeatedly complained about the lack of transparency in the
application of rules giving room to procedural inefficiencies, obstructions, and arbitrary conduct hampering the
country’s overall competitiveness.? (World Bank, 2015b)

13According to the WBG’s Tunisia SCD (World Bank 2015b): “Discretionary implementation of customs
regulations and tariff evasion results in an estimated annual revenue loss of at least US$100 million
(approximately 0.15 percent of GDP). Moreover, import-monopolists (i.e. firms that are the only firms that import
particular products) on average underreport in the magnitude of 131 percent relative to firms that are not.
Corruption in customs has received considerable media attention and has also been identified as one of the key
mechanisms by which cronies were able to reap rents.?

                                                                                                      Page | 47
corruption. Absence of connectivity between customs offices leads to less scrutiny and control
on crony firms’ transactions and operations. Morocco performs moderately well on this
dimension but does not stand out. Although it has successfully carried out customs reform
ensuring transparency, scrutiny and grievance mechanisms, the reform agenda is unfinished.
Reforms are required with regard to phasing-out paper declarations, more transparency and
work on custom agents’ incentives and behaviors on the ground to curb fraud and corruption.


                Figure 2.8: Index of Electronic Processing and Connectivity

                                      Electronic processing and conncectivity
                         1.00

                         0.80      0.75      0.75    0.75             0.75    0.75

                         0.60                                                         0.50
                                                              0.38
                         0.40

                         0.20

                         0.00
                                Algeria     Egypt   Jordan   Kuwait Lebanon Morocco Tunisia




                            III.          Business Regulation Practices

Introduction

92.     Business surveys indicate that regulatory policy uncertainty is a major constraint faced
by entrepreneurs in the MENA region. World Bank (2015a) has been argued that
discriminatory implementation of policy, especially undue discretion in enforcing rules and
regulations, is a major reason why businesses in the region perceive policy uncertainty. The
report provides results from an analysis of the variations in time taken to complete different
regulatory compliance functions such as clearing goods through customs, or obtaining an
operating license or a construction permit. The data, which cover the period 2006-2013, show
widespread variations in business experience with the same regulatory interface within a
country; indeed, within-country variations are greater than differences across countries.

93.    A variety of weaknesses in the business regulatory regime create scope for the discretionary
enforcement of regulations. This section assesses such weaknesses in the MENA region. While
business regulations encompass a wide range of areas, this section does not aspire to provide a
comprehensive assessment of the privilege-resistance of all such areas. Rather, it is based on
data collected for three areas which are important from a firm’s point of view and exemplify

                                                                                              Page | 48
well characteristics of the business regulation regimes in the countries studied. The areas are:
business registration, obtaining construction permit (proxy for the permitting and licensing
regime) and tax inspections.14

94.     These relate to different parts of the life cycle of a business. Business registration is
essentially an entry requirement although in many countries registration needs to be renewed at
regular intervals during a firm’s operations. Obtaining a construction permit is relevant to both
the entry and operations stages. Unless they are operating from a rented premise, one of the
first things businesses need to do is construct a factory and/or office premises. Moreover,
additional construction work is often required during the lifetime of a business, especially for
those expanding their operations. A tax inspection is a regulatory interface that is largely and
frequently encountered during operations.


                Table 2.2: Privilege Resistant Business Regulation Questionnaire

     Privilege Resistant Business Regulation Questionnaire
     Business registration
     Verifies that the requirements and fees for obtaining business registration are publicized and there are no
     hidden or informal ones.
     Permits and licenses: Construction permits
     Verifies that the requirements, timeframes and fees for obtaining construction permits are publicized and
     there are no hidden or informal ones. It also verifies whether negative decisions are justified and appeal
     mechanisms in place.
     Tax Inspections
     Verifies whether tax inspections are risk-based, announced (dates and purpose) and that the tax
     compliance requirements are publicized. It also verifies whether tax inspectors behave transparently and
     are accountable for their actions and whether appeal mechanisms are in place.

95.     These features of the three business regulation interfaces influence the degree to which
businesses are vulnerable to regulatory harassment. We may consider a “vulnerability?
indicator based on two factors: a) the cost to businesses of an adverse decision by the regulator,
and the b) probability of such an adverse decision that, in turn, depends on the frequency of the
regulatory interface and the intrinsic scope for discretionary interpretation by government
officials.15 By this definition, the degree of vulnerability is likely to be lowest for business
registration, highest for tax inspections and in-between for construction permitting. This is
because the frequency of the interface, as well as the scope for discretionary interpretation of a

14
   Future work may look at other regulatory areas. These may include very specific regulatory interfaces, such as
the transparency and fairness in the provision of vendor permits or specific regulatory transactions and nspection
practices in the hospitality industry? Such areas are economically important, and are important for developing
trust between regulators (the state) and economic agents (citizens).
15
   The “intrinsic? scope for discretionary behavior depends on the nature of the regulatory interface and is
independent of the policy and administrative regime in a country. Given the inherent scope, the actual scope for
discretionary behavior is a function of the policy and administrative regime of the country.

                                                                                                         Page | 49
business’s regulatory compliance and its operating conditions (such as taxable profits), is
lowest for business registration and highest for tax inspections. The costs of business
interruption or shutdown due to an adverse government decision is likely to be greater when a
business is operational (most relevant for tax inspections) than when it is yet to start operations
(relevant for business registration). Construction permitting lies in-between on these aspects.

96.    A flip side of this is the degree to which influential businesses may benefit from
manipulating the system. Such businesses have more at stake with the tax regime than with the
business registration process, with construction permitting falling in-between. Thus the
“incentive to capture? measure will go up progressively as we move from business registration
to construction permitting to tax inspections. Figure 2.9 summarizes this logical chain.


                           Figure 2.9: The policy to privilege chain


                           Intrinsic frequency
                              of interaction
                                                    Intrinsic probability     Intrinsic vulnerability
 Nature of regulatory
                                                         of adverse                for ordinary
      interface            Intrinsic scope for      regulatory decision             businesses
                             discretionary
                               treatment
                                                      Intrinsic cost of       Intrinsic incentive for
                                                    adverse regulatory        influential businesses
                                                          decision                  to capture




97.    From these perspectives, the findings on the business regulation interface are quite
revealing. Figure 2.10 summarizes the scores for each of the three regulatory interfaces, with a
higher score signifying greater privilege-resistance of the interface. For the MENA countries,
the quality deteriorates progressively as we move from business regulations to construction
permitting to tax inspections. In other words, in the MENA region, the actual opportunity for
capture by influential businesses and the likelihood of harassment of ordinary businesses is
highest in the very areas where the intrinsic “incentive to capture? and “vulnerability to
harassment? is highest (i.e., tax inspections) – in other words, a double jeopardy!

98.     As described above, the intrinsic measures are a function of the particular type of
regulatory interface and should not vary much between countries. Governments can counteract
the intrinsic nature of the regulatory interface (especially when it is adverse) by policy
decisions that shape the actual nature of the regulatory interface. Thus, government should pay
particular attention to making privilege-resistant those regulatory regimes that are intrinsically
more problematic, such as tax inspections. In the MENA region, the opposite seems to have
happened.

                                                                                           Page | 50
                         Figure 2.10: Degree of privilege-resistance for various
                                     business regulation interfaces

                              Degree of privilege-resistance for various
                                    business regulation interfaces
                           (Higher score means greater privilege-resistance)
           1
         0.8
         0.6
         0.4
         0.2
           0
                  Business Registration      Construction permits        Tax inspections

                                             MENA       Europe

                    Europe is here represented by Italy, France, Portugal and Spain

Differences within MENA

99.     The general picture painted above hide variations across the region. Lebanon, Kuwait
and Tunisia rank at the bottom for their business regulation practices (Figure 2.11). Lebanon
scores the lowest because of the hidden and informal requirements that are needed for business
registration, the non-publicity of requirements, fees and procedures needed for a construction
permit as well as the need to renew the latter annually with no specified time to obtain the
permit, nor a justification for a negative decision or the possibility to appeal such negative
decision. The tax inspection system is not risk-based, the compliance requirements are not
publicized, and neither are the firms provided copies of the inspection nor able to fill in a
complaint.

100. In Tunisia, tax inspections are not risk-based and the tax compliance requirements are
not publicized. Tax enforcement decisions are not vetted by a commission or supervisor,
leaving the power in the hands of a sole tax inspector who can then threaten a firm with
suspension and extract a bribe. As in Lebanon, there are no grievance mechanisms for tax
inspections. In Kuwait, construction permits are not delivered in a specified timeframe and
firms are unable to appeal a negative decision. Kuwait’s tax inspection profile is similar to that
of Lebanon.

101. Algeria, Morocco and Jordan rank in the middle displaying gaps in terms of hidden fees
for obtaining construction permits in Algeria and Morocco for instance. In Jordan, tax
inspectors have too much power, business registration involves hidden requirements and fees
and obtaining construction permits follow and opaque procedure with no specified timeframe.


                                                                                           Page | 51
               Figure 2.11: Business Regulation Indicator Score for MENA countries and
                                             Comparators

                                   Business Regulation Indicator Score
       1.000
       0.900                                                                   0.833
                         0.778                           0.750                                 0.778
       0.800     0.722           0.694                                                                 0.708
       0.700
       0.600                             0.528                   0.500 0.528           0.528
       0.500                                     0.403
       0.400
       0.300
       0.200
       0.100
       0.000




                                                    Indicator         Mean




102. While some countries perform well when the average of the three regulatory interfaces
are considered, there are significant differences within the country across regulatory areas (see
Figure 2.12). Egypt is a good example. Overall, Egypt outperforms its neighbors in terms of
the transparency and fairness of its business regulation practices, except the fact that business
registration needs to be renewed every five years thus multiplying the points of contact with
the administration and hence the opportunities for extracting bribes by threatening the
continuity of the business. However, it scores rather poorly on the tax transparency score. Tax
inspectors, for example, have considerable power to suspend a business and are not required to
provide copies of tax inspections.

103. Jordan provides a contrast. Its overall score is not stellar; it comes fourth best after
Egypt, Morocco and Algeria. However, there is much less variation, with the scores being
roughly the same for the individual business regulation areas. While not as low as in Jordan,
the variation across the three regulatory areas is moderate in Algeria and Morocco. High
variation across regulatory areas, as in Egypt and some of the other countries, can be a warning
sign since significantly non-transparent practices in an area can contaminate areas where the
practices are transparent for now.




                                                                                                           Page | 52
        Figure 2.12: Divergence of country scores on three business regulation dimensions

                                     Divergence of country scores on
                                   three business regulation dimensions
                                                Morocco
                                               1.00
                                               0.80
                                   Oman                         Tunisia
                                               0.60
                                               0.40
                                               0.20
                             Kuwait            0.00                  Algeria




                                 Lebanon                        Egypt

                                                 Jordan

                      Business Registration       Construction permits         Tax inspections




                                      IV.     Public Procurement

Introduction

104. Public procurement accounts for one-fifth of the global GDP. 16 In developing
countries, about half of public spending go to the purchase of goods and services. Therefore, it
is an important point of contact and interaction between the State and the private sector, and an
essential source of business for many private firms including SMEs. This interaction with the
administration can lend itself to privileges and capture, favoring some firms over others on
unfair grounds and thereby diverting public funds for private gains.

105. Five aspects of public procurement policies and practices are covered and assessed in
this section: i) the institutional and regulatory framework governing public procurement; ii)
fair opportunity and equality of treatment; iii) transparency, confidentiality and access to
information; iv) existence and fairness of grievance mechanisms; and v) transparency,
integrity and accountability of the procurement system.


16   Benchmarking Public Procurement Report, World Bank, 2016

                                                                                                 Page | 53
106. The pillars used to assess the fairness and privilege-resistance of public procurement
systems are partly based on the OECD MAPS methodology17 that serves as an auto assessment
tool for countries aiming to improve their procurement system. The framework of this report
focuses on the governance aspects of the public procurement system rather than on its
operational efficiency, and is an external (as opposed to an auto) assessment by experts of
regulations and practices.

                      Table 2.3: Privilege Resistant Procurement Questionnaire

     Privilege Resistant Procurement Questionnaire
     The institutional and regulatory frameworks
     Verifies the existence of a regulatory body that has its own budget, is by law and in practice, is not involved
     in procurement operations (free of conflict of interest) as well as the institutionalization of a multi-year
     procurement planning exercise in support of budget planning.

     Fair Opportunity
     Verifies that procurement opportunities are widely publicized and no large preference is granted to bidders
     over others; the clarity of qualification criteria; and the existence of methodologies to evaluate technical and
     price capacities of bids.

     Transparency, confidentiality and access to information
     Verifies that public opening of tenders follows a defined, regulated, transparent, secure and confidential
     process.
     Grievance, complaint, recourse
     Verifies that bidders have the right to appeal a procurement decision and ask for an independent review and
     obtain a decision in an established timeframe.

     Integrity and accountability
     Verifies that fraud, corruption, conflict of interest and unethical behavior and their consequences are
     considered in the regulatory framework for procurement.


107. There is wide variation in the degree to which the public procurement regime is
vulnerable to privilege-seeking among the countries studied ranging from a reasonably robust
regime in Tunisia to a very vulnerable procurement regime in Kuwait (Figure 2.13).
Nonetheless, all countries have weaknesses in one or more dimensions of the procurement
regime, as is evident from the discussion of these individual areas below.




17
     Methodology for Assessing Procurement Systems, OECD 2010

                                                                                                            Page | 54
              Figure 2.13: Public Procurement Privilege-Resistance Scores



            1.000
                    0.791
            0.800             0.674   0.698     0.711
                                                        0.656
            0.600                                               0.512
                                                                        0.449
            0.400
                                                                                0.238
            0.200
            0.000
                    Tunisia   Algeria Morocco   Egypt   Oman    Jordan Lebanon Kuwait

                                         Indicator          Mean



Institutional framework governing public procurement

108. In terms of the institutional framework governing public procurement, the good
practice is to have a dedicated regulatory body or authority overseeing public procurement.
Such entity has to be independent from political influence and possess its own budget. It also
has to be free from any involvement in procurement operations and planning in order to avoid
any conflict of interest situation.

109. Only Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt and Oman have a regulatory body or an authority that
oversees public procurement. However, their effectiveness is likely to vary. In the particular
case of Algeria, there is no authority in charge of public procurement. However, the
procurement law and the processes it has put in place are so strong that it leads to the same
score as a country with an authority in charge of public procurement. Here, the function took
precedence over the form since the duties of such institution are performed given the strong
legal framework and processes in place.

110. In Egypt and Oman, the authorities have their own budget but their counterparts in
Morocco and Tunisia do not. On the other hand, the authority in Morocco is prohibited, both
by regulation and in practice, from participating in procurement planning, procurement
activities and evaluation of bids. This serves to enhance its neutrality. The same is true for
Egypt but partially. The authorities in Tunisia and Oman are not subject to such prohibitions.

                                                                                        Page | 55
111. Lebanon, Jordan and Kuwait do not have a regulatory body or authority to oversee
public procurement. Lebanon is in the process of reinstating a high tender board. In Jordan,
procurement activity by the central government is largely carried out by three entities: the
Ministry of Work’s General Tender Directorate (for construction procurement ), the Ministry
of Finance’s General Supply Department (for purchase of goods) and the Joint Procurement
Directorate attached to the Office of the Prime Minister (for purchase of medicine). Despite
being on the reform agenda for many years, an initiative to merge these entities into a central
oversight unit has not materialized. There is also no entity in charge of a common regulatory
framework, and each of the three procurement entities are responsible for their own
regulations.18

Fair opportunity

112. In terms of fair opportunity, procurement opportunities should be widely and
transparently advertised to ensure equal opportunity of access to all bidders. With the
exception of Lebanon, the MENA countries favors national companies formally through the
law. For instance, in Tunisia, offers submitted by Tunisian companies (in public works
contracts as well as the Tunisian products in all markets to supply goods) would be preferred
to offers from foreign firms and products of any origin other than Tunisian, whenever such
services and products are of equal quality, and as long as the price of Tunisian products do not
exceed more than 10% the amount of the offers of foreign companies and the prices of foreign
goods19. In Algeria, a quota of procurement contracts must be awarded to domestic firms. A
margin of preference of 25% is granted to Algerian products and/or companies owned mainly
by Algerian nationals. Moreover, if a need or service can be met by a micro-enterprise, the
contracting services is required to procure it from a micro-enterprise. In Egypt the margin is
15% of the price.

113. In Kuwait, Egypt and Jordan and Lebanon (where state-owned enterprises do not
participate in bids) the public procurement framework does not favor state-owned companies,
whereas in Algeria, Tunisia, Morocco and Oman it does. This poses competition issues and
constrains the ability of the private sector to benefit from public procurement opportunities.

114. All countries have a regulatory framework that requires that procurement opportunities
(other than sole source or price quotations) be publicly advertised in a national gazette or a
widely distributed newspaper. It is also the case regarding advertisement on a central web
portal with different degrees of accessibility to the relevant information.


18
   World Bank, Enabling Implementation of Public Procurement Reform in MENA countries: A case study of
Jordan and Morocco, April 2015.
19
   Benchmarking Public Procurement 2017 report.

                                                                                               Page | 56
Transparency, confidentiality and access to information

115. In terms of transparency, confidentiality and access to information, public opening
of tenders should follow a defined, secure, confidential and regulated procedure that is
predictable and known by all parties, ideally in the 24 hours following the closing date for bid
submission. Records of proceedings for bid openings should be retained and available for
review.

116. Another good practice is the existence of an integrated information system that
provides at a minimum, up-to-date procurement information, including tender invitations and
requests for proposals. Such information systems should be accessible to the public at no or
minimum cost. Tender decisions and modifications should be publicly available (such as on a
government website or national gazette) in order to provide equal access to information, and
thus equal opportunities, to all parties. Such features avoid opacity and hidden manipulation of
the procurement process that could unfairly benefit connected firms.

117. In terms of the criteria listed above, Tunisia scores very high fulfilling all the
requirements, followed by Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia. For instance, in Morocco, tender
documents are accessible for free. In Algeria, there is a cost of USD 139 20. In Tunisia, the fee
is subject to the discretion of the procuring entity. In Morocco and Tunisia, bidders have the
opportunity to ask a question for clarification to the procuring entity and the answers are made
available to all interested bidders. In Algeria, bidders cannot ask clarification questions. In
Algeria, unsuccessful bidders are not individually notified by the procuring entity that they did
not win the contract award. In Tunisia and Morocco, they are notified.


Grievance, complaint and recourse

118. Grievance, complaint and recourse mechanisms constitute another dimension that is
key to shield public procurement from privileges and corruption by granting the right for a
review by an independent review body, by guaranteeing timeframes for the issuance of
decisions by the procuring agency as well as by the independent review body. The grievance
framework is very important as its shortcomings undermine the benefits of regulations that
favor transparency and fair treatment since firms cannot obtain redress in case of irregularities.

119. Morocco, Kuwait, Lebanon and Jordan score very low. In Jordan, the complaining
party does not have the option of filing a complaint. In Morocco, but it is not recognized as an
independent review body, or directly before the courts.


20
     Source : Benchmarking Public Procurement, 2017

                                                                                        Page | 57
Integrity and accountability

120. Integrity and accountability is the fifth dimension against which we assess the public
procurement systems in MENA. This dimension helps lower the prevalence of fraud and
corruption proof by introducing a regulatory framework that includes provisions regarding
fraud, corruption and unethical behavior as well as responsibilities and coercive measures
against them.

121. Jordan’s public procurement framework displays high integrity and accountability
scores, followed by Algeria and Tunisia. At the bottom, Kuwait and Lebanon lack a regulatory
framework that covers fraud and corruption, and spells out the individual responsibilities. Both
Lebanon and Kuwait lack a confidential system for the public reporting of fraud cases,
unethical behavior and corruption.

Conclusion

122. In general, Maghreb countries perform well with Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco being
in the top three in terms of the resistance of their public procurement systems to privileges.
Nonetheless, there are some weaknesses in these countries which may open the door to
privileges and, once that happens, there is a risk that other areas that are fairly robust now may
be compromised (see Figure 2.14, which shows divergence of performance within and across
countries). Thus, while Tunisia is the best performer overall, its institutional framework
remains weak. Although there is a regulatory body or authority that oversees public
procurement, it does not have its own budget and its involvement in procurement activities and
planning are not prohibited. This may potentially leave room for conflict of interest and
privileges.

Figure 2.14: Divergence of country scores on dimensions of public procurement policies




                                                                                        Page | 58
                                                Kuwait
                                          1.0
                                          0.8
                             Oman                               Morocco
                                          0.6
                                          0.4
                                          0.2
                     Lebanon               -                          Tunisia




                            Jordan                              Egypt

                                                Algeria
                          The institutional and regulatory frameworks
                          Fair Opportunity
                          Transparency, confidentiality and access to information



123. Morocco, while performing well on four dimensions, has a very poor score on
grievance and recourse mechanisms as mentioned above. The lack of effective grievance
mechanisms may embolden actors who seek to obtain, or provide, privileges because unfair
treatment to others may go unnoticed in the absence of complaints. Algeria has a similar
weakness as Tunisia, i.e., in the institutional and regulatory framework but that its performance
on this front is far worse. The remaining countries also show variations along the five
dimensions of the procurement regime, although it is less pronounced for Egypt. Kuwait also
shows less variation but only because its performance is uniformly poor.

124. Performance also diverges when viewed from another angle, i.e., within the five
dimensions rather than within countries (Figure 2.14). For example, with regard to the
institutional and regulatory framework, the scores vary from a high of 0.9 (Egypt) to a low of 0
(Kuwait). Similarly, in the case of grievance, complaint and recourse, the top-performer,
Tunisia, scores a 1 while Kuwait scoring zero and three countries, Morocco, Jordan and
Lebanon tied near the bottom with a score of 0.25.

125. These divergences suggest that there is considerable scope for learning from good
practices, both across countries on any particular dimension of the procurement regime and
within a country across different procurement dimensions. At the same time, as mentioned
before, the variations within countries also indicate potential vulnerabilities because good
practices in some aspects of the regime may be undone in weaknesses remain in other areas.



                                                                                       Page | 59
                                   V.         Allocation of Public Land
Introduction

126. Access to land is crucial for industrial and commercial investment whether it is to build
a factory, a real estate or tourism project. When land governance systems are weak, privileges
and rent seeking are widespread, thereby leading to inefficient and costly allocation of land to
connected investors who may not make the best use of it. In an effort to spur investment and
private sector development, governments need to ensure fair, timely and cost-effective access
to public land for investment purposes, providing an efficient and equitable access for all
private sector players as part of an efficient and equitable investment climate.

127. In the MENA region, the land governance framework is reputed to be weak and
institutional reforms are needed to bring efficiency and transparency in the process of public
land allocation to the private sector.

128. To analyze the seven MENA countries 21 , this report uses the World Bank’s Land
Governance Assessment Framework selectively through the lenses of transparency, fairness
and equity as opposed to opacity, discretion and privileges. Four aspects of public land
allocation systems were assessed:

              The institutional and legal framework to assess whether a dedicated and
               independent authority manages land allocation and whether it follows a fair process;
              The transparency, access to information and the integrity of the cadaster;
              The grievance mechanisms, i.e. the ability to appeal a negative decision;
              The enforcement of tax collection: to assess whether firms are equal in terms of
               paying their taxes or whether exemptions and special treatments are prevalent.

                         Table 2.4: Privilege Resistant Land Allocation Questionnaire

 Privilege Resistant Land Allocation Policies Questionnaire
 Institutional and regulatory framework for public industrial land
 Verifies the existence of a public industrial land allocation system and a dedicated, independent management
 authority. It also assesses the land allocation mechanisms.
 Transparency, publicity and scrutiny
 Verifies whether reports of allocated land, land inventory and valuation rolls are made available to the public
 as well as the quality of the cadaster and land mapping.

 Grievance and recourse
 Verifies if negative decisions are justifies and if appeals are possible and managed by an independent body
 and handled in a specified timeframe.


21
     Oman data is incomplete and doesn’t allow us to draw conclusions.

                                                                                                        Page | 60
 Enforcement: tax collection
 Verifies if tax collection is enforced and whether exemptions are based on publicized criteria and applied in a
 transparent and consistent manner.



Overall findings

129. Overall, land policies in MENA are imperfect. This is equally so across the countries
studied, as illustrated by the weak scores that are rather tightly gathered around a low mean
(Figure 2.15).




                 Figure 2.15: Convergence of countries in terms of land policies


                                                    Algeria
                                                1.000
                                                0.800 0.581         0.367
                              Tunisia                                     Egypt
                                                 0.600
                                               0.452
                                                0.400
                                                0.200
                                                                            0.417
                                                0.000

                        Morocco                                               Jordan
                                                                    0.200

                                                0.355
                                                  0.414                             Indicator

                                                                                    Mean
                                     Lebanon                     Kuwait




130. Algeria ranks at the top in terms of the privilege-resistance of its land policies, followed
by Tunisia and Jordan (Figure 2.16). Thanks to its new cadaster and recently modernized land
registry, Lebanon scores better than Kuwait, Egypt and Morocco.

                   Figure 2.16: Degree of Privilege-Resistance of Land Policies


                                                                                                        Page | 61
                            Degree of Privilege-Resistance of Land Policies
         0.700
                   0.581
         0.600
         0.500                                                                      0.452
                                         0.417                0.414
         0.400                 0.367                                     0.355
         0.300
                                                    0.200
         0.200
         0.100
         0.000
                  Algeria      Egypt     Jordan    Kuwait    Lebanon   Morocco     Tunisia
                                            Indicator        Mean




Institutional and regulatory framework for public industrial land

In terms of institutional framework, countries display a reasonable score with the exception
of Kuwait (Figure 2.17). All covered countries except Kuwait have a dedicated entity in charge of
public land allocation. However, this entity is not considered as independent. Public land is allocated
through auctions, tenders, cost-benefit analysis and due diligence processes. In Egypt, however, some
lands maybe allocated by virtue of a decree from the competent authority such as the Governorate) or
the New Urban Communities Authority (NUCA) that may allocate lands in any way it deems necessary.
131. In general, the assessment of land is not based on market values in Morocco, Algeria,
Tunisia and Kuwait, whereas it is the case in Jordan and Egypt and Lebanon. However, there
is certain latitude in the case of Lebanon for the registrar to modify those prices (15% of the
value) which leaves room for discretion and hence corruption and privileges. Furthermore, in
Lebanon and Egypt, land categories are reputed to be easily changeable. This could reflect, in
theory at least, a flexible system where land categories adapt to the needs of the economy.
However, this could also create opportunities for connected elites to obtain agricultural land,
for instance, at low prices and then be granted a change of land category to industrial, real
estate or tourism purposes allowing for higher profits.



           Figure 2.17: Institutional and Regulatory Framework of Land Policies




                                                                                             Page | 62
                         Institutional and Regulatory Framework of Land
                                               Policies
              0.80               0.67              0.70   0.70
                                          0.60                   0.60
              0.60     0.50
              0.40                                                          0.25
              0.20
              0.00
                     Lebanon Jordan    Tunisia Morocco Algeria   Egypt    Kuwait
                                         Indicator      Mean



Transparency and access to information

132. In terms of transparency and access to information, no country in the sample
publishes a report of allocated public land every year. Though not classified as confidential in
some countries, such as Jordan, only parties to a transaction are allowed access to the records
for the allocated land. This is problematic in terms of publicizing the terms of the allocation
and ensuring that the land is used for the stated purpose. In all countries, information of
allocated land, available land and valuation roles is not accessible to the public. Jordan,
Kuwait, Morocco and Egypt rank at the bottom (Figure 2.18) since in addition to their lack of
transparency, they do not possess functional cadaster and land registry systems. The cadaster
and valuation rolls systems are functional in only three countries: Lebanon (following the
modernization of the cadaster, although 40% of Lebanon is not surveyed yet), Tunisia and
Algeria where the land is inventoried, mapped in an up-to-date system. Thus, on the
transparency criteria, Algeria ranks at the top followed by Lebanon and Tunisia. Jordan and
Morocco rank at the bottom.

      Figure 2.18: Transparency, publicity and scrutiny of Land Policies in MENA


                          Transparency, publicity and scrutiny of Land
                                      Policies in MENA
                0.60                                    0.50
                         0.43
                0.40                    0.29
                                                                 0.15     0.19
                0.20                             0.07
                                0.00
                0.00
                       Lebanon Jordan Tunisia Morocco Algeria Egypt Kuwait
                                         Indicator      Mean



                                                                                      Page | 63
Grievance and recourse mechanisms

133. In terms of grievance and recourse mechanisms, Jordan and Morocco score at the top
since they offer the possibility of appeal to an independent body. Jordan’s appeal body is even
required to render a decision within a specified timeframe. Algeria, Tunisia and Egypt offer a
possibility of appeal but the appeal body is not independent. Lebanon does not offer the
possibility of appeal at all and in Egypt, the possibility of appeal exists although the land
authority is not forced by law to provide arguments and explanations when it renders a
negative decision. In Egypt, Jordan, Algeria and Morocco, appeals are handled through courts.


             Figure 2.19: Grievance and Recourse in Land Policies in MENA


                       Grievance and Recourse in Land Policies in MENA
                           0.75                0.75
          0.8
          0.6                         0.5                0.5
          0.4                                                     0.25
          0.2
                   0
            0
                Lebanon    Jordan   Tunisia Morocco Algeria      Egypt
                                       Indicator        Mean



134. In terms of tax collection and enforcement, all property holders are liable for tax and
listed on the tax roll except in Jordan and Morocco. The latter ranks at the bottom on this
criterion
having no clear or publicized criteria for land tax exemption.




                                                                                     Page | 64
Source: « Untying the land knot » (Shen & Sun) The World Bank 2012


 Box 6: The success story of public land allocation in China

 China: Shenzhen SEZ as a policy reform incubator for urban land market development

 Public land allocation in China used to be discretionary and inefficient thereby leaving the door open to
 rent seeking. Despite the fact that Shenzhen has made efforts to improve its land allocation procedures,
 the issue of privileges and abuse of power persisted. Shenzhen decided to move to a public auction
 system. China’s first state land auction took place On December 1, 1987, in Shenzhen Municipal Hall.
 The new competitive land allocation system brought transparency and efficiency to the system allowed
 for more revenues for the municipality. A radical change from the past when land transfers depended on
 negotiation, the process was time consuming and unpredictable. With no reliable market data, land
 valuation was extremely difficult.

 With the new system, Shenzhen land officials could finally pass on the valuation risk to the market
 ending a situation where connected elites obtained a land that they didn’t have the capital to develop
 depriving investors truly able to develop the land thereby diverting public land from an efficient
 allocation.

 “Thus began what became a popular saying as such reforms later proceeded throughout China: don’t go
 to the shizhang (the mayor), go to the shichang (the market)?. Since then, it took the national
 government 15 years to include the competitive land allocation in the law.




                                   VI.     Investment Incentives

Introduction

135. Well-connected businesses often try to tilt the award of investment incentives in their
favor and succeed, even though that may not serve an economic objective of the country. Their
ability to do so depends on several factors, of which the nature of the incentive policy regime,
including its administration, is among the most important. This section assesses several
important dimensions of the incentive policy regime in eight MENA countries in terms of their
vulnerability to privilege-seeking.

                Table 2.5: Privilege Resistant Incentive Policies Questionnaire


  Privilege Resistant Incentive Policies Questionnaire
  Legislative framework




                                                                                             Page | 65
  Assesses the clarity of the incentives policy and its purpose, the existence of regular reviews and cost
  assessment and their publicity,

  Consultations

   Verifies the existence of consultations for incentives policy formulation and the communication of
  changes to the public before they are adopted.

  Administration and governance of incentives

  Assesses the existence of a specific authority awarding incentives, the processes of allocation of incentives,
  the publicity their criteria, the notification of investors in case of change to the incentives regime, the
  publicity of awarded incentives, the existence of justifications for negative decisions and the opportunity to
  appeal them.
  Transparency and access to information

   Verifies the publication of laws and regulations related to incentives and the existence and publicity of and
  inventory of incentives, the application process, appeal mechanisms and statistics about past incentives.


The policy framework for incentives

136. The first set of variables relate to government policy on incentives. The lack of a good
policy framework increases the likelihood of discretionary award of incentives. A good
incentive policy would clearly articulate the principles of the award process and have
provisions for publishing information on the incentives offered. In addition, there should be
provision for periodic government review of the incentive regime in order to assess the results
and reform the regime if needed. The first two provisions are intended to introduce
transparency to the award process and thereby constrain the ability to covertly award incentives
on a purely discretionary basis. The last two provisions may help guard against the
perpetuation of a flawed incentive regime or a regime that may have outlived its purpose.

137. Of the eight countries covered, two, i.e., Jordan and Oman, do not have an incentive
policy that clearly and publicly states the objectives of the incentives regime. The other six
countries do have such a policy but often lack the good practice provisions mentioned earlier.
Morocco and Kuwait do quite well, having all the four provisions. Egypt and Tunisia come
next with a score of 3 out of 4. Egypt does not have a provision for the reform of the regime,
even though the policy provides for periodic reviews, while Tunisia does not provide for
publication of information on incentives. Algeria’s policy provides for reviews and reforms but
not for sharing of information. Lebanon’s incentive policy does not have any of t hese
provisions.

138. Having these provisions in place is one thing and acting upon them is another. Four
questions sought to assess whether governments actually carry out regular reviews of the
relevance and appropriateness of the incentives policy in pursuing its investment policy
objective, and regular assessments of the fiscal costs associated with the incentives regime, and
whether the review results are published. Of the four countries with reasonably good

                                                                                                        Page | 66
provisions on paper, two (Morocco and Tunisia) score zero on de facto implementation, while
Egypt and Kuwait have some implementation on the ground. Egypt periodically reviews the
appropriateness of its incentive regime and makes the results public, but does not do
assessments of the fiscal costs. Kuwait does both types of assessments but does not make the
results public.

139. Figure 2.20, which summarizes the above analysis, shows how the scores of the MENA
countries progressively decline as one moves from existence of an incentive policy, to quality
of the policy (on paper) and the actual implementation on the ground. Morocco and Tunisia’s
top position on de jure polices is diluted when de facto implementation is taken into account.
Kuwait follows up on policy provisions and carries out assessments of its incentive regime but
falls short on transparency. Egypt does not do a comprehensive review but is transparent with
what it does. In summary, there appears to be three broad agendas. For one category of
countries, i.e., Lebanon, Jordan and Oman, getting good de jure policy in place appears to be
the immediate agenda. For Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria, it is about ensuring de facto
implementation. For Egypt and Kuwait, it is about further deepening the de facto
implementation.

                           Figure 2.20: Incentive regime: legislative framework

                                        Incentive regime: legislative framework
                           100

                           80
                 % score




                           60

                           40

                           20

                            0
                                 Morocco Tunisia      Algeria     Egypt     Kuwait Lebanon Jordan           Oman

                           Incentive policy   Review and transparency: de jure   Review and transparency: de facto




The administration and governance of incentives

140. The administration and governance of incentives influences both the intensity of
privilege-seeking behavior and the vulnerability of the system to such influences. Other things
remaining the same, the scope for privileges is likely to increase when multiple agencies are
authorized to grant incentives. In six countries, a single authority is in charge of the
administration and award of incentives; the exceptions are Lebanon and Algeria where such
authority is diffused. However, having a single authority is no guarantee that the award of
incentives will be immune to privilege-seeking behavior. Three good-practice features of the
incentive governance regime are important:


                                                                                                                     Page | 67
      The award of incentives through a review/screening process, based on a pre-announced
       and published set of criteria (rule-based awards)
      Notification to the investor of specific decisions, with provisions for explaining
       negative decisions, and for adversely affected investors to appeal to higher authorities
       (redress for adverse decisions)
      Publication of information on incentives awarded (publication of awards).

141. The performance of the countries on this front is summarized in Figure 2.21. Rule-
based award of incentives varies widely in the region. Four countries score the maximum
possible score: Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt and Jordan. Algeria and Lebanon score the worst.
These scores suggest that half of the countries have some rule-based discipline in the award
process. However, in six out of the eight countries, information on incentives awarded is not
published. The only exceptions are Algeria (paradox because the country scores poorly on rule-
based incentive awards and therefore should have much to hide!) and Lebanon. This suggests
that even if a rule-based process exists, as is the case in six countries, there could be scope to
manipulate it since the discipline of disclosure is absent. Thus, well-connected businesses will
have the incentive and latitude to use their influence and obtain incentives that they do not
deserve.

                      Figure 2.21: Governance and administration of incentive regime

                        Governance and administration of incentive regimes

                100
                 80
                 60
                 40
                 20
                  0
                      Morocco Tunisia Algeria   Egypt   Kuwait Lebanon Jordan        Oman

                        Rule-based awards               Redressal for negative decisions
                        Publication of awards



142. Interestingly, the countries do relatively better in terms of informing investors about
specific decisions and having appeal mechanisms for negative decisions. This is a somewhat
paradoxical finding since these governments are not expected to have a strong sense of
accountability and provide a grievance redress mechanism for investors. However, it is
possible that while an appeals mechanism exists, it may not function to the satisfaction of
investors. This aspect was not covered by this study and will require more in-depth work, such
as an investor perception survey. This could be part of an analytic agenda as follow-up to this
study.


                                                                                            Page | 68
Transparency and access to information

143. An important aspect of transparency is the publication of laws, regulations and decrees
related to incentives. Where the law requires such publication and government complies with
the law through actual publication, stakeholders get an opportunity to assess the nature and
governance of the incentive regime and raise concerns if any. They are also in a better position
to monitor the administration of the incentives. This introduces some degree of oversight and
discipline that may constrain privilege-seeking behavior. MENA countries do reasonably well
on this front. In six countries, not only does the law provide for such publication, the
governments also de facto make these accessible to the public. The exceptions are Kuwait and
Oman. In Kuwait, there is no legal requirement for publication; nonetheless, the government
does publish the information. The converse is true in Oman where the legal requirement to
publish is not followed in practice by the government.

144. While the publication of laws, regulations and decrees helps enhance transparency, this
is further strengthened, and some accountability is achieved, when there is a culture of
consultation with stakeholders. Three questions were asked to assess the degree and nature of
consultation: whether the law requires consultation during formulation of the laws, regulations
and decrees related to incentives, whether in practice investors are given an opportunity to
comment on such documents, and whether any changes to the incentive regime are formally
communicated to the public before they are effected.

145. Figure 2.22 summarizes the findings through the summary data on “consultation?. The
situation varies widely in the region. In three countries, i.e., Egypt, Morocco and Lebanon, the
high degree of transparency in terms of providing information on laws and regulations is
combined with a reasonable degree of stakeholder consultation. Stakeholders are informed
about the content of the laws and regulations, get some opportunity to comment on the drafting
and are informed about important changes in future. By contrast, in Tunisia, while stakeholders
are provided considerable information about laws and regulations once enacted, they do not get
an opportunity to comment during the drafting even though the law provides for such
consultation. In Algeria, they are consulted, but this is not a legal requirement. In neither
country, are stakeholders informed of any changes in the incentive regime.

146. A more powerful transparency measure is the existence of an incentives data-base. The
MENA countries were assessed on a number of dimensions in this regard. These included the
existence of a central database or inventory of investment incentives with a comprehensive list
of incentives being offered, its accessibility to the public, and the quality of the database in
terms of how well it provides information on the nature and administration of the incentive
regime and on actual awards of incentives. The country performance varies widely on this
measure (see Figure 2.21). While Egypt, Lebanon, Morocco and Algeria have at least two-

                                                                                      Page | 69
thirds of the good practice features, Kuwait and Oman have none, and Jordan and Tunisia very
little.


                   Figure 2.22: Transparency and access to information

                               Transparency and access to information
             100

              80

              60

              40

              20

               0
                   Morocco Tunisia      Algeria    Egypt   Kuwait Lebanon     Jordan    Oman

                    Publication of laws, regulations   Consultation   Data-base of incentives




147. The absence, or poor quality, of the inventory/database on incentives in several MENA
countries makes the incentive regimes in these countries particularly vulnerable to privilege-
seeking. Lack of such data makes “under-the-table? awards easier to conceal and also reduces
the ability of any interested body, inside or outside the government, to play a watchdog role.


From the trees to the forest: bringing it all together

148. The three categories of good practice features discussed above lie on a continuum in
terms of their contribution to making the incentive regime privilege-resistant. The existence of
a good policy on incentives, including the provision for review and reassessment, is a
beginning. However, more important is the way the incentive regime is governed and
administered. And, even more important is the degree of transparency of the regime. There is
synergy between them – as discussed below. Figure 2.23, which is at a more aggregate level
compared to previous figures, summarizes how countries are doing on these three broad
categories. Based on this, the countries may be divided into the following groups:

a) Relatively good performers - Egypt and Morocco: These countries do an average job in
terms of having a good policy framework on incentives but progressively better as they move
to the administration and governance of the incentive regime, and finally its transparency. This
progression is somewhat counter-intuitive since developing countries often do better at policy
formulation but perform worse as they move to actual administration and governance, and even
worse when it comes to transparency and stakeholder engagement. Nonetheless, the lack of a

                                                                                                Page | 70
robust policy framework is a matter of concern. Without this, it may be difficult to sustain the
good practices currently observed with regard to administration and transparency.

b) Intermediate performers - Algeria, Lebanon and Kuwait: Algeria and Lebanon have a
similar pattern to that of Egypt and Morocco, except that their performance on policy is much
poorer. As mentioned before, weak policy dilutes the robustness of good practices on other
fronts. On administration and governance, while their composite score is just a few notches
poorer than Egypt and Morocco, these countries have serious weaknesses. As mentioned
before, both countries score very poorly on rule-based award making and publication of
information on awards (Figure 2.21). These weaknesses make the system particularly
vulnerable to privilege-seeking.

Kuwait has a different character. While scoring very high on policy and administration, it is
very poor on transparency, the second lowest in the sample. In particular, it lacks a data-base
on incentives. This has implications. Even a reasonably good administrative regime for
incentives may contain loopholes and poor transparency may encourage and enable privilege-
seekers to exploit these, thus undermining the system. It may be noted that, while Kuwait
scores high on the administration and governance dimension, there is one important area where
it is deficient. Kuwait does not publish decisions of positive awards. Thus, it is not easy to
know who got incentives, a weakness further compounded by the fact that no data-base exists
on incentives. This, combined with the general lack of transparency, may make privilege-
seeking easier.

c) Poor performers – Tunisia, Jordan and Oman: Jordan scores the highest in the region on
the administration and governance of incentives while the other two countries perform
moderately. However, all three countries perform poorly on policy and transparency, with
Oman completely lacking an incentive policy. As argued above, there is synergy between these
dimensions of the investment incentive regime. Thus, the relatively better performance of these
countries (especially Jordan) on administration and governance may not be a source of comfort
because this may be quite vulnerable given the serious weaknesses in other areas.


                Figure 2.23: Privilege-resistance of investment incentive regime




                                                                                      Page | 71
                         Privilege-resistance of investment incentive regime
             100
              80
              60
              40
              20
                0
                    Morocco Tunisia       Algeria     Egypt      Kuwait Lebanon        Jordan         Oman

                       Policy framework                         Administration and governance
                       Transparency and access to information



149. Detailed operational implications will be derived later for these countries based on this
assessment. However, at first glance it appears that the main agenda for Algeria and Lebanon is
to have a good policy framework in place, and for Egypt and Morocco to further strengthen the
policy framework in order to consolidate the good practices on other fronts. For Kuwait the
main agenda is transparency. For Jordan and Tunisia, it is both policy and transparency. For
Oman, improvements are urgently needed across the board.

                                          VII. Access to Finance

   Jordan: bringing transparency to the incentives regime

   In 2016 and with the support of the World Bank, Jordan developed a world-class inventory that is
   publicly available on the Jordan Investment Commission (JIC)’s e -portal. The inventory is
   underpinned by an internal IT solution administered by a dedicated team. In addition, in order to
   make the reform sustainable, the government adopted a notification mandating staff to update the
   inventory on a yearly basis. This recent reform will now make Jordan one of the top performers
   for incentives transparency according to the PREP study methodology.

   Transparency & Access to Information on Incentives after the Jordan Inventory Reform


            100%               90%                  90%                  90%
                     80%                                                           80%
             80%
             60%
             40%                          25%                                                           30%
             20%                                                10%                             10%
              0%




                                                                                                              Page | 72
Introduction

150. Financial systems play a primary role in resource allocation in any modern economy.
They act as depositories of household wealth, mobilizing savings and providing the mechanism
for channeling this wealth to the different investment choices offered by society. Likened to the
circulatory system in human beings, the health of the economy is contingent on ensuring a
competitive, efficient and well-governed financial sector. This contingency is starkly illustrated
by the fact that every economic crisis of the past three decades was caused, or accompanied, by
a financial crisis compounding the economic and social cost significantly. (Litan et al eds.
2002)

151. Financial systems in MENA have not been successful in providing broad access to
finance. Surveys show that 39% of the region’s enterprises considered access to finance to be a
major constraint. (World Bank, 2009) This ratio is very high by international comparison.
While MENA’s financial sectors are generally large, and the ratio of private credit to GDP
averages over 60% with sub-regional and country variations, only 20% of the region’s SMEs
have a loan or credit. This is a share lower than that in all other middle-income regions. (World
Bank, 2011)

152. The non-bank financial systems in MENA are also underdeveloped. Adding this to the
banks’ restrictive lending practices, enterprises in the region in general and SMEs in particular
are left with very few options. The scarcity of capital means that any biases in the allocation
decision have a highly distortive effect and are capable of tipping the competitive balance
disproportionately.

Four sets of regulatory standards to enhance privilege-resistant access to finance

153. This work identified four sets of regulatory standards governing financial sectors that, if
enforced effectively, can reduce the opportunity for bias of financial access decisions in favor
of insiders and persons with political clout (Table 2.6). They also strengthen the arm’s length
standard in financial transactions, creating space for financial access to be determined by risk
and revenue factors and not by the personal connection of the debtor or recipient of the
investment.




                                                                                       Page | 73
                     Table 2.6: Privilege Resistant Access to Finance Questionnaire
      Privilege Resistant Access to Finance Questionnaire
      Corporate Governance
      Verifies that banks boards oversee large loans, have independent administrators, have audit committees
      chaired by an independent administrator and receiving internal audit reports.
      Related Parties and Politically Exposed Persons
      Verifies that the Central Bank regulate and monitors banks when it comes to related parties and
      politically exposed persons (PEP) and that banks have effective mechanisms to deal with related parties
      and politically exposed persons.
      Insider trading
      Verifies the existence of rules and sanctions to prevent insider trading that are enforced by an agency
      through on site/off site inspections)

154. The most fundamental of these sets of standards focuses on the corporate governance of
banks examining the role of the boards in overseeing high value transactions, the composition
of the board, its independence and the audit function. The second and third sets examine the
regime regulating related party transactions and the standards that guard against the influence
of Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs). The fourth set focus on the standards for preventing
abuse and biases by insiders.

155. Each of the four sets of standards combine both regulatory features that identify what
the rules on the books should be in order to reduce the opportunity for distortion and influence,
and institutional features that aim to ensure the implementation and enforcement of these rules.


                          Table 2.7: Standards Shielding Against Privilege
Privilege Resistance Measure          Source of the Standard                 Original Regulatory Objective
Corporate Governance                  Principle 14: Basel Core               Provide a degree of confidence
                                      Principles, Principles for             essential for the proper functioning
                                      Enhancing Corporate Governance         of a market economy and prevent
                                      2010                                   difficulties arising from corporate
                                                                             governance shortcomings and
                                                                             affecting the public or the market.
                                                                             Recent revisions were triggered by
                                                                             the financial crisis and specifically
                                                                             geared towards enhancing risk
                                                                             management.

Board Oversight over Large Loans      Principle 19: Concentration Risk       Ensuring the safety of the financial
                                      and Large Exposure Limits, Basel       institution and its long term
                                      Core Principles, Principles for        success by maintaining credit risk
                                      Managing Credit Risk 2000              exposure within acceptable limits.

Related Party Transactions            Principle 20: Basel Core               Ensuring the safety of the financial
                                      Principles, Principles for the         institution and its long term
                                      Management of Credit Risk 200          success by maintaining credit risk
                                                                             exposure within acceptable limits.

Insider Trading (falls under the      A number of sources including          Promote investors’ confidence,

                                                                                                         Page | 74
ambit of related parties transaction   IOSCO’s Objectives and Principles      protecting investors, ensuring
regulations)                           of Securities Regulations, Principle   markets are fair, efficient and
                                       36 on “detecting and deterring         transparent and reducing systemic
                                       manipulation and other unfair          risk.
                                       practices.?

                                       International Accounting Standard
                                       24 on Related Parties Disclosures

Politically Exposed Persons            Principle 29: Basel Core               Promote high ethical and
                                       Principles, FATF                       professional standards and prevent
                                       Recommendations 2012                   the abuse of the financial system
                                                                              for criminal activities.



Beyond “Safety and Soundness?

156. The four sets of regulatory standards identified in this work and advocated as potential
tools against capture, discretion and arbitrariness in financial sector capital allocation decisions
are derived from a broader set of regulatory standards that are already applicable to the
financial sector. With the exception of standards relating to insider trading, ensuring market
transparency and efficiency, and the related effective resource allocation function, are not
primary objectives of the standards.

157. This work purports to give these prudential standards explicit market fairness and
transparency objectives that improves the resource allocation role of the intermediation
process. There is a growing body of research that provides strong basis for this broadening of
the use of prudential regulations. (World Bank, 2013)

158. Researchers have now shown with robust evidence that financial systems have direct
impact on growth and that the main channel for this impact is the role the intermediation
system plays in comparing different investment opportunities and allocating capital to the firms
with the best potential for growth. Researchers have also demonstrated that the depth of
financial markets is just one characteristic of financial systems and is not sufficient to measure
the level of financial development. Instead, financial systems are better described in terms of
four characteristics: depth, access, efficiency and stability.

159. Further evidence has emerged suggesting that the “stability? of financial systems has
particularly low correlation with the other attributes. Stable financial systems may be too
conservative and providing very low access to finance, i.e.; failing to fund financially viable
projects. The reverse has also been shown to be true. For the purposes of our discussion, it
means that applying a prudential standard with only stability in mind may not produce the
same result as applying it with the objectives of fairness and effective resource allocation.
Are Banks Well Governed?

                                                                                                        Page | 75
160. Reducing the vulnerability of the banking sector to undue influence and distortive
practices must start with a strong corporate governance framework. Good corporate
governance ensures that decision-making is robust, risk is managed transparently and
effectively, and rules and standards are adhered to not only in form but in intent throughout the
institution. While there are multiple approaches to good corporate governance, the Basel
Committee for Banking Supervision has evolved a set of principles within which banks and
supervisors should operate to ensure that banks are well governed. These include standards for
the board’s role, composition and practice, senior management, risk management function, as
well as compliance and audit functions.

161. This work has identified five corporate governance standards that are assessed to be
particularly useful for preventing undue influence and distortion of the banking sector’s capital
allocation decisions. These standards are: board oversight of large loans, board independence,
board level audit committee, independence of the audit committee, and board-level reporting of
the audit function. The first two standards are assessed separately in their application to state-
owned banks and private banks thus bringing the total number of variables to seven.

162. Identifying board oversight over large loans as a key measure in reducing the
vulnerability of the banking sector to privilege and undue influence is grounded in well-
documented analysis of the performance of the banking sector in MENA. Several studies have
showed that the banking sector, instead of channeling finance to the most productive projects,
has been allocating large amount of funds to connected businesses, sometimes without enough
regard to productivity, ability to repay and risk management. (World Bank, 2009 & 2011)

163. The most staggering example of these practices involved loans granted to the family of
Ben Ali. Evidence shows that Tunisian banks provided $1.75 billion (5% of all financing by
the sector) in funding to businesses linked to the family of President Ben Ali and nearly 30 per
cent of the loans were not supported by guarantees of repayment. (World Bank, 2014)

164. The analysis covered 2 countries: 8 MENA and 4 high-income European countries.
Nine of the countries assessed, including 5 from MENA, scored positively on 6 or more of the
seven indicators measured by this study. Two MENA countries scored positively on 4
indicators and failed to meet the standard for 3 out of seven indicators thus showing a medium
level of protection against potential abuse as measured by these criteria. One country out of the
sampled 12 adopted just one measure out of the seven identified by this study, thus indicating a
very low of resistance to undue influence. Figure 2.24 shows the rate of adoption of each of the
identified standards.

       Figure 2.24: Rate of adoption of privilege proofing corporate governance measures


                                                                                        Page | 76
                   Board Reporting Audit Function
                Independence of Audit Committee
                       Board level audit committee
                Board Independence-Private banks
                Board Independence-Public Banks
     Board Oversight of Large loans-Private Banks
      Board Oversight of Large loans-Public Banks

                                                     0         2          4         6         8         10   12

                                         Number of countries adopting the measure



Public v. Private Banks

165. MENA is characterized by relatively high level of direct intervention of the state in the
supply of banking services in the economy. In 2009, the asset share of government owned
banks in the financial sector stood at 35%, higher than all other regions of the world except
South Asia. This entrenchment of state-owned banking persists to date, albeit with significant
country variations. The set of countries covered by this study can be divided into three
categories in terms of the dominance of financial intermediation by state-owned banks, as
shown in the table below for the entire region.

   Table 2.8: Grouping countries on the basis of state-owned bank share of bank assets
       State banks dominate            Algeria, Libya & Syria
       intermediation
       Private banks dominate          Egypt, UAE, Qatar, Tunisia, Morocco
       with role of the state
       significant
       Private banks dominate          Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Saudi and Yemen
       with state role
       negligible
       Underlined countries denote countries for which data is collected for the purposes of this chapter.
       Source: Farazi, Feyen and Rocha, 2011.


166. State banks in MENA are associated with political patronage and the channeling of
funds to either unproductive state-owned firms or highly connected private businesses. These
practices are typically linked in the literature to inefficiency, weak financial development, low
growth, low productivity, less efficiency and higher rate of non-performing loans. (World
Bank, 2011 and 2013) It is for this reason that focusing efforts on enhancing governance in
public banks and monitoring this indicator separately from an aggregate indicator of good
governance becomes important.


                                                                                                             Page | 77
167. The results of the analysis carried out in this work confirm the trend observed in the
above-mentioned literature in one stark way. The one country in the sample which scored the
lowest in this set of corporate governance indicators, implementing only one of the measures
identified in this taxonomy, is a country with a dominant state-owned banking sector (the asset
share of state-owned banks in the financial sector being 86%). However, the remaining results
are more conflicting. For the two countries that achieved an intermediate score of 4 out of 7
“privilege resistance measures?, Egypt is one that has private-led banking sector with
significant share for state-owned banks. Kuwait, on the other hand, is a country where the
private sector leads intermediation and the state has a negligible role.

168. It is also important to note that Tunisia and Morocco are both countries with significant
state ownership in the banking sector and yet showing a very high score, reflecting near 100%
adoption of the set of “privilege resistance measures? defined in this work. In the case of
Tunisia, scoring 6 out of 7, explaining this finding is more challenging given that evidence
from other research has shown that patronage and cronyism have affected the banking sector
significantly and that governance reform to address this vulnerability is urgently needed.
(World Bank, 2014).

169. Three explanations, borne as well by other research in this area, can be offered to
explain these apparent discrepancies. These explanations should also be borne in mind in
interpreting this research and in designing any future policy intervention:

        Adopting effective good governance measures in state-owned banks, while difficult
         and faced with many challenges, is possible and may result in reducing political
         influence over allocation decisions. (World Bank, 2013)
        Private sector banks are not immune to the governance issues that plague state banks
         and are also vulnerable to political interference, either through lax regulatory
         environment or privilege capture. (World Bank, 2009)
        Corporate governance of banks is a very complex issue and often difficult to evaluate
         externally. Regulatory requirements and pro-forma compliance may mask real
         vulnerability to capture and undue influence (See Box 7).


Box 7: Reality Check: Banks’ Corporate Governance and Lessons from Crisis

Every financial crisis eventually leads to a conversation about the role of governance in causing the
crisis and what can be done about it. Such conversation took place following the Asian financial crisis
in 1997. A group of experts pondered the question and made a number of observations about the
complexity of governance in Banks (Litan et al, 2002). Some of these observations are important to
reflect on here to avoid underestimation of the demands of governance reform even for the narrower
purpose of proofing against privilege:
       Banks activities are more opaque and therefore they are difficult to monitor by shareholders
          and depositors.

                                                                                              Page | 78
         Bank governance has both public and private dimension that are mutually reinforcing.
          Influential financial institutions with poor governance can undermine supervisory governance.
          The experts noted that financial sector shows higher incidence of regulatory capture than other
          sectors.
      Deposit guarantees create moral hazards reducing the incentives of management and
          depositors to monitor good governance.
The 2009 was no exception. To the contrary, the fact that crisis unlike its predecessors, had its root in
developed financial markets made questions about the role of governance even more urgent. With the
abundance of investigations of the causes of the crisis, researchers have been able to identify key
governance weaknesses and to claim that they contributed to the incidence of the crisis (Kirkpatrick,
2009). Again, these findings are useful to contemplate here:
    Firms with better governance averted the worst impact of the crisis.
    Transparency and flow of information through effective channel is a sine qua condition of good
        governance.
    Some large and well established banks followed the letter rather than the intent of regulations
        adopting a box ticking approach to a huge cost. For example, some banks started writing credit
        lines for 464 days to evade the provisioning requirements triggered by credit term longer than a
        year.
    Only 46% of audit committee members were very satisfied that their company had an effective
        process to identify potentially significant business risk and only 38% were very satisfied with
        the risk reports they received from management according to a survey of of nearly 150 UK
        audit committee members and over 1000 globally.



The Arm’s Length Principle

170. The Arm’s length principle is one that is closely linked to the proper functioning of the
market. Transactions carried out on market terms should be conducted on an arm’s length
basis. The assumption in a market system is that parties to any market transaction are entering
such transactions freely and are negotiating to maximize the benefits to themselves. The more
such conditions obtain in the market, the better it functions and the better the market is able to
allocate resources rationally across the economy.

171. Financial markets in this regard are no different. Efforts to protect the markets against
the harmful forms of non-arm’s length dealings have resulted in the development of a highly
technical area of financial market regulation governing “related parties’ transactions.? The
emergence of this body of regulations recognizes that related parties’ transactions occur in the
market and aims at ensuring the transparency of these related parties dealings, mandating and
enforcing the arm’s length principle, prohibiting the most pernicious forms of related parties’
transactions, and preventing potential impact on the stability and soundness of the banking
system that may arise from high-risk transactions between related parties.

172. In the context of the securities market and corporate governance more generally, related
parties’ transactions are regulated with the explicit objective of ensuring market integrity and
preserving trust in the market. In the area of banking regulations, regulation of related parties’

                                                                                              Page | 79
transactions is driven again by a concern for the safety and soundness of the banking sector and
not directly by concern for the efficient allocation of resources in the economy and the integrit y
of this allocation mechanism.

173. This work brings the focus more to the issue of efficient allocation of resources and
equality of access to resources, including with respect to access to finance in the banking
sector. It does so by looking at related parties’ regulation not just as a tool for ensuring the
safety and soundness of the banking sector but also as an instrument to protect the banking
sector against privileged access to capital allocated through the different credit services
provided by banks.

174. In order to assess the strength of the systems in ensuring an arm’s length standard in the
financial market, the research identified eighteen criteria that are deemed pertinent to assessing
the strength of this system in MENA. Thirteen of the criteria relate to lending practices in the
banking sector and five relate to trading rules in the securities sector. The criteria relating to
lending practices in the banking sector can be grouped into three categories:
         - Criteria relating to the presence and scope of a regulatory framework governing
         related party transactions with emphasis on transactions with shareholders.
         -     Criteria relating to the regulatory framework determining the standards and
         governance rules set for implementation of the rules relating to related party
         transactions within banks.
          - Criteria relating to the enforcement of the regulatory standards imposed in this area.

 Table 2.9: Selected Indicators of the Strength of Related Party Transactions Framework

               Selected Indicators of the Strength of Related Party Transactions Framework

Scope of Regulatory Requirement         Implementation Standards Set by      Enforcement of regulatory
(5 Criteria)                            Regulations (7 criteria)             standards (3 criteria)
-   The existence of a regulatory     -    Regulations oblige banks to      -    Monitoring through onsite
    framework governing RPT?               have policies and procedures to       supervision
-   Including shareholders as              identify exposure to, and        -    Monitoring through off-site
    individuals.                           transactions with, RPs including      supervision
-   Including shareholders as              total amount of exposure.        -    Mechanisms to limit exposures
    firms?                            -    Monitoring and reporting              to RPs such as capital or
-   Including 1st degree relatives?        through an independent process.       collateral requirements.
-   Including 2nd degree relatives?   -    Policies and procedures to
                                           prevent persons benefiting from
                                           RP transactions from taking part
                                           in the decision process.
                                      -    Excluding Board members with
                                           conflict of interest from the
                                           decision process relating to
                                           RPTs.
                                      -    Prior Board approvals for all
                                           RPTs transactions?

                                                                                                    Page | 80
                                                         -       Board approval of particularly
                                                                 risky write-offs of RP
                                                                 exposures.



175.     This is an area of international standardization under the Basel Core Principles and yet the
results summarized in the graph above reveal very clearly the gap between the adoption of international
standards and actual implementation. While 100% of the countries surveyed scored more than 75% rate
of adoption of regulations governing related party transactions involving shareholders with adequate
scope, this ratio drops to 66% when it came to the category of implementation standards required by
regulations and dropped further to 50% for the criteria relating to enforcement of the regulatory
standards through inspections and capital adequacy standards.


        Figure 2.25: Mapping the Strength of Related Party Lending Regulations

                                         Mapping the Strength of Related Party Lending Regulations
           Indicators by category




                                      Enforcement

                                    Implementation

                                              Law

                                                     0       2          4         6        8        10   12   14
                                                                              Number of Countries

                                                             < 50%          50% -75%   > 75%



176. We now turn to the findings relating to insider trading in the securities market. This is
the only dimension of related party trading that the research has dealt with and it refers to the
illegal practice of trading in stock using information obtained through insider access and is not
available to the public. The analysis focused on five criteria:

       Rules against insider trading
       Sanctions against insider trading
       Presence of an enforcement agency with jurisdiction over insider trading
       Onsight inspection of insider trading regulations
       Off-sight inspections of insider trading regulations

177. With the exception of three countries, all others in the sample achieved a perfect score
on all of the criteria selected above. The lowest scoring country in fact has one of the smallest
stock exchanges in the world, which may explain the less developed framework of insider

                                                                                                                   Page | 81
trading in this country. It is important, however, to place these findings in the broader context
of corporate governance and related party transactions regulation in the region.

178. In September 2014, the OECD published a Guide on Related Party Transactions in the
MENA Region. This guide was based on the results of the survey of 15 Arab Securities
Authorities, which was conducted in collaboration with the Union of Arab Securities
Authorities (UASA). The report provides findings relating to the regulatory environment of
related parties’ transactions in the corporate non-banking sector that is worth considering when
one reads the findings above. (Box 8 provides a summary of these findings).


Box 8: Related Party Transactions in the Corporate Sector in MENA

The OECD Guide on Related Party Transactions in the MENA Region, published in 2014, identified a
number of trends in related party transactions in the region and the regulatory frameworks governing them:
- Informality of commercial relations, the prevalence of business groups, holding companies and ownership
concentration create an environment where related party transactions can spread.
- The most common related party transactions in the region are with board members and with companies in
the same group. There is also indication that transactions with controlling shareholders are frequent creating
a risk of abuse and weakening minority shareholder protection.
- Another risk of abuse of related party transactions stems from the common practice in the region of
combining between a controlling shareholder position with management and key board functions.
- The most common regulatory approach in the region is to allow RPTs and mitigate the risks of abuse by
imposing review and approval requirements. This approach is also adopted in relation to certain RPts that
are typically prohibited by regulators outside the region, such as loans to board members.
- The most prevalent review mechanism of RPTs in the region is ex post review by the shareholders with
heavy involvement of the external auditors who are typically required to review and report on RPTs (12
jurisdictions require such review). The departure from the common practice globally of relying on the board
for review of RPTs is consistent with the prevalence of transactions involving board members in the region.
- Global practice indicate that approval mechanisms are most effective when applied ex ante, contrary to
MENA practice.
- Common regulatory practice in the region also does not adopt a materiality principle, which means all
RPTs are submitted to the shareholders meeting for ex post approval without selectivity.
- Regulators in the region commonly rely on administrative sanctions and cancellation of illegitimate RPTs
instead of criminal sanctions.
- Enforcement however is a challenge. This is the case across the world. In MENA, it is also affected by the
weaknesses in corporate governance regulatory enforcement in general and the capacity of the regulators in
this area.
- Reliance on market mechanism instead enabled by a robust disclosure system, as is the case in many
OECD countries, is not possible because of the nature of the justice system in MENA in general. Also the
nature of the shareholders in the region including the prevalence of retail investors and the passivity of
minority shareholders, renders such mechanisms less effective.
- Information on the incidence of RPTs in MENA is generally not publicly available and it was not reported
by the regulators who responded to the survey.



                                                                                                   Page | 82
Protecting against Political Clout

179. The marriage between financial regulation and fighting corruption is now about two
decades old. It finds its roots in the “Abacha? case and the efforts of the Nigerian government
to recover assets stolen by the Abacha family. This effort led to collaboration with the Swiss
authorities and tracing of billions of dollars in Swiss Bank accounts that eventually led to the
birth of financial regulations relating to “politically exposed persons? or PEPs for short.

180. The international standard for regulating financial relationships and transactions
involving PEPs is set by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), which is a standard-setting
body on fighting money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism. FATF defines
PEPs, in its Forty Recommendations as amended in 2012, as individuals who are, or have been,
entrusted with prominent public functions. The regulatory standards also extend to their family
members or close associates. In the 2003 version of the Forty Recommendations, the standard
for financial relationships with PEPs was set but it was restricted to foreign PEPs only, i.e.,
individuals who are entrusted with such public function in a foreign country. In 2012, the
standard was amended and the definition was expanded to extend the measures to domestic
PEPs as well as senior officials of international organizations.

181. The rationale behind regulating financial relationships with PEPs is the recognition that
many PEPs have access to public assets and political influence that offers an opportunity for
profiteering and criminal abuse, such as bribery and corruption. The objective of the measures
is to ensure that financial institutions are not misused by PEPs to hide the proceeds of crime
and to evade law enforcement.

182. It is important to have some basic idea about what anti-money laundering measures
relating to PEPs do. These measures require financial institutions entering into relationships
with customers to exercise customer due diligence and to have mechanisms in place to identify
customers that are politically exposed, including their family members and close associates.
Historically, and until 2012, the international standard was only concerned with foreign PEPs,
driven by concerns about money laundering. It was recognized that foreign PEPs pose higher
risk of abusing the financial system to launder their money. They were also less known to the
local financial institutions, which was interpreted as presenting a higher degree of risk.

183. In 2012, the system of prevention was extended to domestic PEPs as well, but some
distinction between the two categories persist. Once a customer is identified as a foreign PEP,
enhanced due diligence measures are immediately triggered. In the case of domestic PEPs,
mere identification as a domestic PEP does not automatically trigger enhanced due diligence.
Instead, financial institutions are required to assess the risk and determine whether the
relationship poses high risk based on other risk factors to be determined by the institution.


                                                                                      Page | 83
184. Like the previous standards discussed in this document, the original objective of this
framework of regulatory standards is not to prevent privileged access to the resources allocated
by the financial system itself. Having said that, this system is designed to help tackle the issue
of corruption more broadly by providing another instrument for detection and law enforcement.

185. In this study, data was gathered to assess the strength of the sampled countries in
fighting the abuse of the financial system by PEPs. Four criteria were examined: Whether there
is a system regulating relationships with PEPs, whether this system sets enhanced due
diligence rules for financial relationships with PEPs, whether this system sets record-keeping
rules for such relationships, and finally whether the regulatory authorities audit banks for
compliance with these rules.

186. The results confirm the trend identified in the previous sections of this chapter, where it
is shown that there is a gap between having a law on the books regulating an activity and actual
implementation and enforcement of the rule. As Figure 2.26 below shows, while only one of
the MENA countries examined does not have at all a rule regulating financial sector
relationships with PEPs, six out of the 8 countries examined do not have regulatory
enforcement of the applicable rules in this area.

187. It is also important to note that only two of the seven countries that have rules on the
books regulating PEPs engagement with the financial sector apply these rules only to foreign
PEPs and exclude domestic PEPs. This issue of scope is particularly relevant to this study,
which looks to the rules regulating financial sector services to PEPs as one instrument in
proofing the economic system against privilege. So in reality only two countries out of the
eight examined actually deploy anti-money laundering preventive measures in the fight against
domestic corruption.




              Figure 2.26: Strength of PEP Regulations in MENA Countries



                                                                                        Page | 84
                       Strength of PEP Regulations in MENA Countries


                          Total



               PEP Enforcement



       PEP Implementation Rules



                PEP Regulation


                                  0           1       2       3            4     5   6       7

                                          > 75%   50- 75%   25-50%       < 25%



188. It is also worth observing that this is the only regulatory area examined in this chapter
where there is a big gap between the strength of the regulatory system in sampled MENA
countries, by comparison to the strength of the same system in sampled southern European
countries. While three out of the four Southern European countries examined satisfy all four
criteria of strength tested in this work, only one of the eight MENA countries examined
achieve this result, while 4 satisfy less than 25% of the criteria and 3 satisfy 50%.

   Figure 2.27: Strength of PEP Regulations of Selected Countries in Southern Europe

                    Strength of PEP Regulations of Sampled Countries in
                                     Southern Europe

                                  Total


                    PEP Enforcement


            PEP Implementation Rules


                      PEP Regulation

                                          0            1             2           3       4

                                          > 75%   50- 75%   25-50%       < 25%



Mind the Gap: It Is Not What the Law Says, It’s What Regulators and Markets Do and
Why

                                                                                             Page | 85
189. The discussion above has revealed with sufficient clarity that there is a clear gap
between the law on the books and rules of implementation and actual enforcement. This gap
will need to be addressed if the areas of regulation examined in this work are to be effectively
deployed as instruments against privilege capture in the financial sector. Improving
performance against the indicators identified in this study will be directly affected by the
strength of the overall supervisory capacity in the financial sector as well as by standards and
practice of corporate governance in the sector.

190. Unleashing the ability of these regulatory measures to make the financial sector
resistant to privileged access will also require stretching the logic of these regulatory standards
beyond mere financial market stability, safety and soundness and towards market integrity,
access and inclusion as regulatory objectives.




                                        VIII. Competition Policy

Introduction

191. Market competition is a key driver for achieving greater innovation, productivity,
and economic growth. Greater competition is enabled through a comprehensive competition
policy framework that includes a set of policies and laws ensuring competition in the
marketplace is not restricted in such a way as to reduce economic welfare. 22 In practical terms,
competition policy involves two pillars: (i) the promotion of measures to enable contestability,
firm entry and rivalry; and (ii) the enforcement of antitrust laws (typically rules against abuse
of dominance and anticompetitive agreements, and merger control) and state aid control (Table
2.10).23 The former involves the improvement of regulations and administrative procedures by
government bodies, while the latter focuses on business behavior of all entities that perform
commercial functions. It is worth noting that the ultimate aim of competition policies is not to
increase the number of firms in a market or to eliminate market power to achieve a theoretical
state of perfect competition. Their final goal is to generate the right incentives for firms to
improve their economic performance vis-à-vis their actual and potential rivals and in so doing
deliver the best outcomes for consumers and the economy as a whole.

                         Table 2.10: Comprehensive Competition Policy Framework



22
 Massimo Motta. 2004. Competition Policy. Cambridge Books, Cambridge University Press.
23
 For more details on competition advocacy, see International Competition Network. 2009. “Report on Assessment of ICN
Members’ Requirements and Recommendations on Further ICN Work on Competition Advocacy.? Presented at the 8th
Annual Conference of the ICN, Zurich (June).

                                                                                                        Page | 86
Fostering competition in markets
Pro-competition regulations and government                    Effective competition rules and antitrust
interventions: Opening markets and removing                   enforcement – Pillar 2
anti-competition sectoral regulation – Pillar 1

Reform policies and regulations that strengthen               Tackle cartel agreements that raise the costs of key
dominance: restrictions to the number of firms,               inputs and final products and reduce access to a
statutory monopolies, bans towards private                    broader variety of products
investment, lack of access regulation for
essential facilities.
Eliminate government interventions that are                   Prevent anticompetitive mergers
conducive to collusive outcomes or increase the
costs of competing: controls on prices and other
market variables that increase business risk
Reform government interventions that                          Strengthen the general antitrust framework to
discriminate and harm competition on the                      combat anticompetitive conduct and abuse of
merits: frameworks that distort the level playing             dominance
field or grant high levels of discretion                      Control state aid to avoid favoritism, ensure
                                                              competitive neutrality, and minimize distortions on
                                                              competition*
Source: Adapted from Kitzmuller M. and M. Licetti, “Competition Policy: Encouraging Thriving Markets for Development?
Viewpoint Note Number 331, World Bank Group, August 2012. *This sub-topic is included under Pillar 2 since it comprises
economy-wide rules. However, it could be considered to be a separate pillar since it is often developed outside of rules on
anticompetitive behavior of firms and merger control.


192. The available competition policy tools and the extent to which competition policies
are implemented vary across countries. Since the competitive environment in any country
will be affected by government interventions 24 , policies and regulations, there is scope to
implement pillar 1 on pro-competition market regulation25 to varying degrees in any country.
Pillar 2 (competition enforcement) on the other hand usually requires a competition law to be
enacted and a competition authority (or other responsible body) to enforce the law. Thus, for
countries without a competition law or an operational competition authority, the focus of
competition policy will lie in pillar 1 in the short to medium run.

193. Pillar 1, which consists of pro-competition regulations and government
interventions, comprises: regulation of network sectors to simulate competitive market
outcomes; infusing competition principles in different public policies (e.g. public procurement,
trade, investment, and industrial policies); conducting competition assessments in regulatory
impact assessments of procedures, regulations or policies to understand their impact on
competition and to identify more pro-competitive alternatives.
24
   Consistent with the WBG MCPAT, government interventions are described in this section so as to include government
policies, regulations, rules, procedures and actions of government officials that affect decisions made by market players
regarding economic matters.
25
   Procompetitive regulations are those that are designed to achieve public policy objectives whilst minimizing the extent to
which the regulation hinders competition, or those that are set with the explicit objective of increasing entry or the degree of
rivalry in a market.

                                                                                                                   Page | 87
194. Where a competition law has been enacted and a functional competition authority
is in place, competition enforcement (pillar 2) complements economic market regulation
(pillar 1). Competition authorities monitor and punish anticompetitive behavior by firms and
prevent mergers which could harm competition. Competition authorities typically support
pillar 1 with advocacy efforts, conducting research on the effect on competition of proposed
government interventions, and providing opinions on their unintended impacts on market
functioning and potential alternatives to minimize market distortions. In some cases, a new
competition authority may find it more effective to focus on these advocacy efforts in the early
stages of its development while it develops its enforcement capacity.

195. Interacting competition policy with other policies and introducing competition
principles can make those broader policies more effective. There is evidence that the
introduction of market-based competitive voucher schemes into subsidy programs has positive
effects. Industrial policy can also benefit from being complemented by competition policy.
Other studies find that sectoral industrial policies (such as subsidies or tax holidays) have a
larger impact on productivity growth when targeted at competitive sectors or where they are
allocated in such a way as to preserve or increase competition (for example, by inducing entry
or encouraging younger enterprises). Trade policy is another key tool which policy-makers can
use to enhance competition and welfare in the absence of a competition enforcement
framework. Finally, competition law enforcement (pillar 2) can complement traditional poverty
reduction measures such as direct cash transfers to the poor from the state.26



196. This Chapter focuses only on the Competition law aspects that ensure a system of
checks and balances and that reduce the risks of undue private and public influence over
the competition policy and decision-making process. The analysis is mainly based upon a
review of the Competition laws of Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt, Kuwait, Oman, Lebanon,
and Jordan (hereinafter, “the selected MENA countries?). Methodologically, it builds upon the
Markets and Competition Policy Assessment Toolkit developed by the Trade and
Competitiveness Global Practice Competition Policy Cluster and the OECD good governance
framework for regulators.27 In addition, it draws upon a framework of good principles for


26
  World Bank and OECD (forthcoming). A Step Ahead: Competition for Shared Prosperity and Poverty Alleviation.
27
  This framework includes the following principles: (i) role clarity, (ii) preventing undue influence and maintaining trust, (iii)
decision making and governing body structure for independent regulators, (iv) accountability and transparency, (v)
engagement, (vi) funding and (vii) performance evaluation. OECD Best Practice Principles on the Governance of Regulators
(2014): http://www.oecd.org/gov/regulatory-policy/governance-regulators.htm
See also the following documents of relevance: OECD Revolving Doors, Accountability and Transparency - Emerging
Regulatory Concerns and Policy Solutions in the Financial Crisis (5 May 2009); OECD Institutional Design of Competition
Authorities – Note by Allan Fells and Henry Ergas (18 December 2014); OECD Summary Record of the Roundtable on
Changes in Institutional Design (23 March 2015); OECD Draft Report of Best Practice Principles for Improving Regulatory
Enforcement and Inspections (2013).

                                                                                                                    Page | 88
market and competition authorities, which was elaborated by Annetje Ottow in her
monography Market and Competition Authorities: Good Agency Principles.28


          Table 2.11: Examples of Competition Law and Policy Questions and Rationale

Privilege Resistant Competition Questionnaire
Questions                                                    Rationale based on potential outcomes
Effective Enforcement of the Competition Law
     1. Is there a Competition Law in place? Does  Weak competition legal framework limits the
        the competition legal framework include          ability to tackle anticompetitive behavior and
        provisions that address horizontal and vertical  anticompetitive regulation
        agreements, abuse of dominance, merger
        control,                         anticompetitive
        regulation/competition advocacy or actions of
        public officials that facilitate anticompetitive
        behavior?
   2. Are there economic sectors or enterprises  Exceptions may create/enhance privileges for
        exempted from the application of the             economic sectors or enterprises
        competition framework (e.g., SOEs, state
        bodies or agencies, professional associations,
        etc.)?
   3. Is there a specific framework and procedure  Lack of transparency may result in discretion,
        that public bodies should follow to grant state  arbitrariness and privileges for few
        aid (subsidies, tax breaks, government land,
        concessional loans, etc.) to private enterprises
        and SOEs in such a way to minimize
        competition distortions?
   4. Is there a functional Competition Authority in  Weak enforcement capacity can limit the
        place (i.e., with executive regulations in place ability to tackle anticompetitive behavior and
        to implement the law, and endowed with staff     anticompetitive regulations
        and a budget)?
   5. Does the Competition Authority have the  Weak competition advocacy may limit the
        mandate to issue opinions on government          ability of the Competition authority to identify
        policies, draft legislation and regulations as   and seek the removal of anticompetitive
        part of its role in advocacy? Are the opinions   regulation, with potential for protecting certain
        binding or is there a mechanism to monitor       interests
        their implementation?
   6. Does the competition authority have the  Weak enforcement capacity that limits the
        necessary power and tools to uncover illegal     ability to tackle anticompetitive behavior of
        practices (e.g., case prioritization, adequate   private and public operators
        fines, leniency program, inspection powers,
        etc.)?
Maintaining Trust and Independence in Competition Law and Policy Implementation
   7. Is the Competition Authority entrusted with  Weak competition framework may result in
        enforcing competition an independent body        using the competition authority for goals that
        or a ministerial department?                     are alien to competition
   8. Is the Competition Authority accountable  Lack of accountability may result in discretion
        before the legislative or executive powers?      and arbitrariness in implementation
   9. Can an anticompetitive merger or acquisition  Non-competition criteria may result in

28
  Annetje Ottow, Market and Competition Authorities: Good Agency Principles, Oxford 2015. This refers to principles of
Legality, Independence, Transparency, Effectiveness and Responsibility (LITER).

                                                                                                              Page | 89
          be allowed on grounds other than competition           discretion, arbitrariness and privileges for few
          (e.g. public interest)?
    10.   Is there an objective procedure to select and         Lack of transparency may result in undue
          dismiss the Board members of the                       political pressure on the Competition Authority
          competition agency?
    11.   Are Board members jointly nominated or at             The joint nomination of Board members may
          intervals so as to ensure continuity in                affect institutional stability and reduce the
          operations and strategy implementation?                incentives to act independently
    12.   May the Competition Authority's board                 The possibility to hold incompatible
          members hold other offices or appointments             appointments in the public and private sectors
          in the government or the industry?                     reduces the incentives to act independently
    13.   Is there a cooling off period during which            The absence of a cooling off period reduces the
          board members and staff of the Competition             incentives to act independently
          Authority cannot take jobs in the government
          and/or companies investigated after their term
          of office/employment contract?
    14.   Are there different teams from the                    Lack of internal mechanisms of checks and
          Competition Authority/authorities involved in          balances increases discretion and may result in
          opening the investigation, prosecuting and             discretion, arbitrariness and privileges for the
          reaching a decision?                                   few
    15.   Are there rules to avoid conflict of interest of      Lack of conflict of interest rules reduces the
          case handlers and members of the decision              incentives to act independently
          body?
    16.   What is the financing mechanism of the                The lack of financial autonomy of the
          Competition authority?                                 competition agency reduces incentives to act
                                                                 independently
Procedural Fairness and Transparency
    17. Can the Competition Authority's decisions be            Lack of transparency and discriminatory
        vetoed by the line Ministry(ies) or any other            enforcement that may result in privileges for
        body of the Executive branch?                            the few
    18. Are there protections for ensuring that                 Technical weakness that may be used by
        confidential      or    privileged       business        business parties and third parties and may
        information provided by companies during                 result in discretion, arbitrariness and privileges
        investigations, merger reviews and market                for the few
        studies is not disclosed to third parties?
    19. Are the Competition Authority’s decisions               Lack of judicial control may result in
        subject to effective review by an independent            discretion, arbitrariness and privileges for the
        appellate body?                                          few


197. As such, the analysis includes three main aspects that are important to shield
Competition Authorities from undue public and/or private influence in the implementation of
their competition laws, notably elements to ensure:
             effective enforcement of the Competition law, including of a subsidy/state aid control
              framework;
             maintain trust in and independence of the competition authorities; and
             procedural fairness and transparency of the competition authorities’ activities (see also
              Figure below).


198. These three areas were embedded in a questionnaire on competition law and policy that
was answered by competition authorities and local experts in the selected MENA countries

                                                                                                           Page | 90
during 2015. The questions were selected in order to identify elements that may result in a
higher risk of public or private influence on Competition law implementation because they: (i)
weaken the competition legal framework and/or its effective enforcement; (ii) reduce the
ability and incentives of Competition Authorities (Board members or staff) to act
independently; and/or (iii) increase the room for discretion in Competition law implementation
that may result in shielding a limited number of enterprises or economic sectors from
competition (see Annex 1: Examples of Competition Law and Policy Questions and Rationale).



           Table 2.12. Implementing the Competition Policy and Legal Framework

  A. Legal and policy      B. Operational              C. Enforcement of             D. Creation of
  framework                framework                   competition law               competition culture

  Competition policy       Functioning rules and       Competition regulations       Awareness raising for
                           structure of agency         (bylaws)                      private sector, civil society,
                                                                                     journalists, academia,
                                                                                     public sector
  Competition law          Staffing and financial      Capacity building for staff   Capacity building for
                           resources for the agency    and board members             stakeholders



                           Operating manual, staff     Non-binding guidelines for    Collaboration with
 Other relevant laws       code of conduct             enforcement                   regulators and ministries
 • Framework for                                                                     within the government
    regulation of trade
 • Sectoral legal          Strategy for                Internal procedural           Opinions on relevant laws
    frameworks             operationalizing the law:   guidelines                    / regulations that might
 • Public procurement      priorities, milestones                                    likely harm competition
    law
 • Public service legal
    framework              M&E and impact              Case handling                 Market studies in sectors
 • State aid control       evaluation framework        (anticompetitive practices    with competition concerns
    framework                                          and merger review)


Source: WBG Markets and Competition Policy Assessment Toolkit (2016).

199. In order to provide comparisons with other countries’ competition laws, the Chapter
also includes reference to competition laws from 4 EU countries (Portugal, Spain, France and
Italy) selected on the basis of geographical proximity to the MENA region. The analysis
reflects the status of the competition laws as they appear in the books.

200. Competition Authorities may be exposed to risks of undue influence by both
private and public parties. Undue private sector influence may be associated with formal and
informal barriers to entry embedded in public policies that confer competition privileges to a
few (often unproductive) incumbents. As a consequence, the latter may gain a competitive-
edge because of their connections or their ability to influence policy making and delivery,


                                                                                                         Page | 91
including competition policy implementation. On the other hand, public capture covers those
situations where the competition institutional set-up does not provide for sufficient safeguards
against political pressures, cronyism and interference with their core mandate of competition
authorities to protect competition and consumer welfare.29

201. This Chapter constitutes only one entry point towards a more in-depth review of those
competition policy aspects that may give rise to undue private and public influence in the
selected MENA countries. Its scope reflects a desk review of the Competition laws of the
selected MENA countries. Hence, a more detailed analysis will be required in order to provide
a complete assessment of key issues, especially in relation to procedural fairness, agency
architecture or funding mechanisms, as well as a review of competition issues that are affecting
specific sectors of those economies.




202. The number of jurisdictions with Competition laws has almost tripled in 15 years
in Africa. In 2000, 13 jurisdictions had adopted competition laws (12 countries and one
regional bloc). By 2015, this number had increased to 32 jurisdictions (27 countries and 5
regional blocs). Competition authorities have been operating in 22 countries and two regional
communities for an average of 10 years. Competition authorities start operating four years, on
average, after the law is passed, but in some cases there has been a considerable delay. In the
African region, Algeria and Cameroon, for example, established their competition authorities
18 and 10 years, respectively, after the laws providing for their establishment were passed.
Madagascar and the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) have not
yet operationalized the framework after more than 10 and 16 years, respectively. Tunisia’s
Competition Council, in operation since 1992, is one of the oldest competition authorities in
Africa; the Monopolies and Prices Department under Kenya’s National Treasury began
implementing an early version of that country’s competition law in 1989.30


203. An effective competition law applies across all sectors of the economy and to all
economic agents, be they public or private, and provides an institutional set-up to enforce
the competition law. Whilst this is the typical situation in the selected EU countries,31 it is not

29
   World Bank Group, T&C Concept Note “Towards Capture-Resistant Private Sector Policymaking in MENA: Shielding
private sector policies from privileges and discretion: policy instruments and operational implicati ons?, February 10, 2015.
30 World Bank and Africa Competition Forum (2016), Breaking Down Barriers: Unlocking Africa’s Potential through

Vigorous Competition Policy.
31
   In the EU, Article 42 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union establishing that the legislator can modify the
standard competition rules when applying them to the agriculture value chain (in addition, the French law explicitly excludes
agriculture from the remit of the Competition law). The competition rules for agricultural products (other than fisheries
products) are set out in Regulation 1308/2013 (the "Common Market Organisation (CMO) Regulation"). Pursuant to the
Regulation, establishes that competition rules apply to agricultural products except in limited cases: (i) when anticompetitive
agreements are necessary to achieve the objectives of the Common Agriculture Policy (CAP) or (ii) when they are
implemented by farmers’ associations or producer organizations and concern the production and sale of agricultural products

                                                                                                                  Page | 92
always the case in the selected MENA countries. In the MENA region, some countries do not
have a Competition law (Lebanon), fully staffed competition agency and procedural
framework to develop its activities (Kuwait) or have not investigated competition cases so far
despite having a Competition law and an agency in place (Oman) (Table 2.13). 3 out of 7
countries with a Competition law have recently amended their Competition law (Kuwait is
currently in the process of finalizing the adoption of a new Competition law); and 3 out of 7
countries have a Competition Authority that has been operational for 10 years or more.


                 Table 2.13: Competition Laws and Competition Authorities in MENA



                                                                                        Year when the authority
                                                  Year of enactment of                started operations based on
                    Country
                                                current competition law a/               previous version of the
                                                                                            competition law


Kuwait                                                        2007                          Not operational yet
Oman                                                          2014                                2011
Algeria                                                       2003                                 2013
Jordan                                                        2004                                 2002
Morocco                                                       2014                                 2009
Tunisia                                                       2015                                 1992
Egypt                                                         2014                                 2006
a/ The eldest competition law is taken in
consideration

Source: WBG Competition Policy Team (2015).

204. Exceptions to the Competition law unrelated to efficiency reasons are common in
the selected MENA countries. These may limit the effectiveness of the competition law and
may reinforce distortions in the market. From the 7 MENA countries with a Competition law, 6
provide for certain exceptions at the sector or type of economic agents levels (see Figure 2.28):
 In Tunisia, there is an exclusion of sectors or areas where competition is limited by virtue
   of a monopoly and first necessity goods or services or goods and services facing durable
   difficulties of supply;
 In Morocco, professional associations, regulated sectors and sectors with a legal monopoly
   or where State aid is potentially granted are excluded from the competition law;



or the use of joint facilities for the storage, treatment or processing of agricultural products – in any case, this second
exemption does not apply to agreements, decisions and practices which entail an obligation to charge an identical price or to
exclude competition.

                                                                                                                Page | 93
     SOEs are excluded from the scope of the competition law in Egypt and Oman. There is a
      lack of clarity regarding the scope of exceptions for SOE in Kuwait; the law does not apply
      to public projects and facilities managed directly by the state (for example, the competition
      law does not apply to the oil sector).
     The Competition Authority may decide to exclude the application of the competition law
      on a case by case basis in Algeria and Egypt.



     Figure 2.28: Sectors and Type of Economic Agents That Fall Outside the Competition
                                      Legal Framework

The competition legal framework does not apply to:



         Conduct that is required or authorized by other
                     government authority                       AL         EG         JO         MO         OM            TN


                         Certain sectors of the economy         AL         EG         KW         MO         OM            TN


                                       Legal monopolies         AL         EG         KW         MO         OM            TN


                               Certain goods or services        AL         EG         JO        KW          MO            TN


          Other state bodies and government agencies            EG        KW          OM


                                State owned entreprises         EG         OM

                                                            0                     2                     4                       6
        Note: The used acronyms account for Algeria (AL), Egypt (EG), Jordan (JO), Kuwait (KW), Morocco (MO), Oman (OM)
        and Tunisia (TN)


Source: WBG Competition Policy Team (2015).

205. In most countries in the sample, the scope of the competition laws is consistent
with typical substantive provisions. Competition laws have a broad scope of application,
addressing all forms of anticompetitive conduct (horizontal and vertical agreements, abuse of
dominance) and anticompetitive mergers. This is the overall approach in the selected MENA
countries that have a competition law in place with few exceptions (notably, merger control in
Egypt32) (Figure 2.29.



32
  Despite the absence of merger control powers, the Egyptian Competition Authority has held discussions with the Health
Ministry surrounding mergers in the sector that could lead to the creation dominant positions in the health care market. It
should also be mentioned that Kuwait’s Competition law does not specifically include vertical agreements but this does not
necessarily mean that the competition law will not be enforced in relation to this type of agreements.

                                                                                                                               Page | 94
206. However, the definition of market dominance needs to be improved in most of the
MENA countries. In relation to determining market dominance and anticompetitive practices,
good practice recommends a ‘market effects-based’ approach, which takes into consideration
countervailing economic efficiencies (with the exception of hard core cartels) and does not
establish market dominance on the basis of market shares. While this is the standard approach
in the EU countries, several of the selected MENA countries establish market dominance based
on market shares (Kuwait – 35%, Oman - 35%, Jordan – 40%), which may negatively affect
the ability of firms with market power to compete on the merits.

207. Most of the selected MENA competition authorities have a general mandate to
carry out advocacy activities, but few can act against anticompetitive regulation . An
effective competition law provides the basis for a strong advocacy role of competition agencies
to promote competition principles in other policies. In the case of EU, the competition legal
framework is also complemented by a state aid/subsidy control legal framework to minimize
competition distortions in the markets. According to the competition laws in the selected
MENA countries, the competition advocacy role is foreseen for the MENA Competition
Authorities as in the EU countries. However, more important than having an explicit advocacy
mandate is the way in which it is implemented. In this regard, only the Competition law of
Morocco provides the Competition authority with the tools to monitor the implementation of
their competition opinions on draft laws and existing legislation.33


208. With regard to the ability to conduct market inquiries/studies, all the MENA
Competition Authorities have this power by law. The Competition Authorities from
Jordan34, Morocco35 and Egypt36 indicated they carried out several sector inquiries in 2013-
2014 (see Figure 4 below).


209. On the other hand, subsidy/state aid control regimes are not present in the selected
MENA countries as opposed to the EU ones. Beneficiaries that receive subsidies/state aid or
other state support measure enjoy a comparative advantage over their competitors that is not
necessarily associated with their efficiency. Control of subsidies/state support measures is a
necessary safeguard for effective competition, free trade, and efficient management of fiscal
resources. In the Europe, state aid where the concept originated, can be defined as any form of
public assistance extended to an undertaking by public authorities on a selective basis. State aid
encompasses a wide range of state support including direct subsidies, tax concessions, state
guarantees and investments from public funds in circumstances where a private investor would

33
   It is worth highlighting the advocacy efforts carried out by the Egyptian Competition Authority, that signed cooperation
agreements with the Egyptian Legislative Reform Committee and the Egyptian Regulatory Reform and Development Activity
on the review and streamlining of business related regulations.
34
   Construction materials, telecommunications, financial services, transportation, insurance, auditing and foodstuffs.
35
   Cooking oils, cement and professional services.
36
   Six market studies including in the following sectors: media, food industries, telecommunications and books for schools.

                                                                                                              Page | 95
have not invested. The Treaty for the Functioning of the EU generally prohibits state aid unless
it is justified by reasons of general economic development. Although State aid is a typically
European concept, a few African jurisdictions have also included provisions on state aid
control in their Acts (Seychelles, Togo, and the East African Community).37



                                  Figure 2.29: Scope of the Competition Laws


     Anticompetitive regulation / competition advocacy         AL      EG       JO     KW        MO     OM        TN


                                    Abuse of dominance         AL      EG       JO     KW        MO     OM        TN


                                          Merger control       AL      JO       KW     MO        OM     TN


                          Vertical restraints/agreements       AL      EG       JO     MO        OM     TN


                                   Horizontal agreement        AL      EG       JO     KW        MO     OM        TN

                                                           0                2                4                6
       Note: The used acronyms account for Algeria (AL), Egypt (EG), Jordan (JO), Kuwait (KW), Morocco (MO), Oman (OM)
       and Tunisia (TN)


Source: WBG Competition Policy Team (2015).

210. Most of the MENA countries lack enforcement powers to effectively deter
anticompetitive behavior. In addition to a clear and complete legal mandate, competition
enforcers (Competition Authorities) typically have the powers and tools necessary to enforce
the competition law. Typically, these powers include instruments, such as adequate fines,
leniency programs to foster cartel detection, 38 powers to request information from the
companies (summons or subpoena) and to conduct surprise inspections (dawn raids), powers to
seize documents and ability to reach settlements with parties involved in anticompetitive
behavior that cooperate with the Competition authority. This is the case in the selected EU
countries. Differently, several MENA Competition Authorities lack fully-fledged enforcement
powers, which can reduce the probability of detection of most harmful anticompetitive
practices (such as hard core cartels) and can hinder the effectiveness of leniency policies.
Moreover, certain countries adopted a prosecutorial model, in which the agency simply brings
enforcement actions against those who violate the law. This fails to provide the necessary tools



37 World Bank and Africa Competition Forum (2016), Breaking Down Barriers: Unlocking Africa’s Potential through
Vigorous Competition Policy.
38
   Leniency refers to the partial or total exoneration from the penalties that would otherwise be applicable to a cartel member
that reports its cartel membership to a competition enforcement agency.

                                                                                                                         Page | 96
for agencies to function in a complex and dynamic business environment (Figure 5). For
instance:
     Several countries do not have leniency programs: Kuwait, Oman, Algeria, Jordan, 39
       although the leniency programs can be effective in detecting and proving the existence
       of cartels because such programs allow a cartel member to confess to its involvement in
       a cartel and cooperate fully with a cartel investigation by providing evidence that will
       aid in proceedings against another cartel member;
     The power to settle violations is scant, the exceptions being Egypt, Tunisia, Morocco;
     Certain countries rely on a prosecutorial model where the Competition Authority
       simply brings enforcement actions against those who violate the law to the Courts
       (Egypt40) or refer the case to the Public Prosecutor (Jordan and Oman).

211. Large fines can be a significant deterrent against cartel activity, but fines imposed
in the selected MENA countries are relatively low (based on information submitted in the
questionnaire). In most jurisdictions, the fines for hard core cartels and anticompetitive
practices as stated in the law are below the levels encountered in international practice (10
percent of turnover). For example, fines are below 10% of the annual turnover in Jordan and
Algeria. In terms of enforcement, Egypt emerges as an outlier in the MENA region with fines
totaling USD2.6 million in 2014 and a record fine of USD25.5 million imposed to the largest
steel manufacturer for abusing its dominant position in the steel market during 2005-2006.
Besides Egypt, only the Tunisian Competition Council indicated the imposition of fines for
breach of the competition rules (around USD 614,000 in 2013; USD 103,000 in 2014). The
imposed fines imposed for the competition law infringement seems to be low. As shown by
Ivaldi, Jenny and Khimich (2016), even in the case of a country with an established
enforcement record, such as South Africa, fines are only 9 percent of the excess profits, on
average considering 4 cases, compared to 26 percent in the European Union.41

212. Furthermore, Competition Authorities in MENA are assigned conflicting goals,
such as regulating prices. Differently from the standard practice in the selected EU countries,
the MENA countries’ competition laws may include conflicting goals, including the
opportunity to introduce price controls.42 Price control rules are among the regulatory tools
instituted by governments, often with the aim of protecting consumers from excessively high
prices or protecting the incomes of small producers. While regulating prices in traditional
monopoly sectors (e.g. natural monopolies in utilities) or as a response to supply-side shocks
might be warranted, price controls in markets where there are many potential suppliers may

39
   In Jordan, Algeria and Oman, the Court may take into consideration when deciding the penalty if the violator provided
information leading to the uncovering of the practice.
40
   The Board of the Competition Authority can only enforce cease and desist orders only; for Competition law violations, it
must bring enforcement actions against violators before the Economic Courts (although the Competition Authority’s
Chairperson has the power to settle violations).
41
   Published in World Bank (forthcoming), A Step Ahead: competition Policy for Shared Prosperity and Inclusive Growth.
42
   Typically, provisions on price controls in the competition laws are referring to exceptional situations, which are limited in
time (this is also the case in France). However, the practice in some MENA countries shows that such provisions may provide
an opportunity for the introduction of unlimited price controls through other laws (for example, in Tunisia).

                                                                                                                  Page | 97
have adverse effects. In fact, price regulation can act as a barrier to competition by, for
example, distorting incentives for entry and investment and innovation, or distorting the
dynamics of price-based competition by preventing firms from putting downward pressures on
prices. To that end, the EU countries’ competition agencies have steered away from such
conflicting goals 43 and have concluded protocols of collaboration with other regulators to
prevent situations of conflict.44


                             Figure 2.30: Powers of the Competition Authorities

                    Requesting parties to voluntarily provide
                                 information                            AL        EG        JO        KW         MO        MO

                             Issuing a summons or subpoena              AL        EG        JO        KW         MO        TN
                Conducting unannounced raids (search and
                         seizure) and inspections                       AL        EG        JO        KW         MO        TN

                                                 Market studies         AL        EG        JO        KW         MO        TN
               Law enables a fine of at least 10% of annual
                                turnover                                EG        KW        MO        OM         TN

                              Powers to impose fines directly           AL        KW        MO         TN

                                       Possibility of settlement        EG        MO        TN

                                            Leniency programs           EG        MO        TN

                                                                    0                   2                    4                  6
          Note: The used acronyms account for Algeria (AL), Egypt (EG), Jordan (JO), Kuwait (KW), Morocco (MO), Oman (OM) and
          Tunisia (TN)
         Source: WBG Competition Policy Team (2015).




213. Collaboration between competition authorities and sector regulators is key to
enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of their actions to the benefit of consumers . A
lack of coordination may generate risks in terms of jurisdictional conflicts between authorities,
double jeopardy for regulated firms, and forum shopping. Having a common understanding of
the market and competition instruments, and recognizing the value that each authority brings to
the table, are essential for collaboration. In some countries, the competition law states the need
for collaboration (Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia), while in others authorities have signed
Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) to encourage greater collaboration. However, in the
case of the selected MENA countries, there are few protocols signed with regulators (Oman,



43
   France is an exception in this regard with the law establishing that prices may be regulated by decree of the Council of State
(Conseil d’Etat) after consulting the Authority in industries or areas where price competition is limited either by monopoly
situations, by lasting supply difficulties or by legislative or regulatory provisions.
44
   Not applicable in the case of Spain where the competition authority and sector regulators are integrated within a single
authority: Comisión Nacional de Mercados y Competencia or “CNMC?.

                                                                                                                                    Page | 98
Algeria– no protocols signed; Jordan and Tunisia– only with the telecom regulator, Kuwait –
only with the Statistics Agency).45




214. In some cases, the independence of decision-making may be affected by the
current legal framework in the selected MENA countries. Drawing on international best
practices, it is possible to identify a series of entry points that help prevent undue external
influence from the private and public actors. A key aspect of the independence of a
Competition Authority is the ability to act without day-to-day management of a minister or the
political bodies of government. This includes the power to make final decisions with direct
effect on firms that engaged in anticompetitive behavior. Only a high degree of independence
helps insulate the authorities from political pressures, cronyism and interference with their core
mandate to safeguard competition. Technical independence may be compromised in cases
that: (i) a competition authority is a department in a line ministry, (ii) a line ministry can
revoke, has veto powers or has the final saying on decisions and cases, (iii) the line ministry is
responsible for industry matters, which might conflict with the pursuit of purely competition
goals.


215. In the selected MENA countries, the independence of the Competition Agency
decisions may be affected by the absence of full institutional independence under the
existing legal framework (Figure 2.31). In the selected MENA countries, competition policy
is entrusted to:
   i.       Authorities with administrative and financial autonomy, reporting to a line ministry
            include: Oman, Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt, Kuwait;
  ii.       In Jordan, the competition body is a ministry directorate;
 iii.       The line Ministers are the Minister of Commerce and Industry (Kuwait and Oman),
            the Ministry of Commerce (Algeria), the Ministry of Industry and Trade (Jordan),
            the Ministry of General Affairs and Governance (Morocco), the Ministry of
            Commerce (Tunisia) and the Cabinet of Ministers (Egypt).


                                  Figure 2.31: Status of Competition Authorities
                     Authorities with administrative and
                   financial autonomy reporting to a line       AL       EG       KW       MO        OM       TN
                                   ministry


                                    Ministry directorates       JO


                                                            0                 2                  4                   6
                   Note: The used acronyms account for Algeria (AL), Egypt (EG), Jordan (JO), Kuwait (KW), Morocco
45                 (MO), Oman (OM) and Tunisia (TN)
  On the other hand, the Egyptian
                   Source:         Competition
                           World Bank             Authority
                                      Competition Policy Teamhas recently entered into Protocols with the Telecoms Regulator, the
                                                              (2015).
Financial Surveillance Authority, besides ensuring presence in the Board of the Electricity Regulator.

                                                                                                                         Page | 99
216. Out of the six selected MENA countries with a merger control regime in place, two
allow their Governments to reverse a prohibited merger (Algeria and Morocco), whilst
one (Tunisia) gives the line Minister the competence to assess if the concentration is
illegal. Moreover, Competition Authorities can take into consideration other public
interests when authorizing a merger (e.g., Tunisia, Morocco, Jordan, Kuwait – the
competition law does not specify the economic test for allowing/prohibiting a merger), which
normally leads to a more restrictive assessment of mergers than in a scenario where a
methodology based exclusively on competition considerations was followed. In addition, it is
important to set clear boundaries and criteria for the application of a public interest test by
competition authorities. For example, South Africa requires that a public interest consideration
be merger-specific and substantial. Botswana, Kenya, Zambia, and South Africa are some of
the countries that have developed or are in the course of drafting guidelines on the assessment
of public interest considerations. Contrary to the aforementioned examples, the selected
MENA countries with a public interest test have not issued guidelines to facilitate
implementation and increase predictability: Kuwait does not define the grounds for allowing or
prohibiting a merger in the competition law; Tunisia adopts a broad objective of technical or
economic progress but adds that national consolidation and the competitiveness of national
companies at the international level will also be taken into account; Algeria merely refers to
public interest considerations; Morocco lists employment, international competitiveness of
domestic firms and industrial development; whilst Jordan mentions employment, encouraging
exports, attracting investment and the ability of domestic companies to compete
internationally.


217. Heads of governments and ministries in MENA appear to play a key role in
appointing the Board Members of the Competition Authorities, but the appointment
process does not follow best practice. Good practice suggests that the appointment of
Competition Authority Board members should be made at intervals and based on objective
criteria. This is the case of the selected EU countries with Board members appointed by
national parliaments at intervals following on objective criteria and with dismissal limited to
specific situations. According to the replies to the Competition Law and Policy Questionnaire,
in the selected MENA countries, Board members are appointed by Governments (or the King
in Morocco, Sultan in Oman or President in Algeria), but not always at intervals and in
accordance with objective appointment and dismissal rules:
     Only Jordan provided for the possibility of nominating Board members at intervals;
     Oman and Jordan have no rules in terms of mandates’ duration;
     Oman, Algeria and Kuwait lack objective dismissal rules.



                                                                                    Page | 100
                                        Box 9: Institutional design models
 It is widely recognized that competition authorities require a substantial degree of independence to
 conduct their activities in a professional, technical, nonpartisan, competent, and effective manner.
 According to a 2015 World Bank/African Competition Forum survey (WBG/ACF survey), most agencies
 responsible for the administration of competition policy in Africa are structured as independent bodies. Out of
 28 authorities surveyed, 64 percent identify themselves as structurally independent bodies. Under at least ten
 regimes in the region, however, the competition authority is embedded in a ministry as a government
 department (or is under the strict supervision of the prime minister). In these cases, the competition authority
 remains budget-dependent or administratively dependent on government ministries under different forms of
 accountability.
 The design of a competition agency has a decisive influence on the type and quality of policy outcomes
 that a country’s competition regime achieves. An independent agency with a specific mandate and
 predictable decision-making that remains consistent through a change of government will be better able to limit
 the extent that business groups can lobby ministries for favorable treatment, and will provide business with
 greater regulatory certainty. Competition authorities operate within a wide variety of institutional frameworks:
 Under the bifurcated judicial model, the competition agency has investigative powers and must bring
 enforcement actions before the general courts. This is the model followed by the US Antitrust Division of
 the Department of Justice (DoJ). In practice, the DoJ opens a formal enforcement proceeding, whether criminal
 or civil, carries out its investigation and then brings the case before federal courts. While this model involves
 limited expertise in the adjudicative function, it offers the necessary detachment to ensure impartiality and
 transparency in the decision-making. Problems associated with this model include the length and costs typically
 resulting from judicial litigation.
 Under the bifurcated agency/tribunal model, the agency has investigative powers and brings
 enforcement actions before separate, specialized adjudicative authorities. This is the model followed by
 Canada with respect to non-criminal practices (e.g. abuse of dominance, mergers, and restrictive practices). The
 Canada Competition Bureau has investigative and enforcement functions while the Competition Tribunal,
 formed by federal judges and competition experts, performs adjudicative functions. The bifurcated
 agency/tribunal model provides for a good level of independence as well as expertise in the adjudication. At the
 same time, it allows to tackle some of the procedural problems of general courts since the term to make a
 decision is normally shorter.
 In the integrated agency model, a single specialized agency is entrusted with the investigative,
 enforcement and adjudicative functions. Probably the best-known examples of such an agency are the U.S.
 Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and the Competition Directorate of the European Commission. The FTC
 investigates and adjudicates cases internally. Its decisions are then subject to court review, in first instance
 before an administrative law judge whose decision can be appealed at the deferral court. In the European
 Union, the Competition Directorate investigates and initially adjudicates competition cases subject to approval
 by the College of Commissioners. Parties have a right of appeal to the Court of First Instance and subsequently
 to the European Court of Justice. The advantages of this model are significant; it yields high levels of expertise
 both from the staff investigating the case and the body of commissioners adjudicating it. Additionally, this
 expertise not only assists in the adjudication of cases but also in the policy-making of the agency. Integrated
 agencies offer also considerable advantages in terms of administrative efficiency. The main disadvantage of
 this model is related to the possible lack of impartiality in the adjudication of cases. Therefore, ensuring the
Source: WBG
 necessary    Competition
            checks         Policy to
                    and balances   Team  elaboration
                                     avoid           (2016).
                                            any confusion  between investigation and adjudication is crucial for
 integrated agencies.
218. Cooling off periods for Board Members and key staff of Competition Authorities
are not common across the region. A regime of incompatibilities and cooling off periods
should be part of the competition framework to safeguard independence of the Competition
Authorities (Figure 2.32). This is the prevailing solution in the selected EU countries with
Board members performing their activities in exclusivity (except France where five out of
seven Board members can be market operators) and subject to an incompatibilities regime and

                                                                                                      Page | 101
a cooling off period. The MENA countries have no cooling off periods (besides Egypt) and
seldom require exclusivity (only Algeria and Kuwait) (Figure 2.33). Moreover, participation of
Government representatives (Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria, Jordan and Egypt 46 ) and private
operators (Jordan, Morocco, Tunisia and Egypt) in the Competition Agencies’ boards is often
accepted.47

                              Figure 2.32: Cooling Off Periods for Board Members


                        No          AL             JO             KW             MO             OM             TN




                       Yes          EG


                              0              1              2              3              4             5              6

                             Note: The used acronyms account for Algeria (AL), Egypt (EG), Jordan (JO), Kuwait (KW),
                             Morocco (MO), Oman (OM) and Tunisia (TN)
                             Source: World Bank Competition Policy Team (2015).



                                     Figure 2.33: Exclusivity for Board Members


                        No
                                                 [SERIES                                      [SERIES
                                    EG                            MO             OM
                                                  NAME]                                        NAME]


                       Yes          AL             KW


                             0              1               2              3              4              5             6



                             Note: The used acronyms account for Algeria (AL), Egypt (EG), Jordan (JO), Kuwait (KW),
                             Morocco (MO), Oman (OM) and Tunisia (TN)
                             Source: World Bank Competition Policy Team (2015).




219. From an operational perspective, the availability of sufficient financial resources
and skilled staff, effective powers of investigation and of sanctioning are all factors that
can contribute to a better enforcement of Competition law . In order to strengthen
independence, good practice suggests that Competition Authorities’ budgets be provided by
Parliament or that the Competition Authorities move towards becoming at least partially self-
financing in the longer term. The provision of a Competition Authority’s budget by the
Minister of the Ministry in which the agency is housed is generally considered to be sub-

46
     The 2014 review of the Competition law in Egypt reduced the number of government representatives in the Board from 4 to
2.
47
     Note: information for Oman is not clearly reported.

                                                                                                                           Page | 102
optimal since it creates financial dependency which can damage the perceived independence
and political neutrality of the agency. The amount of funds and how it is sourced determines
how the Competition Authority is organized and operates efficiently. Funding should not be an
element that influences the decisions taken by the agency; instead, it should be sustainable and
enable it to take decisions that are impartial and that it performs its mandate in an efficient and
effective manner, namely in terms of staff hiring. The funding process should be simple,
transparent and efficient. In the MENA countries, there is a predefined budget normally
allocated by the Government (except Morocco and Egypt, where the budget is approved by the
Parliament). Most Competition Authorities have the power to recruit their own staff (except
Oman; also Kuwait is still in the process of hiring staff). In the selected EU countries, the
budget figures are public and the agencies are provided with sufficient funding and staff to
fulfil their mandate.48 On the contrary, in the MENA countries, the Competition Authorities
expressed concerns over insufficient resources – most of the MENA Competition Authorities
have a staff of 20 or less, which may be insufficient to implement effectively their countries’
competition policies.



              Table 2.14: How is the Budget of the Competition Authority Allocated?

                                                                                   Government with
                          Parliament                    Government
                                                                                  parliament approval

                                                  Algeria, Jordan, Kuwait,
                            Morocco                                                        Egypt
                                                           Tunisia

                    Note: information for Oman is not clearly reported.
                    Source: WBG Competition Policy Team (2015).




220. Due process and transparency should be integral principles of the Competition
laws and are typically part of the mechanisms of accountability and transparency before
Government and Parliament, the business community and the public.
221. Separation between investigation and decision-making functions can provide
additional warrantees against undue influence from both public and private entities. As
such, this is the rule in the selected EU countries and the exception in several MENA countries
where such a functional separation between investigation and decision-making competences of



48
  In the EU countries, agencies have financial autonomy and may allocate freely their budget and recruit their own staff.
However, there is no homogeneity in terms of sources of funding and budget approval regime: in Portugal and Italy, the
authorities are self-financed: in the first case, via a transfer of revenues from other regulatory authorities (budget subject to
ministerial pre-approval) and in the second case, through a mandatory contribution from companies incorporated in Italy
whose turnover exceeds a threshold of EUR50 million. On the other hand, in France and Spain, the budget is allocated by the
Parliament and is based upon State funding.

                                                                                                                 Page | 103
the Competition Agencies is absent (except for Morocco, Egypt and Tunisia where this
separation exists).

222. Moreover, transparency and accountability before the judiciary is also essential to
preserve the integrity of the Competition Agencies decisions. In the MENA countries, the
final decisions of the Competition Authorities are subject to judicial review (although this
remains unclear in Oman). This is also the general rule in the EU countries with a system
characterized by independent judicial review, procedural transparency and reporting before
Government and Parliament. However, there is a lack of due process guarantees in the
relationship to the Competition Authorities in some countries: Jordan (no provisions on oral
hearings, access to non-confidential version of statement of objections and the case files); in
Kuwait, fair and transparent procedures are to be defined in regulations developing the
competition law; in Oman the authority reportedly refuses access to a lawyer and commonly
threatens lawful activities with incarceration. 49 With the exception of Egypt, Competition
Authorities are only accountable to the Government (Table 2).


                 Table 2.15: Who Are the Competition Authorities Accountable To?

                  Government Minister                         Parliament


Morocco, Algeria, Jordan, Kuwait, Oman, Tunisia                  Egypt


Source: WBG Competition Policy Team (2015).


223. Further, safeguards that prevent the disclosure of confidential information to
third parties are generally foreseen in the MENA countries similarly to the EU ones.
Publicity of the agencies’ decisions and activities should be ensured for transparency purposes
before the public and businesses. This is the general rule in the EU and MENA countries (with
the exception of Oman for annual reports and reasoned decisions, and of Jordan for the latter).
However, in some MENA countries the decisions are not always available on-line (this is the
case of Algeria, Jordan, Tunisia – only until 2011, Egypt – inoperative website) and many
MENA countries have not adopted guidelines (secondary legislation) explaining how they
enforce provisions in their competition laws (Jordan, Egypt and Morocco are exceptions in this
regard).




49
     http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/236828.pdf

                                                                                   Page | 104
Figure 2.34: Availability of Guidelines for the Implementation of the Competition Law to
                                         the Public


                                 Horizontal agreement              EG                   JO                  MO

                                      Vertical restraints          EG                   JO                  MO

                                  Abuse of dominance               EG                   JO                  MO

                 Treatment of confidential information             EG                   JO

                                            Fine setting           JO

                                         Merger control            JO

                              Investigative procedures             JO

                                                            0                 1                    2                   3
     Note: The used acronyms account for Algeria (AL), Egypt (EG), Jordan (JO), Kuwait (KW), Morocco (MO), Oman (OM)
     and Tunisia (TN)

Source: WBG Competition Policy Team (2015).




224. Based on the features that increase the risk for private and public influence in the
implementation of the Competition policy and law, the following table presents potential
areas to make the competition legal framework less prone to undue influence and more
effective in levelling the playing field for both private and public players . As previously
discussed, this review provides only entry points into the analysis of those aspects that may
give rise to undue private and public influence in the MENA countries. Hence, a more detailed
analysis is required in order to provide a complete assessment of key competition policy issues,
and contribute to increasing the effectiveness of the competition policy and legal framework
implementation in tackling anticompetitive behavior and anticompetitive regulations and
policies.



     Table 2.16: Potential Areas for Making the Competition Legal Framework More
                                        Effective

                        Kuwait Oman Lebanon* Algeria                              Jordan      Morocco        Tunisia       Egypt
The Competition Legal Framework
Entry points for making the Competition law more effective


                                                                                                                       Page | 105
Adopt a                           x
comprehensive and
effective competition
law that applies to the
main types of
anticompetitive
conduct and to all
economic operators
(public and private)
Establish an efficient                                 x
merger control
regime in the
competition law
Expand the scope of           x               x        x
the competition law
to cover
anticompetitive State
action
Eliminate/reduce
competition law
exceptions regarding:
a) Conduct that is            x       x   x   x   x    x
required/approved by
other government
authorities
b) Legal monopolies       x   x       x       x   x    x
c) Certain economic       x   x       x       x   x    x
sectors, goods or
service
d) State bodies           x   x                        x
e) SOEs                   x   x                        x
f) Professional                               x
associations
Eliminate the             x   x           x
presumption of
dominance (i.e.
criteria based on
firms’ market shares)
Strengthen powers
and tools to enforce
competition law. In
particular:
a) Competition law        x   x       x   x
provisions on leniency
b) Establish adequate                 x   x
fines in the
competition law (e.g.
up to 10% of firm’s
annual turnover in
the affected market)
c) Establish subpoena         x
power
d) Establish power to     x   x       x   x
reach settlements
f) Allow the                  x           x            x

                                                      Page | 106
competition agency to
impose fines directly
Establish a             x          x       x           x      x       x   x    x
subsidy/state support
control
regime/legislation to
minimize competition
distortions
Other potential entry points to enhance implementation
Promote protocols of    x          x                   x      x           x
collaboration with
sector regulators
Maintaining Trust and Independence in Competition Policy Implementation
Potential areas for making the Competition law more effective
Upgrade the status of                                         x
the competition
agency from a
government
department to a body
with administrative
and financial
autonomy
Provide for an          x          x                   x      x       x   x    x
independent status of
competition authority
(vis-à-vis the line
ministry)
Eliminate/clarify the   x                                     x       x   x
public interest test to
approve mergers
Eliminate/reduce the    x                              x              x   x
possibility of having
the line minister
interfering with the
decisions of the
competition agency
Establish that Board    x          x                   x      x       x   x    x
members should be
appointed through an
independent process
Establish clear rules              x                          x
in terms of the
duration of Board
members’ mandates
Nominate Board          x          x                   x              x   x    x
members at intervals
Establish objective     x          x                   x
criteria for
appointment and
dismissal of Board
members
Impose rule of                     x                          x       x   x    x
exclusivity of
functions on Board
members and staff

                                                                              Page | 107
Eliminate/minimize                                     x        x   x   x    x
the presence of
Government
representatives in the
Board
Consider reducing                                               x   x   x    x
the presence of
private sector
representatives in the
Board
Put in place cooling     x         x                   x        x   x   x
off periods after
Board members and
staff leave the
competition agency
Other potential entry points to enhance implementation
Ensure sustainable       x         x                   x        x       x
budget allocation (e.g.
from the Parliament)
Ensure that the          x         x                   x        x   x   x    x
budget is sufficiently
funded
Enable the                         x
competition authority
to recruit its own staff
Procedural Fairness and Transparency
Potential areas for making the Competition law more effective
Make competition         x         x                   x        x   x   x
authorities
accountable before
the Parliament as
well as the
Government (e.g.
present annual
activity reports)
Separate investigative x           x                   x        x
and decision making
functions
Clarify in the                     x
competition law the
right to judicial
review
Strengthen due           x         x                            x
process and rule of
law in competition
procedures (e.g., in
terms of oral
hearings, access to
non-confidential
version of statement
of objections)
Other potential entry points to enhance implementation
Increase                           x                   x        x       x
transparency
mechanisms (e.g.

                                                                            Page | 108
annual reports;
publication of the
decisions)
Ensure the publicity                x                     x         x                     x         x
of the competition
authorities’ activities
and decisions, namely
through on-line
resources
Develop                   x         x                     x         x         x           x         x
comprehensive
competition bylaws
for implementation
/guidelines

Note: *In Lebanon, a competition law needs to be adopted and include the topics suggested above.




                                                                                                   Page | 109
                            IX.     Conflict of Interest Restrictions

225. Conflict of interest refers to a situation in which an individual is in a position to exploit
an official capacity for personal benefit, but has not done so yet. The presence of a conflict of
interest is not an indicator of improper conduct, but rather a warning, or risk, of its possibility.
Some of the most significant risks or conflicts of interest appear in the following situations:

        Stockholdings or Private firm ownership
        Officials holding government contracts
        Gifts and Hospitality
        Patronage/Nepotism
        Private firm engagements, e.g., board member, advisor, company officer
        Outside employment with international organizations
        Voting on policy decisions
        Post-employment engagements

226. The operating principle of a conflict of interest system is to assist public officials in
avoiding situations where a conflict of interest can arise. Restrictions on conduct,
incompatibilities or engagements aim to prevent situations that frequently give rise to conflicts
of interest. Restrictions place the burden of compliance on the public official, who must be
aware of the laws, identify the situation, and act accordingly. Clear definitions of prohibited
conduct reduce the pressure of uncertainty on public officials and employees by establishing a
distinct line between acceptable and unacceptable activities. It is also important to provide a
clear definition of conflict of interest and specify a broad prescription to avoid and resolve any
perceived conflicts of interest that arise during performance of job tasks. In lieu of an
enforceable code of conduct, this broad restriction on conflicts of interest encourages public
officials to consider the impact that private interests may have on the public’s perception of
their ethics as representatives of the state. It also provides a means of reprimanding officials
who violate the spirit of the law, rather than specific provisions or restrictions on behavior.

227. Countries around the world have struggled over the past two decades to design and
implement effective systems of conflict of interest. Cross-country analysis, like the one
produced by the World Bank 50 , highlights gaps that still exist in the existing systems and
especially between the regulations and laws defining the system and their implementation. The
World Bank PAM dataset found that nearly all countries specify conflict of interest restrictions
for public officials, but the type of restriction, and which officials are subject to those
restrictions, varies widely.



50
  World Bank Public Accountability Mechanisms (PAM) Initiative. More information
http://www.agidata.org/pam

                                                                                        Page | 110
228. The MENA countries studied in this analysis (Jordan, Tunisia, Lebanon, Algeria,
Morocco, Kuwait, Egypt, Oman) scored as good or better on conflict of interest restrictions, as
compared with the four European countries studied (Spain, Portugal, France, Italy). In terms
of average scores displayed in Figure 2.35, MENA countries scored comparably to the four
European countries studied, with the exception of monitoring and oversight. Overall country
scores (Figure 2.36) on conflict of interest restrictions did not cluster by region. Algeria has a
very comprehensive conflict of interest regime based on restrictions, as do Portugal and
France. But the average score for the remaining countries was 45 out of 100.

                        Figure 2.35: Average scores on COI restriction
                  (0-100 scale, where higher scores reflect more robust frameworks)


                              Conflict of Interest Restrictions: Averages

                                                      Country Score
                                                       100
                                                        80
                                                        60
                                                        40
             Monitoring and Oversight                                        Officials covered
                                                        20
                                                         0




                                     Sanctions                        Restrictions coverage

                                  MENA                  Spain, Portugal, France, Italy



                  Figure 2.36: Overall country scores on COI restrictions
                  (0-100 scale, where higher scores reflect more robust frameworks)


                         Conflict of Interest Restrictions: country scores
            100                         95
             90                                                                           79
             80                                                                     72
             70                                  57
             60    55    54
             50                                                44            44                  44
                                39
             40                                          34           33
             30
             20
             10
              0




                                                                                                      Page | 111
229. Figure 2.37 demonstrates that there is a wide variety of scores for sub-categories,
except for the coverage of public officials. Sanctions and oversight arrangements are often
specified by law, but it is unclear whether sanctions are regularly applied, and what kind of
monitoring and guidance that authorities provide to officials.


                         Figure 2.37: Category scores on COI restrictions

                         Conflict of Interest Restrictions: category scores


                                   100

                                                                          50    100
                                   100
              25    25                      63                            75
                                                          0                     100
             100    75      25                                      38                  63
                                   100      50      0    74          0    64
                            25                     25          25   58                  0
                    35      26              57     31                            37     32
              37                                               50
                    80      80     80              80   100    18   80    100    80     80
              60                            60                 40




               Officials covered        Restrictions    Sanctions   Monitoring and Oversight




230. The underlying data collected highlights that civil servants were most often subject to
conflict of interest restrictions, while heads of state were least likely to be required to modify
behavior based on private interests. This finding corresponds to the World Bank PAM data,
where heads of state faced fewer restrictions, and civil servants were subject to extensive
restrictions. While it is often difficult to regulate the activities of members of parliament and
ministers, as they cycle in and out of office with regularity, it is important to restrict some
activities that clearly represent risks to the appearance of high ethical standards. Business
activities were the most heavily restricted of private interests for ministers, members of
parliament, and civil servants, with around 70% of both MENA and European countries
regulating this type of conflict. This figure is similar to the World Bank PAM findings, with
around 60% of countries regulating these restrictions. These types of business activities include
holding government contracts, private firm ownership and stockholdings (except for members
of parliament), and private firm board membership. The presence of these restrictions points to
the recognition that private sector engagements may often conflict with public service
mandates, particularly when public officials are responsible for selecting contractors and

                                                                                               Page | 112
crafting policy. Membership in non-governmental organizations and labor unions were the
least likely activities to be restricted, indicating that participation in civil society is not
considered a potential risk for misuse of office, even if it reflects an official’s political
leanings.

231. Post-employment restrictions were virtually non-existent across the entire dataset,
except for civil servants. This reflects the findings from the World Bank PAM dataset, where
only 30% of countries regulated employment after leaving office. While it is possible for
countries to require disclosure of employment opportunities after leaving office, a cooling-off
period that prohibits employment with specific firms or fields may be more likely to
discourage misuse of the authority and connections that are accorded to public officials while
they are in office.

232. Addressing conflicts of interest through disclosure requirements is less common than
restricting behavior (See Figure 2.38). Disclosure systems require significant capacity for
receipt and review of declaration forms, as well as the existence of trained personnel that can
work with officials to alleviate conflicts. For countries unable to dedicate substantial financial
and human resources to a disclosure system, post-employment restrictions are a cost-effective
means of removing potential abuse of office. However, these restrictions must be coupled with
appropriate sanctions and enforcement capabilities to be effective. Unfortunately, sanctions for
violations of the restrictions of behavior were specified by law in only half of the countries in
the dataset. Conflict of interest restrictions will be largely ineffective without a credible threat
of enforcement. Enforcement bodies for these types of restrictions were even less likely to be
specified by law, except for civil servants (whose employment is already highly regulated by a
civil service body).


               Figure 2.38: Data from Public Accountability Mechanisms (PAM)
                                    90-country dataset (2013)
                                           Disclosure vs. Restrictions
                                                                                                           88%

                                                                                                                 88%
                                                  87%




                                                                                               85%
                                     84%




                                                                                                     81%
                                            80%
                          77%




                                                        77%




                                                                               60%
                    58%




                                                                                     55%
              38%




                                                                         32%
        32%




                                                                   30%




   Disclosure of business           Restrictions on             Disclosure of public      Restrictions on public
         activities                business activities        of f ice incompatibilities of f ice incompatibilities


                      Low income     Lower Middle Income         Upper Middle Income       High Income



                                                                                                           Page | 113
                                X.       Financial Disclosure

233. Financial disclosure systems require that public officials disclose their income, assets,
and financial interests. They are intended for a variety of purposes, most fundamentally to
prevent and to detect the abuse of public office for private gain. They also help to build a
climate of integrity by providing guidance to officials about the principles and behaviors of
ethical conduct in public office, reminding public officials that their behavior is subject to
scrutiny, and generating a valuable source of information for financial or corruption
investigations. Most financial disclosure regimes are combinations of prevention and detection,
incorporating measures aimed at prevention of conflicts of interests and abuse of office, as well
as explicit detection of disproportionate increases in wealth (also referred to as illicit
enrichment).

234. Financial disclosure systems may focus on detecting instances of illicit enrichment, by
requiring public officials to disclose the ownership of real estate, moveable assets, cash,
amounts and sources of income, and liabilities. This information can then be compared with
land and vehicle registries, private firm registries, bank account information, tax databases, and
the results of lifestyle checks by independent agencies or civil society. This type of approach
can also function as preventative, since the threat of detection serves as a deterrent to behavior
that enriches officials at the expense of their public service.

235. However, preventative measures are primarily focused on preventing and remedying
conflicts of interest between an official’s employment responsibilities and private financial
interests. A preventative approach that focuses on conflicts of interest can be collaborative –
encouraging participation of both employer and employee in a discussion about appropriate
behavior and solutions to potential conflicts, without the immediate threat of sanction. The
types of conflicts that might be disclosed in this approach include stockholdings, gifts and
hospitality, private firm board membership, performing advisory services, serving as company
officer of private firm, non-governmental organization or labor union membership, holding
outside employment, holding government contracts, and post-employment endeavors.

236. An effective disclosure system requires officials to disclose any interests that may
compromise their ability to serve as unbiased agents of the public service. Disclosures can be
divided into two categories: 1) ad hoc disclosure: disclosing private interest when a conflict
arises with public interest and 2) preventative disclosure: declaring one’s private interest in
advance of any conflict arising. Disclosures provide the means for governments to monitor
potential or existing conflicts, provide officials with regular reminders to review their
circumstances for potential conflicts, and provide them with guidance on how to identify and

                                                                                      Page | 114
avoid them. A disclosure system involves the participation of both public officials and their
supervisors (or other ethics authority figures) in the identification of potential or actual
conflicts, so that these conflicts may be resolved efficiently and effectively.

237. Many countries have preventative systems that have evolved from restrictions-based
models to a hybrid model that incorporates some form of disclosure. In disclosure systems,
conflicts can be addressed in a number of ways, depending on the nature of the conflict and the
responsibilities of the official:

      Divestiture of the investments/interests
      Cessation of further acquisition of the investments/interests
      Freezing any investment transaction for a specified period of time
      Placement of the investment in a blind trust (without the requirement to first divest
       from current investments)
      Cessation from handling cases with actual or potential conflict of interest
      Re-assignment of duties (to another individual) that pose actual or potential conflict of
       interest
      Prohibition of information flow regarding actual or potential conflict of interest

238. The World Bank PAM dataset found that nearly 80% of countries have some sort of
financial disclosure framework in place, but their features vary significantly across income.
Higher income countries tend to have more sophisticated verification systems, while lower
income countries face resource constraints in monitoring and oversight arrangements. Upper-
middle income countries specify considerable items to be disclosed, both in terms of assets,
liabilities, and interests. Interestingly, ministers, members of parliament, and civil servants are
subject to financial disclosure obligations more often in middle income countries.

239. MENA countries scored comparably to the European countries included in the study,
with the exception of public access to declarations, as illustrated in Figure 2.39. Overall
country scores on financial disclosure did not cluster by region. France has a very
comprehensive financial disclosure regime, while Lebanon, Portugal, and Algeria score fall
into the middle performers range. The average score for the remaining countries was 50 out of
100 (Figure 2.40).

240. Heads of state were least likely to be subject to financial disclosure provisions, since
monarchy are exempt from legal provisions of this nature. However, there is high prevalence
of financial disclosure regimes for members of parliament, ministers, and civil servants in
MENA countries. These public officials are required to disclosed the following:

      Real estate
      Movable assets

                                                                                       Page | 115
   Cash
   Loans and Debts
   Income from outside employment/assets
   Gifts
   Private firm ownership and/or stock holdings

           Figure 2.39: Average scores on Financial Disclosure restrictions
           (0-100 scale, where higher scores reflect more robust frameworks)

                                 Financial Disclosure: Averages

                                          Country score
                                          100
          Public access to declarations                         Officials required to disclose
                                             50

                                               0
          Monitoring and Oversight                                Disclosure items


                                 Sanctions               Filing frequency


                                MENA               Spain, Portugal, France, Italy




                Figure 2.40: Overall country scores on Financial Disclosure
                (0-100 scale, where higher scores reflect more robust frameworks)


                             Financial Disclosure: country scores
    100                                                                                     90
     90
                                          76
     80                                                                              68
                           67
     70
     60    52      55                              51                                            53
                                  50                       47       48
     50                                                                     37
     40
     30
     20
     10
      0




                                                                                                  Page | 116
241. By contrast, the European countries did not have a high instance of requiring cash,
loans, and debts to be disclosed, and they were less likely to require civil servants to disclose
income, assets, and interests than members of parliament and ministers. This may be because
civil servants are subject to extensive conflict of interest restrictions rather than financial
disclosure regimes.

242. Public officials are required to file declarations upon taking and leaving office in most
MENA countries. However, ad hoc filing that is triggered when assets or interests change, and
annual filings, are not common. This is unfortunate, as annual filing allows for periodic review
of changes in assets, income, and interests. In the absence of this kind of extensive process to
verify the veracity of declarations, ad hoc disclosure of conflicts allows managers and ethics
advisors to immediately address issues. This is particularly important in voting and decision-
making, e.g., for members of parliament and civil servants overseeing contracts and public
policy.

243. Sanctions, monitoring, and oversight are specified by law in nearly all countries in the
dataset (Figure 2.41). This is encouraging, as financial disclosure regimes focused on detecting
instances of illicit enrichment require a credible threat of detection and credible threat of
sanctions in order to be effective. However, it is not clear if all financial disclosure regimes are
functioning in practice. In cases where an enforcement body was specified, the World Bank
Public Accountability Mechanisms dataset has shown that a specialized commission is the
most common. These commissions tend to have independent budgets, and in some cases
independent policing powers and investigative capacities, which can help ensure greater
effectiveness of the financial disclosure system. In any case, an oversight agency or department
should be established for enforcement of rules, issuance of guidance materials, and monitoring
of implementation. Ethics advisors, either within agencies or in specialized commissions,
should be appointed in order to provide guidance to officials on specific instances of conflict
avoidance.

244. Although the opportunities for abuse of public office might increase as economies
develop in complexity, the risk for misuse of authority exists at all levels of income and
responsibility. With a credible threat of enforcement, restrictions may serve as a practical first
step to addressing the potential for misconduct. As capacity grows, the addition of disclosure
requirements can help to instill and reinforce a sense of ethics in the public service. This is
particularly true when disclosure regimes are collaborative in nature, with the aim of
identifying and mitigating conflicts of interest, rather than punishing public officials for
impropriety.

245. Unfortunately, MENA countries fall quite short with regards to public access to
declarations (Figure 2.41). Only Algeria allows access to declaration content, consisting of
only assets, through publication in the Official Journal. European countries provide for
                                                                                        Page | 117
requests for declaration content, and in many cases, proactive publication of content on a
dedicated website that allows download for analysis and re-use. While public availability of
declaration content will never replace the need for government capacity and expertise in
overseeing the financial disclosure system, it reinforces the pressure for public officials to
exhibit ethical behavior with regard to the intersection of their private interests and the public
interest



                       Figure 2.41: Category scores on financial disclosure

                                 Financial Disclosure: category scores


                                                                                      100
                           0             100                                          100
                          75                                                    50
           0      0                       75      0                             75
          56     63                0                        0       0                 100   38
                         100      75              75       56      75                       56
                 38                      100                                    100
          75     50       50                                               25         75    50
                                  63              100      75     75       50
          63     81       75      44      75               38                   50    63    56
                                                  25              19       50
          41                      52      19      19       45     41            50          38
                                                                           38
          80     100     100      70      90      90       70     80       22   80    100   80
                                                                           40




                          Officials required to disclose   Disclosure items
                          Filing frequency                 Sanctions
                          Monitoring and Oversight         Public access



                                 XI.       Freedom of Information

246. Freedom of information systems function as an integral, foundational factor in the
institutionalization of transparency. Freedom of information, as a right and a principle,
entrenches the notion of transparency as part of good government. Freedom of information
systems (also known as right to information and access to information) are practical
components of government administration that reflect commitment to the principle of
transparency, and may serve to encourage, if not facilitate, participation and accountability.

247. Although freedom of information systems comprise only a part of transparency in
government, they are a substantial factor in successful institutionalization of openness and
access to information. A freedom of information system aims to increase the transparency of
government by providing regular and reliable information to the public and facilitating

                                                                                             Page | 118
appropriate and relevant use of that information. Experts commonly support the notion that
access to information is integral to the promotion of participation, transparency and
accountability in any given society.

248. A freedom of information framework aims at improving the efficiency of the
government and increasing the transparency of its functioning by:

      Regularly and reliably providing government documents to the public;
      Educating the public on the significance of transparent government;
      Facilitating appropriate and relevant use of information in the lives of individuals.

249. Furthermore, in order to act as an effective anti-corruption tool, freedom of information
depends upon a legally entrenched right to access documents held by the government (and in
some cases, by private bodies). Access to information can be protected through a variety of
legal mechanisms, from explicit constitutional safeguards to individual departmental orders.
For a framework to be an effective and functioning mechanism for transparency, seven factors
are key: scope of coverage of disclosures; procedures for accessing information; exemptions to
disclosure requirements; enforcement mechanisms; specified deadlines for release of requested
information; sanctions for non-compliance; and proactive disclosure.


250. The World Bank PAM dataset found that existence of freedom of information laws is
closely tied to the level of income. Only 30% of lower income countries had freedom of
information regimes in place, contrasted with nearly 70% of upper-middle income countries
and 95% of high income countries. In addition, the existence of an independent non-judicial
appeals mechanism, in the form of an information commissioner, was only found in 50% of
countries. Most often, countries rely on first appeals at the level of the public body and second
appeals in the regular courts, despite the implicit bias in the former process, and the high costs
and level of expertise required at the second level.

251. Out of the three corrective mechanisms in this study, access to information was the least
developed and least entrenched in the MENA region (Figure 2.42). Compared to the European
countries included in the study, MENA countries scored poorly. Overall country scores on
access to information clustered somewhat by region. European countries and Tunisia scored
above 50 points, while Jordan, Lebanon, and Morocco scored less than 50. The remaining four
MENA countries of Algeria, Egypt, Kuwait, and Oman scored at or near zero; none of these
countries have an Access to Information law that establishes a legal right to information and
the framework for releasing information. (Figure 2.43)

252. Of the documents analyzed in this study, enacted legal instruments were the most likely
to be legally required for disclosure in MENA countries, with draft laws and annual budgets a
close second. In European countries, it is often the case that these documents are released
                                                                                      Page | 119
online proactively, whether or not it is prescribed by law. However, this leaves citizens with
little basis to demand information should it not be released for any reason.




                   Figure 2.42: Average scores on Access to Information
              (0-100 scale, where higher scores reflect more robust frameworks)

                                 Access to Information: Averages
                                              Legal framework
                                               100
               Sanctions for non-disclosure                      Access to specific documents
                                                  50

                                                                       Procedures for accessing
              Monitoring and Oversight             0
                                                                             information


                      Deadlines for release                      Exemptions and Overrides

                                                   Appeals
                                 MENA              Spain, Portugal, France, Italy




               Figure 2.43: Overall country scores on Access to Information
              (0-100 scale, where higher scores reflect more robust frameworks)

                           Access to Information: Country Scores
        100

         80
                                                                           68
                     63                                                                           63
                                                                                    58   57
         60
                            45
               40
         40
                                   26
         20
                                                       6
                                              0              0     0
          0




                                                                                                       Page | 120
253. In countries with a dedicated access to information law, guidelines for release of
information are common, which allow for both written and electronic submission of requests.
However, despite the international standard of a 20-day response deadline, none of the MENA
countries specified any deadlines for responding to information requests. This is unfortunate,
since requiring the release of information within specified deadlines lays the groundwork for
applying sanctions in cases of non-compliance. Often this is the consequence of vague, sparse
legislation that does not provide substantive instructions for the implementation and
enforcement of the right.

254. All countries with a dedicated law have specific exemptions to disclosure, including
European countries. However, balancing tests that provide mechanisms to override these
exemptions are not common in MENA countries; only Tunisia and Lebanon provide for this
practice by law. Where the public interest in maintaining the exemption outweighs the public
interest in the disclosure of the information, then the information can be withheld. If the public
interest in disclosing the information is equal to or greater than the public interest in
maintaining the exemption, then the information must be disclosed. A related harm test may
only allow relevant bodies to withhold specific information in cases where there is legitimate
risk that release of the information would cause harm. The World Bank Public Accountability
Mechanisms Initiative has found that balancing tests are more prevalent with increasing
country income levels, most likely because these tests require trained professionals to apply the
law in complex cases. (Figure 2.44)


                      Figure 2.44: Category scores on Access to Information


                                   Access to Information: category scores
              Italy     60   100    67 332540 67
                                                               Access to specific
            France 20 100   100 67 25400                       documents
           Portugal 40 50 67 67 75 400                         Procedures for accessing
             Spain    80 75 67 100     100            80 0     information
             Oman 0 0                                          Exemptions and Overrides
            Kuwait 0
                   0
             Egypt 0
                   0                                           Appeals
            Algeria 0
                    0
           Morocco 400        20
                       33 67 25 0                              Deadlines for release of
           Lebanon    100 50 67              20 67
                                         67 25                 information
            Tunisia     60   75    100    67 50 400            Monitoring and Oversight
             Jordan 40 50 33 67 25400




                                                                                          Page | 121
255. In contrast to all of the European countries in this study, only Jordan and Tunisia
require that information officers be appointed in public agencies. They are also the only
MENA countries with laws that identify a nodal agency to oversee implementation of access to
information in the public sector. Nodal agencies or departments are responsible for oversight of
the access to information regime, including training of civil servants and information
awareness campaigns for the public. None of the MENA countries specified an independent
enforcement agency to handle appeals. Worldwide, the most common means of non-judicial
enforcement is the Information Commission through the hearing of appeals. Unlike
Ombudsmen, Commissions of this type often have the authority to force disclosure of
government agencies, even if they do not have sanctioning powers. Nearly all countries allow
for appeals to be heard by the courts, but this should be a last resort, given the high costs and
lengthy processing times for judicial cases.

256. Sanctions in access to information regimes are not common, so it is not surprising that
only two of the countries in the entire dataset specified sanctions. A worrying trend is the
sanctioning of public officials for disclosure of restricted information, which is specified by
law in several MENA countries. This practice discourages openness in government and
incentivizes secrecy. (Figure 2.45)


 Figure 2.45: Appeals mechanisms in Public Accountability Mechanisms dataset (2010)


                            Appeals Mechanisms in Access to Information
                                          frameworks
                Judicial appeals mechanism                            77%
           Independent non-judicial appeals…                    56%
                               Ombudsman                  35%
                  Information Commission            15%
                                                                            Types of
                    Administrative Dispute 1%                               Independent
                                                                            non-judicial
                Human Rights Commission 1%
                                                                            appeals
                 Supreme Audit Institution 1%
              Appeals within public entities                     62%

                                               0%         20%         40%        60%       80%

                           Percent of Countries with Legal Right to Access




                                                                                                 Page | 122
                              XII.     Summary: The big picture

257. The data collected for this study suggests that in all MENA countries, the policy
environment is vulnerable to privilege-seeking. However, the degree varies by countries and
within countries, by policy areas. Table 2 presents the average scores for six policy areas
(Trade and Customs, Business Regulations, Allocation of Public Land, Public Procurement,
Investment Incentives and Access to Finance) and the three dimensions of public
accountability (Conflict of Interest Regulations, Asset Disclosure and Freedom of Information)
covered by this study. It also presents the average scores covering all these nine areas.


           Table 2.17: _Privilege-Resistance of Policy Making: summary scores

             Country            Average for            Average for     Average for all
                                policy areas              public       areas combined
                                                      accountability
                                       1                    2                3
             Morocco                 0.715                0.462            0.630
             Egypt                   0.683                0.644            0.670
             Algeria                 0.628                0.669            0.642
             Tunisia                 0.610                0.504            0.574
             Jordan                  0.593                0.429            0.538
             Oman                    0.556                0.371            0.494
             Lebanon                 0.539                0.444            0.507
             Kuwait                  0.482                0.270            0.411
             Note: The maximum possible score is 1.


258. Given the limitations of the methodology and data, as described in Chapter 1, finer
differences in the above numbers should be ignored; rather the focus should be on the big
picture that these data reveals. First, the average scores for the six policy areas (shown in
column 1) confirm the earlier statement that in all MENA countries the policy environment is
vulnerable to privilege-seeking. Within this general picture, it is possible to group the eight
countries into three categories; moderately vulnerable to privilege-seeking: Algeria, Egypt
Morocco and Tunisia, although the last two have weaker accountability mechanisms and are
less protected against privilege-seeking behavior; substantially vulnerable: Lebanon, Jordan,
Kuwait and Oman.




                                                                                         Page | 123
   Figure 2.46: _Privilege-Resistance of Policy Making: implementation (X-axis) versus public
                               accountability mechanisms (Y-Axis)

        0.80

        0.70

        0.60

        0.50

        0.40

        0.30

        0.20
           0.40        0.45          0.50       0.55      0.60      0.65       0.70          0.75

                  Kuwait   Lebanon     Jordan   Tunisia   Morocco   Oman   Egypt   Algeria




259. As discussed earlier, a high degree of accountability for public officials may dilute the
incentive of officials to grant privilege in exchange for favors by increasing the costs of doing
so. Thus, to some extent, it may mitigate the vulnerabilities in the policy areas. However, the
likelihood of that happening in the MENA region is rather poor due to the low degree of
accountability. This is indicated by the average scores for the three dimensions of public
accountability covered by this study. As shown in column 2 of Table 2.17, no MENA country
scores above 0.70. Indeed, with the exception of Algeria and Egypt, all countries score 0.50 or
below, with Oman and Kuwait scoring particularly low. This suggests that the vulnerability to
privilege as indicated by the assessment of individual policy areas may be accentuated due to
poor checks and balances on public officials. In this regard, Morocco’s top score on the policy
areas (0.715) does not give much comfort given its poor score on public accountability (0.462).
Finally, it may be noted that there are also variations in privilege-vulnerability across different
policy areas, both overall as well within individual countries. The best score is for Trade and
Customs in Morocco (0.908) and the worst is for Allocation of Public Land in Kuwait (0.20).
Overall, the vulnerability to privilege-seeking is the worst in the latter area with an average
score of 0.393 across the countries. Relatively better areas are Trade and Customs, and Access
to Finance, with scores of 0.726 and 0.712 respectively; nonetheless, this is not much
comforting given the absolute levels of the scores. These wide variations suggest considerable
scope for improvement as well as the scope for learning from relative good practices within
and across countries.




                                                                                             Page | 124
Page | 125
                   Chapter 3: From Measurement to Action

                        I. Going Forward: An operational agenda

260. The analysis in Chapter 2 reveals a variety of weaknesses in private sector related
policy areas in the MENA region that create opportunities for privilege-seeking. As described
in Chapter 1, the database underpinning this analysis largely consists of indicator values for
different dimensions of the policy areas studied for eight MENA countries and four European
comparator countries. These values are essentially binary numbers, which indicate whether or
not certain features (e.g., institutions, policies or practices) exist for these policy dimensions.
The values are based on the judgements of experts familiar with the respective policy areas in
the countries. The experts were also provided with detailed guidance on how to carry out their
assessments. Nonetheless, binary scoring has its limitations. Some degree of subjectivity
creeps into the assessments and often there are gray areas that can’t be adequately captured by
such scoring.

261. Thus, the findings of the above analysis should not be viewed as the last word on the
subject. Rather the usefulness of the exercise lies in providing initial indications of where
weaknesses may exist in the policy systems of these countries that create scope for privilege
seeking. Such indications can tell us where it may be worthwhile to probe further so that
specific operational interventions could be identified in order to make the policy apparatus in a
country resistant to privilege seeking.

262. Notwithstanding the methodological limitations, the approach of this study, including
its wide coverage of countries and policy dimensions, does provide a number of important
insights. For example, it brings out the importance of synergy between different policy
dimensions. Thus, countries may have processes for rule-based decisions that help restrain
privilege-seeking. Despite this, the culture of rule-based decision-making may be fragile
because supporting features, such as grievance redress mechanisms and systems to fight
fraudulent behavior, are weak or non-existent. Even where such supporting mechanisms exist,
they themselves may be fragile in the absence of more fundamental governance features such
as regular stakeholder consultation and public sharing of information. The analysis thus
demonstrates both the synergy between different policy dimensions and a hierarchy among
them.

Triggering a virtuous cycle of change

263. The synergy between different policy dimensions may also create the possibility of a
virtuous cycle of change. This suggests that a small set of politically feasible, technical
solutions may trigger a cascading set of additional changes. This may generate the cumulative
effect needed to make a significant dent in a privilege-ridden policy system. Such ripple effects

                                                                                       Page | 126
are often driven by dynamics within governments. Thus, a reform action in one area can
demonstrate the benefits of reform to stakeholders within the government, both functionaries in
the agency carrying out the reform and also in other parts of government. It may also show to
risk-averse bureaucrats that actual risks of carrying out a reform are less than perceived, thus
reducing their resistance to change. Thus, while the initial reform may be catalyzed by an
external agent, such as a development partner, subsequent changes maybe driven by internal
dynamics in governments, although external actors may continue to support the process, even
if it is only through some timely nudges. Annex 3 discusses these dynamics in detail with a
summary provided below.

264. The ripple effect of an initial reform may happen both “vertically and “horizontally?.
Consider the case of rule-based decision-making in the allocation of public land and assume
that a reform champion has introduced this discipline in the government. Once the benefits of
this reform is demonstrated, the same reform champion or others involved in the allocation of
public land may decide to consolidate the gains through additional reform, such as a grievance
mechanism so that applicants for public land may voice their concerns and/or an appropriate
policy and legal framework that will buttress the rule-based decision-making process.51 At a
later stage, the reformers working on land allocation may become bolder and ready to become
even more participatory and transparent by putting in place mechanisms for stakeholder
consultation and public sharing of information on allocation of public land. These are examples
of a vertical spillover effect, i.e., synergy within the same policy area

265. The ripple-over effect may also happen “horizontally?, i.e., by triggering reform
dynamics in a different policy area. Thus, the establishment of a system of rule-based decision
making in the allocation of public land may trigger the establishment of similar systems in
other policy areas, such as public procurement and business regulations. This second round of
reform may be followed by a third round where similar systems are introduced, say for
customs and trade, and for investment incentives.

266. Sometimes, the rounds of ripple effects come full circle to the original reform. Thus,
transparency measures in the area of land allocation may create pressure to sustain and
strengthen the initial reform in land allocation, i.e., the introduction of rule-based decision
making. When that happens a virtuous cycle of reforms is established.

267. Understanding such dynamics is operationally useful because it helps craft a long-term
reform program with appropriate sequencing between short and long-term actions. The
sequencing will depend on country contexts. Thus, in some situations, a reform program may

51 In a classic scenario, the policy and legal framework may come first, followed by the specific
processes/systems that the framework is supposed to underpin. However, in the real world, reforms sometimes
follow an idiosyncratic, opportunistic path and is initiated in the middle, rather the beginning, of a stylized linear
sequence.

                                                                                                          Page | 127
initially focus on the core policy dimension of rule-based decision-making and help establish
the processes and practices that encourage such decision-making. With these core features in
place, attention may be focused in the medium-term on the supporting features, such as
grievance redress mechanisms and systems to restrain fraudulent behavior. Finally, in the long
run, systems may be put in place for regular and structured dialogue with stakeholders and
sharing of information with the public. This type of sequencing may be appropriate for
countries whose governments are initially reluctant to open up to stakeholders and the public in
general. Such governments may be more willing to start with technocratic solutions that
promote rule-based decision making, then gradually bring in somewhat controlled
accountability features, such as grievance redress mechanisms, and much later feel comfortable
in opening up to the public. In more open societies, it may be possible to pursue reforms
simultaneously at different levels of the above-mentioned hierarchy.


                      II. Operationalizing the Privilege Resistance Agenda

268. An operational agenda to help countries make private sector policy-making privilege-
resistant may consist of a diverse set of activities supported by a range of WBG instruments.
The first step will be discussion and debate on the findings of this study in each of the
countries covered. Such discussions may create a demand for more in-depth diagnostic and
analytic work that probes deeper into one or more of the policy areas covered by this study.
Such an exercise may begin by taking stock of work already done in the country and identify
areas where further work is required, including policy areas not covered by this study. The
more in-depth analysis will help identify areas of intervention, including their packaging and
sequencing.

269. This study may also be discussed in MENA countries not covered in the study. Such
discussions may trigger interest in carrying out similar analysis for these countries. The
analysis may initially be light-touch following the approach of this study, followed by more in-
depth analysis along the lines mentioned above. Alternatively, if there is sufficient interest, the
analysis may skip the light-touch methodology and move directly to the more in-depth
approach.

270. The diversity of policy features covered in this study suggest a wide range of
operational interventions that could comprise a privilege-resistant support program for a
country. Some critical policy actions may be supported through development policy operations
while others may be better supported by advisory activities, results-based operations or
investment operations. Different combinations of these instruments are also possible. Table 3.1
provides examples of such interventions mapped to different WBG tools.



                                                                                       Page | 128
      Table 3.1: World Bank instruments and operational interventions in support of
                           privilege-resistant policy-making

Policy areas          DPO Prior Action             Program for Results       Investment           Advisory project
                                                   (PforR)                   project              component
                                                   Disbursement              component
                                                   Linked Indicator
Policy formulation    Policy on Regulatory         Notice and Comment        Funding for          Capacity building on
process               Impact Assessments           System established        automation of        regulatory impact
                      announced                                              Notice and           assessments
                                                                             Comment System
Trade and customs     Customs code made            A formal appeals          Funding for          Support to reform of
                      publicly available           mechanism is              electronic           trade clearing
                                                   established for           processing of        procedures
                      Trade clearing               customs related           customs
                      procedures and               grievances                declaration
                      formalities are made
                      publicly available
Public procurement    Public procurement           A public procurement                           Support to the
                      policy announced with a      regulatory framework                           development of a public
                      defined and regulated        is established that                            procurement regulatory
                      procedure for public         provides for                                   framework
                      opening of tenders           independent review
                                                   of procurement
                                                   decisions
Allocation of land    A transparent process for    An independent body       Funding for an       Support to the
                      allocation of public land    is established to         automated land       development of a
                      announced                    which applicants for      allocation process   database on available
                                                   land can appeal                                public land
Investment            Clear criteria established   Data base on existing                          Support for carrying out
incentives            for award of investment      investment incentives                          economic analysis of
                      incentives                   prepared                                       investment incentives
Business regulation   New law or policy            Automated                 Funding of an        Support for the
                      enacted stipulating risk-    construction              automated            development of a risk-
                      based inspections of         permitting system is      construction         based system for tax
                      businesses                   operational               permitting system    inspections
                                                                             Funding of
                                                                             automated
                                                                             business registry
Competition policy    A fully-fledged              The Competition           Financial            Capacity building
                      competition policy and       agency is provided        provided for the     support to Competition
                      legal framework is           independence from         operations of the    agency
                      enacted, applicable to all   the political process     Competition
                      sectors and economic         (specific indicators to   Agency for a
                      agents, and with             be defined to reflect     defined period.
                      provision for an             independence)
                      institutional set up.
Public                E.g. Existence of an                                                        Capacity building and
accountability        independent auditor,                                                        advisory services to
mechanisms            scope of mandate;                                                           reform implementation

                                                                                                     Page | 129
                      Freedom of information;
                      etc.

271. Two important aspects of country programing need to be highlighted. These are critical
if the objective is to build upon the first round of reforms and make a significant dent in
privilege-seeking. First, is the need to take a long-term programmatic approach which will use
a series of WBG operations, such as a series of development policy operations or a mix of
various WBG tools deployed in sequence. An example is provided below (Table 3.1) taking
the cases of two policy areas covered by this study, i.e., investment incentives and allocation of
public land.


                Figure 3.1. Operationalizing the Privilege Agenda: an example


                                        Clear criteria                           Support for
                                                          Data base on
                                       established for                           carrying out
                                                             existing
                                           award of                               economic
                                                           investment
                                         investment                                analysis
                                                            incentives
                                          incentives                            of investment
              In-depth country
                                                                                  incentives
   Action




                assessment of
                  privilege-
              resistance policy
                                       A transparent                            Support to the
                   making                                Funding for an
                                        process for                           development of a
                                                         automated land
                                       allocation of                             database on
                                                            allocation
                                        public land                            available public
                                                             process
                                        announced                                    land
 Instrument




                                                              PforR
                                                          Disbursement            Technical
     WB




                Analytics           DPO Prior Action
                                                         Linked Indicator      assistance and
                                                                              advisory project
                                                                                 component
                                                           Investment
                                                             project
                                                           component




272. In this example, analytic work and policy dialogue identifies these two policy areas as
priority areas to intervene both because these are vulnerable to privilege-seeking and because
there is some interest in government to initiate reforms in the areas. A series of reforms are
programed for each policy area. Thus, establishing clear criteria for award of investment

                                                                                       Page | 130
incentives is identified as a priority reform and this is made a prior action for a development
policy operation. The objective is to introduce the discipline of rule-based decision making and
a DPO instrument is used to create the pressure for enacting the reform. A second reform in the
same policy area is creating a database on investment incentives. Such a database increases
transparency and makes it easier to assess if the criteria for awarding incentives are indeed
being adhered to. This may be supported through a Program-for-Results (P4R) operation. Since
a database may have varying degrees of coverage and it may be difficult to achieve full
coverage in one go, progressive expansion of the coverage may be part of the P4R operation
with disbursement-linked targets set for different years. Another initiative that may introduce
further discipline in the investment incentives regime is economic analysis of incentives. This
will help reveal if the incentives are producing the results they are intended to. This may be
supported by an advisory operation and may follow the completion of the database.

273. Second, is the need to exploit synergy across various parts of the WBG. The policy
areas discussed in this report do not fall in the domain of a single global practice. The field is
further broadened when we consider the enabling areas, such as transparency, public
accountability mechanisms and political engagement by citizens. Thus, in the example above, a
second area of reform is covered as well; this is allocation of public land. Here two a set of
instruments are deployed to support a series of reforms starting with the policy announcement
of a transparent process for allocation of public land, followed by the establishment of an
automated land allocation process and the development of a database on available public land,
each supported by different lending and advisory instruments. As may be noted, the two policy
areas covered by this example, i.e., investment incentives and allocation of public land, both
involve the award of certain privileges to businesses. Reforms in these policy areas thus share
some commonalities such as establishing a clear criteria and process for giving the awards,
maintaining a database on the awards so that privilege-seeking behavior may be detected, and
sharing of information so that pressures are created against the seeking and granting of
privileges. Thus, there is synergy between reform programs in these areas and covering both
such areas within a comprehensive program will help exploit such synergy.

274. To conclude, while it is challenging to address the problem of policy capture and
privilege-seeking, there exist many technical solutions that may be political feasible. A well-
sequenced set of a critical mass of such reforms may have a cumulative effect over time and
create a dent in a privilege-ridden system. A rich variety of instruments are available to support
such reforms in a programmatic manner and exploit synergy between different policy areas.
This report will hopefully facilitate such programmatic exercises by building awareness in
countries of the vulnerabilities that exist in their policy areas to privilege-seeking and
providing a methodology to assess reform opportunities and prioritize them.




                                                                                      Page | 131
Page | 132
                                                   Annex 1: Questionnaires



                                                                                                             How many
                                                                                                             /Comments /
                                                                                                    Yes/No
                                                                                                             Details /
                                                                                                             Sources
                                             Tariffs structure and transparency
1     Are tariff data publicly available on a web portal accessible to all?
2     Is the information up to date, reflecting 2015 tariff data?
3     How many tariff bands are there?
4     What are the 5 highest tariff peak rates? And for which types of goods?
                                           Import restrictions and special regimes
      Are there non-automatic import licenses, outside usual prohibited/regulated goods (e.g.
5     weapons)?
      Are the criteria for the awarding of import licenses stated in a web portal (accessible to
6.1   all)?
6.2   Are there ‘de facto’ hidden, informal requirements, in addition to the official ones?
7     What is the number of customs regimes?
8     How many types of import licenses and permits exist?
9     What is the percentage of physical inspections (%)?
      Does the count of physical inspections include the empty containers in the denominator?
10    (optional)
11    Do ex post controls exist?
                                   Electronic processing of declarations and connectivity
13    Are customs declarations electronically processed for imports - at least at the main ports?
                                                                                                             How many
                                                                                                             /Comments /
                                                                                                    Yes/No
                                                                                                             Details /
                                                                                                             Sources
14     If yes, are paper declarations required in addition to the electronic process?
15     Are trade clearing procedures and formalities publicly available on a web portal?
       Are the main customs offices on the borders electronically connected to the
       Headquarters? (i.e. centralized book keeping, communication channels, networked
16     database)
                                                               Fines
       What is the ratio of the total value of "infringement / value of duties" for a year?
17     (optional)
18     Is there a publicly available web portal with the scale of infringement fines?
19.1   Are there financial incentives for customs officials to discover fraud?
       If yes, what are the incentives for customs agents to discover fraud? No incentive; a flat
19.2   incentive; a percentage of the fine; is it capped?
19.3   Is the incentive to discover fraud capped?
       What is the value of the ratio "average salary/average value of the duties" of custom
20     agents? (optional)
                                                             Brokers
21     Is it mandatory to hire custom brokers?
22     What is the percentage of market share of the five (5) largest brokers country wide?
       What is the number of brokers' license removal (revocation) per year, over the past 5
23     years? (optional)
24     When was the last time a broker's license was removed? (optional)
25     Was there a broker's license removal in the past 5 years?
                                                 Customs procedures and ethics
26     Is there a procedures manual for customs agents?

                                                                                                                    Page | 134
                                                                                                           How many
                                                                                                           /Comments /
                                                                                                  Yes/No
                                                                                                           Details /
                                                                                                           Sources
     In the customs authority, are there internal audits regarding compliance with internal
27   procedures?
     In the customs authority, are there internal audits regarding internal fraud and
28   corruption?
     Is there a code of conduct or rules on conflict of interest in customs? (please specify
29
     which one exists)
30   Is the customs code publicly available?
31   Do regulations to implement the Customs code exist?
     How many customs agents are sanctioned for corruption every year (on average over the
32   past 5 year)? (optional)
33   Were there custom agents sanctioned in the past year? How many?
                                                      Laws and appeals
34   By regulation, is there a possibility to appeal decisions?
35   By regulation, is there an official timeframe for appeal?
     By regulation, is there a possibility of recourse to independent jurisdiction in the final
36   instance?
     How many appeal cases are there per year (please average over the past 5 years)?
37   (optional)




                                                                                                                  Page | 135
                                                                                                            Yes /   Comments /
                    PRIVILEGE RESISTANT PROCUREMENT QUESTIONNAIRE
                                                                                                             No       details
                                       The institutional and regulatory frameworks
1.1     Is there a regulatory body or an authority that oversees public procurement?
        If there is a regulatory body or an authority in charge of public procurement, does it have its
1.2
        own budget?
         - Pursuant to the regulatory framework, is the regulatory body’s involvement in direct
1.3.1
         procurement operations prohibited?
         - Pursuant to the regulatory framework, is the regulatory body’s involvement in procurement
1.3.2
         planning prohibited?
         - Pursuant to the regulatory framework, is the regulatory body’s involvement bids evaluation
1.3.3
         prohibited?

1.3.4    - In practice, is the regulatory body’s involvement in direct procurement operations
         prohibited?

1.3.5    - In practice, is the regulatory body’s involvement in procurement planning prohibited?

1.3.6    - In practice, is the regulatory body’s involvement bids evaluation prohibited?
        Is there a regular procurement planning exercise instituted by law or regulation that starts with
2.1     the preparation of multiyear plans for the government agencies, from which annual operating
        plans are derived?
2.2     Are procurement plans prepared in support of the budget planning and formulation process?
                                                      Fair opportunity
        Does the regulatory framework require that procurement opportunities other than sole source or
3.1
        price quotations be publicly advertised in a national gazette or widely distributed newspaper?
        Does the regulatory framework require that procurement opportunities other than sole source or
3.2
        price quotations be publicly advertised in a central web portal?
        Does the legal framework establish that participation of any contractor or supplier or group of
 4
        suppliers or contractors is based on qualification?


                                                                                                                      Page | 136
                                                                                                              Yes /   Comments /
                     PRIVILEGE RESISTANT PROCUREMENT QUESTIONNAIRE
                                                                                                               No       details
 5.1     Does the regulatory framework establish rules that favor national companies?
 5.2     What is the margin of preference for national suppliers?
         Is it mandatory to enroll as a supplier on a national suppliers’ registry to participate to
 6.1
         biddings?
 6.2     Is the registration timeframe specified in the legal framework?
  7      Is there a classification system for the firms / contractors?
         Does the regulatory framework provide a list of qualification criteria that suppliers must meet
 8.1
         in order to be admitted to submit a bid? ?
         Does the regulatory framework provide that qualification criteria should be communicated to
 8.2
         suppliers, either through the tender notice or tender documents?
  9      Does the legal framework establish rules that favor State owned enterprises?
         Does the regulatory framework and its implementing regulations provide procedures and
10.1
         methodologies for assessment of technical capacity?
         Does the regulatory framework and its implementing regulations provide procedures and
10.2
         methodologies for combining price and technical capacity under different circumstances?
                                   Transparency, confidentiality and access to information
  11     Does the legal framework mandate the following?
11.1.1   By regulation, Public opening of tenders follows a defined and regulated procedure
11.1.2   Public opening of tenders occurs in the 24 hours following the closing date for bid submission
11.2.1   By regulation, Records of proceedings for bid openings are retained.
11.2.2   By regulation, Records of proceedings for bid openings are available for review.
 11.3    By regulation, Security and confidentiality of bids is maintained prior to bid opening
         By regulation, disclosure of specific sensitive information during debriefing or clarifications is
11.4
         prohibited.
         Is there an integrated information system that provides at a minimum, up-to-date procurement
12.1
         information, including tender invitations, requests for proposals?



                                                                                                                        Page | 137
                                                                                                         Yes /   Comments /
                    PRIVILEGE RESISTANT PROCUREMENT QUESTIONNAIRE
                                                                                                          No       details
        Is there an integrated information system that provides at a minimum, up-to-date procurement
12.2
        information, including contract award information?
        Is this information system accessible to the public at no or minimum cost? (please specify the
 13
        cost)
 14     Are the following decisions publicly posted on a government website or a national gazette?
14.1    - modifications of tender documents
14.2    - cancellation of a call for tenders
14.3    - award notices
                                               Grievance, complaint, recourse
        Does the regulatory framework provide for the right of participants to ask for an independent
15.1
        review in a procurement process?
        Does the regulatory framework establish timeframes for issuance of decisions by the procuring
15.2
        agency?
        Does the regulatory framework establish timeframes for issuance of decisions by the
15.3.
        administrative review body?
        Is the administrative review body institutionally independent and autonomous with regard to
15.4
        resolving complaints?
                                                Integrity and accountability
16.1    Does the regulatory framework for procurement, include provisions addressing:
        The regulatory framework for procurement gives instructions on how to incorporate fraud,
16.2
        corruption, conflict of interest and unethical behavior in tendering documents.
 17     Does the regulatory framework cover the following:
17.1.   - cover fraud and corruption
17.2.   - provide a definition of what is considered fraud and corruption
        - spells out the individual responsibilities and consequences for government employees found
17.3.
        guilty of fraud or corruption in procurement.


                                                                                                                   Page | 138
                                                                                                                 Yes /   Comments /
                          PRIVILEGE RESISTANT PROCUREMENT QUESTIONNAIRE
                                                                                                                  No       details
             - spells out the individual responsibilities and consequences private firms or individuals found
   17.4.
             guilty of fraud or corruption in procurement.
             Is there a secure, accessible and confidential system for the public reporting of cases of fraud,
    18
             unethical behavior and corruption?
    19       Does the regulatory framework provide for:
   19.1.     - exclusions for criminal or corrupt activities,
   19.2.     - administrative debarment under the law subject to due process
   19.3.     - prohibition of commercial relations or black listing?
    20       Does the government has in place an anticorruption program to:
   20.1.     - prevent corruption in public procurement?
   20.2.     - detect corruption in public procurement?



                                                                                  Number/figure/scor Who will
                                                                     Yes    No                                            Source
                                                                                  e/Comment          respond
                                                                                  Provide the
                                                                                  complete name and
                                                                                  number of the
                                                                                  act/law
1.1. Is there a Competition Act/Law in place?                                                        The competition
If the answer is “Yes?, when was it enacted (mm/dd/yyyy)?                                            authorities or
                                                                                                     their equivalent
1.1.1. Is there a draft bill with parliament or with government?                                     in the ministries
1.2. Is there a functional Competition Authority in place? By        Yes    No
functional we mean an authority with executive regulations in
place (to activate the law), staff, and a budget.
If the answer is “Yes?:


                                                                                                                           Page | 139
a) Please provide the full name of the Competition Authority         Provide the
                                                                     complete name of
                                                                     the relevant
                                                                     authority
b) If available, please provide the website for the Competition      Provide the website
Authority                                                            address of the
                                                                     relevant authority
c) If a specific act/law for the creation of the agency is needed,   Provide the
when was such act/law issued (mm/yyyy)?                              complete name and
                                                                     number of the
                                                                     act/law
d) Where relevant, what is the parent Ministry that hosts the
Competition Authority?
e) When did the Competition Authority start to take on casework
(mm/yyyy)?

SCOPE OF THE COMPETITION FRAMEWORK
2.1. The legal competition framework has explicit provisions to
address:
b) Vertical restraints/agreements
c) Abuse of dominance
d) Merger control
e) Anticompetitive regulation / competition advocacy
f) Anticompetitive actions of state and public bodies
 g) Actions of public officials that facilitate anticompetitive
behavior
 h) Others (e.g. consumer protection, state aid control, unfair
competition, procurement) [Please, specify in the comments
section]
2.2. The legal competition framework does not apply to:

                                                                                           Page | 140
a) state owned enterprises (in general or in particular sectors) (
please specify in the comments section)
b) other state bodies and government agencies (in general or in
particular sectors) ( please specify in the comments section)
c) certain sectors of the economy ( please specify in the comments
section)
d) certain goods or services ( please specify in the comments
section)
e) legal monopolies( please specify in the comments section)
f) professional associations ( please specify in the comments
section)
g) conduct that is required or authorized by other government
authority (in addition to exclusion that might apply to whole
sectors or markets) (please specify in the comments section)
2.3. Please indicate which of the following are stated objectives of
your country's competition policy:
a) Ensuring effective competitive process
b) Promoting consumer welfare
c) Enhancing efficiency
d) Ensuring economic freedom
e) Ensuring a level playing field for SMEs
f) Promoting fairness and equality
g) Reducing poverty
h) Promoting consumer choice
i) Achieving market integration
j) Facilitating privatization and market liberalization
k) Promoting competitiveness in international markets


                                                                       Page | 141
l) Other [Please specify in the comments section]
                                                                                If the answer is "Yes,
                                                                                what are the possible
2.4. Does the competition framework contain a framework for                     justifications for
exemptions to restrictive practices (e.g. price fixing, market       Yes   No   exemptions?
allocation, coordination of production)
                                                                                If "Yes", please
                                                                                explain under which
                                                                                grounds and provide
                                                                                examples of such
                                                                                merger cases handled
2.5. Can an anticompetitive merger or acquisition be allowed on      Yes   No   by the Authority
grounds other than competition (e.g. public interest)?
STATE AID AND SUBSIDY CONTROL                                        Yes   No
3.1. Is there a specific framework and procedure that public
bodies should follow to grant state aid (subsidies, tax breaks,
government land, concessional loans, etc.) to private and State
owned enterprises?
3.2. If there are general or sectoral criteria to grant state aid
(subsidies, tax breaks, concessional loans, etc.), do they include
an assessment on market competition?
3.3. Is there a registry of State aid (subsidies, tax breaks,
government land, concessional loans, etc.) granted by the
government to private and State owned enterprises?
INSTITUTIONAL SET UP                                              Yes      No
4.1. The Government body that is responsible for the enforcement
of competition law is (please mark all the options that apply and
explain in the comment section):
a) An independent body
b) A government department with a Ministry
c) The public prosecutor


                                                                                                         Page | 142
d) A sector specific regulator
e) A specialized tribunal
f) Other (please specify)
4.2. The Competition Authority is accountable to:
a) A government Minister? [Please specify in the comments
section]
b) A government department [Please specify in the comments
section]
c) Parliament
d) Other [please specify in the comments section]

4.3. Members of the Competition Authority (Commissioner,
Chairman, Director) are appointed by:
a) President or Prime Minister
b) Minister
c) President or Prime Minister with consent of Congress or
Parliament
d) Congress or Parliament
e) Representatives of entrepreneurial or consumer associations, or
academics
f) Judicial system
g) Other (please specify in the comment section)
4.4. Can the Competition authority's decisions be vetoed by the   Yes   No
line Ministry(ies) or any other body of the Executive branch?
(please specify in the comment section)
4.5. Who allocates the budget of the Competition Authority (e.g.,
Parliament, Government, self-financing through merger filing fees
or fines, other)?
4.6. Is the Competition Authority governed by a single chairman

                                                                             Page | 143
or a collegiate body?
4.7. How long is the term of office of the agency's Board
members?
                                                                    Yes   No
4.7.1. If it is a fixed-term appointment, is it renewable?
4.8. Are Board members jointly nominated or at intervals (term of
Board members' mandates does not coincide) so as to ensure
continuity in operations and strategy implementation?             Yes     No


4.9. Are market operators represented in the Board of the           Yes   No
Competition Authority?
4.10. May the Competition Authority's board members hold other Yes        No
offices or appointments in the government or the industry?
4.11. How long is the term of office of the agency's Board
members?
4.12. How can the Board members be dismissed from office?
[Please provide details in the comments section]
                                                                    Yes   No
4.13. Is there a fixed period during which removal is prohibited?
4.14. Is there a cooling off period during which board members
and staff of the Competition Authority cannot take jobs in the      Yes   No
government and/or companies investigated after their term of
office/employment contract? [please specify in the comments
section]
INTERACTION WITH OTHER GOVERNMENT
POLICIES AND ADVOCACY WITH GOVERNMENT
AGENCIES                                                            Yes   No



                                                                               Page | 144
5.1. Do sector specific regulators have a Competition law
mandate, including the investigation of anticompetitive practices
or the analysis of mergers? Can the staff of the regulator
participate in the investigations and market inquiries carried out
by the Competition Authority? [Please specify in the comments
section]
a) Telecommunications regulator
b) Energy regulator
c) Transport regulator
d) Banking regulator
e) Public Procurement agency
f) Consumer Protection agency
g) Others [Please, specify in the comments section]

5.2. Does the Competition Authority have the mandate to issue
opinions on government policies, draft legislation and regulations
as part of its role in advocacy?
5.2.1. If the answer is "Yes", are the opinions binding?
5.2.2. If the opinions are not binding, is there a mechanism to
monitor the implementation of the Competition Authority's
opinions?

5.3. Has the Competition Authority signed protocols or
memoranda of understanding with other government bodies?
If the answer is "Yes", with which bodies?
a) Telecommunications regulator
b) Energy regulator
c) Transport regulator
d) Banking regulator


                                                                     Page | 145
e) Public Procurement agency
f) Consumer Protection agency
g) Others [Please, specify in the comments section]

5.4. Does the regulator have the power to define and recruit its        Yes   No
staff? If not, is it dependent on the staff of a particular Ministry?
POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY
6.1. The Competition Authority may initiate an investigation:
a) Once it has received a complaint or request from the public
b) After conducting its own research or market enquiry
c) At the request or recommendation of a government minister
d) After a request or recommendation from another authority
e) Other (please specify)
6.2. The competition authority has the power to gather
information through
a) requesting parties to voluntarily provide information
b) issuing a summons or subpoena
c) conducting unannounced raids (search and seizure) and
inspections
d) market studies
e) other means (please specify)
                                                                                   Please explain what
                                                                                   are the limitations
                                                                                   faced by the Authority;
                                                                                   or what tools and
                                                                                   powers have been
6.3. Does the competition authority have the necessary power and                   particularly useful to
tools to uncover illegal practices (e.g., case prioritization,                     uncover illegal
adequate fines, leniency program*, inspection powers, etc.)?     Yes          No   practices


                                                                                                             Page | 146
DUE PROCESS                                                    Yes    No
7.1. Does the Competition Authority publish
guidelines/communications/updates explaining how the following
are assessed?
a) horizontal agreement
b) vertical restraints
c) abuse of dominance
d) merger control
e) fine setting
f) investigative procedures
g) treatment of confidential information
7.2. Does your legislation allow for Competition Authority
decisions to be effectively reviewed by an independent appellate
body?( please explain in the comment section)
7.3. Does your competition law provide for a fair and transparent          Please explain how
process to the parties involved in competition investigations and          are the listed
proceedings and for effective judicial review? If "Yes" indicate           instruments used
what instruments are provided by your legislation
a) oral hearings
b) technical discussions with case handlers
c) access to non-confidential version of statement of objections to
be informed about the reasons for the investigation
d) access to the case files
e) annual reports
f) publication of reasoned decisions
g) other instruments to provide for the right of defense (please
specify in the comments section)

                                                                                                Page | 147
7.4. Are there protections for ensuring that confidential or
privileged business information provided by companies during
investigations, merger reviews and market studies is not disclosed
to third parties?
7.4.1. Can the parties appeal decisions granting access to
confidential information before the Courts? If so, does this appeal
have a suspensive effect?
                                                                         If the answer is "Yes",
7.5. Are there different teams from the Competition                      provide information
Authority/authorities involved in opening the investigation,             about the separation
prosecuting and reaching a decision?                                     of functions
7.6. Is the status of the Competition Authority staff the same of
civil servants? If the answer is yes, do general administrative
rules on matters such as conflict of interest apply to the staff of
the Competition Authority's staff?
7.6.1. If the answer is no, are there specific rules to avoid conflict
of interest of case handlers and members of the decision body?
OPERATIONAL INDICATORS
8.1. Number of technical staff working in the agency and dealing
with competition matters
a) Number of lawyers
b) Number of economists
c) Number of staff with postgraduate degree (Masters or PhD)
8.2. Number of Competition Authority's decisions appealed in the
last 3 years
8.3. Number of decisions upheld and rejected by the Courts
                                                                          Please, in addition,
                                                                         specify the main
8.4. Number of agency's opinions on laws, regulations and other          opinions (with larger
government decisions in the last 2 calendar years                        impact)



                                                                                                   Page | 148
8.5. Number of sector inquiries carried out in the last 2 years
[Please specify which sectors where relevant]
8.6. Agency's budget in the last fiscal year (in local currency)
8.7. Amount of fines imposed in the last fiscal year (in local
currency)

* Partial or total exoneration from the penalties that would
otherwise be applicable to a cartel member that reports its cartel
membership to a competition enforcement agency




                                                                                     YES/NO   Comment / Data Source

       Does the Government have an incentives policy in place stating clearly and
  1
       publicly the objectives of the incentives regime?

  2    Does the incentives policy include statements related to the following:
 2.1    - the Government review process of the incentive policy/regime?
 2.2    - the reform/change process of the incentive policy/regime?
 2.3    - the publication of information on incentives offered?
 2.4    - the principles of the awarding process of incentives?
       Does the Government perform a regular review of the relevance and
  3    appropriateness of the incentives policy in pursuing its investment policy
       objectives?
  4    Does the Government make the results of the review available to the public?



                                                                                                           Page | 149
                                                                                              YES/NO   Comment / Data Source
      Does the Government on a regular basis conduct an assessment of the fiscal cost
 5    associated with the incentives regime (tax expenditure statement and cost of
      financial incentives statement)?
 6    Does the Government make the results of this assessment available to the public?

                                                            Consultations
      De jure: Does the law require consultation at the time of formulation of the
 7
      relevant laws, regulations and decrees relating to incentives?
      De facto: Is an interested/affected investor given an opportunity to comment on
 8    the relevant laws, regulations and decrees relating to incentives prior to their
      finalization?
      When changes to the incentive regime are introduced, are the proposed changes
 9
      formally communicated to the public before such changes are adopted?

                                           Administration and governance of incentives
     Is there a specific authority in charge of the administration and awarding of
 9
     incentives to firms? Please describe.
     During the awarding process of incentives, are incentives granted automatically to
 10
     investors?
     During the awarding process of incentives, are incentives granted based on a
10.1 review or screening process by the authority(ies) in charge of incentive
     administration?
     If awarded based on review/screening process, is it based on a list of criteria
10.2
     published in advance?
10.3 Are these criteria available to the public on a web portal or a national gazette?
     De jure: Does the law require the investor to be appropriately notified of any
 11
     specific decision on incentives taken by the administrating authority of incentives?
      De facto: Is the affected investor appropriately notified of any specific decision on
12
      incentives taken by the administrative authority?

                                                                                                                    Page | 150
                                                                                             YES/NO   Comment / Data Source
      When a positive decision is rendered granting some incentives to the investor, is
13
      the decision published?
      When a negative decision is rendered (refusal to grant all or some of the incentives
      requested by the investor), does the Law require that the decision be
14
      communicated in writing, and motivated (meaning that the implementing body has
      to provide some form of justification for the negative decision) to the investor?
      De Jure: Does the law allow the affected investor to appeal to a higher authority
15    once a decision has been taken based on the application on incentives by the
      administrating authority?
      De facto: Does the investor get an opportunity to appeal to a higher authority once
16
      a decision is taken based on the application on incentives?

                                             Transparency and access to information
     De Jure: Does the law require publication of relevant laws, regulations and decrees
17
     relating to incentives?
     De facto: Are relevant laws, regulations and decrees relating to incentives easily
 18
     and publicly accessible in practice (e.g. via Government Gazette or online)?
     De Jure: Does the Law mandate that the Government maintains and publishes an
 19 inventory of investment incentives that lists the types of incentives that are
     available to investors?
     De Facto: Does the Government maintain a central database / inventory of
 20 investment incentives that provides a comprehensive list of incentives that are
     being offered to investors?
 21 Is the inventory published in a source that is available to the public?
     Does the central database / inventory include the categories of information listed
 22
     below:
     - overview information on incentives, including a short description, overarching
22.1 objectives, type/form (e.g. tax holiday, matching grant, etc.), maximum
     value/benefit for investors, and their legal base


                                                                                                                   Page | 151
                                                                                                  YES/NO           Comment / Data Source
     - information to apply for incentives, including eligibility criteria, awarding
22.2
     authority, required documentation, procedures, and timelines
     - information on appeal procedures, as well as monitoring and performance
22.3
     management procedures
     - information on further resources, including direct links to other official
22.4 webpages, or contact information for any questions / follow-up relating to the
     application and awarding process of incentives
     - information about incentives awarded in the past, including budgeted and
22.5
     awarded funds per year, as well as the number of beneficiaries?




                                                                                                                   Yes   No Comment
                  Can be applied to land for Commercial, Real Estate or Tourism Purposes
                                   Institutional and regulatory framework for public industrial land
 0     Is there a public industrial land allocation system in the country?
       Is the management responsibility over public industrial land unambiguously assigned to a dedicated
 1
       authority who has a clear mandate?
2a     If yes, is the industrial land authority independent?
       If yes, does the industrial land authority have adequate budgets and human resources that ensure
2b
       responsible management of public industrial lands?
 3     Is public industrial land allocated to the private sector though auctions or tenders?
 4     Is public industrial land allocated to the private sector after a cost benefit or business plan analysis?
 5     Is public industrial land allocated to the private sector after a due diligence process?


                                                                                                                                Page | 152
                                                                                                              Yes   No Comment
                Can be applied to land for Commercial, Real Estate or Tourism Purposes
     Is public industrial land allocated at market prices in a transparent process irrespective of the
6
     investor’s status (for example, domestic or foreign)?
     In practice, can public land categories be changed easily, providing for windfalls? (e.g., allocating
7    land as agricultural land at low prices, then changing to construction land) please provide typical
     stories.
8    Is the assessment of land values for tax purposes based on market prices?
                                      Transparency, publicity and scrutiny
     Is the land authority required by law or regulation to publish a report of allocated public industrial
9
     land every year?
10   De facto, does the land authority publish a report of allocated public industrial land every year?
11   Is this report available to the public either on a web portal or in a national gazette?
     By regulation, is all the information on the public industrial land inventory accessible to the public
12
     on a web portal or national Gazette?
     De facto, is all the information on the public industrial land inventory accessible to the public?
13
     (Web portal or National Gazette)
     By regulation, are valuation rolls of public industrial land publicly accessible? (Web portal or
14
     National Gazette)
     De facto, are valuation rolls of public industrial land publicly accessible? (Web portal or National
15
     Gazette)
16   Are valuation rolls regularly updated?
17   Is public industrial land clearly inventoried and identified on the ground or on maps?
18   Is all privately-held land formally mapped?
19   Is all privately-held land formally registered in the cadaster?
20   Can records in the registry be searched by both right-holder name and parcel?
21   Is most ownership information in the registry or cadaster up to date?
     Can copies or extracts of documents recording rights in property be obtained by anyone who pays
22
     the necessary formal fee, if any?

                                                                                                                         Page | 153
                                                                                                             Yes   No Comment
                Can be applied to land for Commercial, Real Estate or Tourism Purposes
                                            Grievance and recourse
     By regulation, does the industrial land authority provide arguments and explanations when it
23
     renders a negative decision?
24   By regulation, Is it possible to appeal a negative land allocation decision?
     Is there an independent body to which applicants can appeal against the decision of the industrial
25
     land authority?
26   By regulation, is the appeal committee required to render a decision within a specific timeframe?
                                          Enforcement: tax collection
27   Are all property holders liable for land tax and listed on the tax roll?
28   Are there exemptions to the payment of land and property taxes?
     Are the exemptions that exist based on clear and publicized criteria and applied in a transparent and
29
     consistent manner?




                                                                                                                      Figure/
                                                                                                             Yes No   Details
                                        Related Parties and Politically Exposed Persons


                                                                                                                        Page | 154
                                                                                                                      Figure/
                                                                                                             Yes No   Details
       Is there a Central Bank regulation (or a regulation from the banking supervision authority)
 1
       regarding lending to related parties?
 2     Does the definition of related parties include shareholders as individuals?
 3     Does the definition of related parties include shareholders as firms?
       Do related parties include shareholders' relatives in the 1st degree (spouse, parents, brothers and
 4
       sisters and children)?
       Do related parties include shareholders' relatives in the 2nd degree (in-laws, nephews, nieces,
 5
       cousins)?
       By regulation, do banks have policies and processes to identify individual exposures to and
6.1
       transactions with related parties?
6.2    If yes, does this include the total amount of exposure?
       If yes, are these transactions monitored and reported through an independent credit review or
6.3
       audit process?
       Does the Central Bank impose that banks have policies and processes to prevent persons
 7     benefiting from the transaction and/or persons related to such a person from being part of the
       process of granting and managing the transaction?
       Is it common practice that banks' Board members with conflicts of interest are excluded from the
 8
       approval process of granting and managing related party transactions?
       Are operations (new credits, credit extension, total and partial write offs, rescheduling,
 9     guarantees, off balance sheet operations) to related parties subject to prior approval by banks'
       boards?
       In particular, are write-offs of related-party exposures exceeding specified amounts -or otherwise
10
       posing special risks- subject to prior approval by banks' boards?
11.1   Is lending to related parties monitored through onsite supervision, such as audits?
11.2   What is frequency for these audits to be performed?
12     Is lending to related parties monitored through offsite supervision from the Central Bank?
13     Are there mechanisms to limit exposure to related parties: for instance, to deduct such exposures

                                                                                                                       Page | 155
                                                                                                                  Figure/
                                                                                                         Yes No   Details
       from capital when assessing capital adequacy or to require collateralization of such exposures?
       By regulation do Banks apply the GAFI-FATF principles regarding Politically Exposed Persons
14
       (PEPs)?
15     Does the government or the Central Bank publish a list of PEPs?
       By regulation, is there an enhanced due diligence on politically exposed persons (including,
16     among other things, escalation to the bank’s senior management level of decisions on entering
       into business relationships with these persons)?
17     Are there clear rules on what records regarding PEPs must be kept and their retention period?
18     Do Central Banks audit banks regarding PEPs?
                                                     Corporate Governance
19.1   By regulation, are large loans overseen by the state-owned banks' boards?
19.2   By regulation, are large loans overseen by the state-owned private banks' boards?
20     Are there independent administrators in state-owned banks' boards?
21     By regulation, are there independent administrators in private banks' boards?
22     By regulation, are there rules imposing the existence of a board-level audit committee?
23     If yes, by regulation, is the audit committee chaired by and independent administrator?
24     By regulation, does the internal audit function fully report to the audit committee?
                                                          Insider trading
25     By regulation, are there rules to prevent insider trading?
26     By regulation, are there rules to sanction insider trading?
27     By regulation, is there an agency responsible for enforcing insider trading regulations?
27     Does the Capital Markets Authority enforce regulation through on-site inspections?


                                                                                                                   Page | 156
                                                                                                                       Figure/
                                                                                                              Yes No   Details
  28     Does the Capital Markets Authority enforce regulation through off-site inspections?
                                                      Effectiveness of sanctions
         What were the five last sanctions imposed by the Central Bank regarding money laundering?
  29
         Please specify the years, type of sanction and the amount of the fine.
         What were the five last sanctions imposed by the Central Bank regarding internal control? Please
  30
         specify the years, type of sanction and the amount of the fine.
         What were the five last sanctions imposed by the Central Bank regarding money related parties?
  31
         Please specify the years, type of sanction and the amount of the fine.




                                                                                                   Yes / No        Comments

                                                        Business registration
A.1. By regulation, are the "requirements" for obtaining business registration specified on a
web portal or at the regulator’s office? (please specify where in the comments section)
A.2. By regulation, are the "fees" for obtaining business registration specified on a web portal
or at the regulator’s office (please specify where in the comments section)
A.3. By regulation, are the "procedures" for obtaining business registration specified on a web
portal or at the regulator’s office? (please specify where in the comments section)
A.4. By regulation, registration is one-off and does not need to be renewed periodically.



                                                                                                                        Page | 157
                                                                                                    Yes / No   Comments

A.5. Are there informal requirements for obtaining business registration, in addition to the
official ones?
A.6. Are there hidden, informal fees, for obtaining business registration, in addition to the
official ones?
A.7. Are there hidden, informal steps, for obtaining business registration, in addition to the
official ones?
                                             Permits and licenses: Construction permits
B.1. By regulation, are the "requirements" for obtaining construction permits publicly available
on a website or national gazette? (please specify where in the comments section)
B.2. By regulation, are the "fees" for obtaining construction permits publicly available on a
website or national gazette? (please specify where in the comments section)
B.3. By regulation, are the "procedures" for obtaining construction permits publicly available
on a website or national gazette? (please specify where in the comments section)
B.4. Are there hidden "requirements" for obtaining construction permits in addition to the
official ones?
B.5. Are there hidden "fees" for obtaining construction permits in addition to the official ones?
B.6. Are there hidden "procedures" for obtaining construction permits in addition to the official
ones?
B.7. By regulation, does obtaining construction permits first require a number of other pre-
approvals?
B.7. In practice, does obtaining construction permits obtaining first a number of other pre-
approvals?
B.8. By regulation, do construction permits need to be renewed periodically?
B.9. By regulation, are the relevant agencies required to inform applicants about decisions or
delays in providing construction permits within a specified timeframe?
B.10. In practice, do the relevant agencies inform applicants about decisions or delays in
providing construction permits within a specified timeframe?


                                                                                                                   Page | 158
                                                                                                    Yes / No   Comments

B.11. By law or regulation, are the relevant agencies required to provide justification for
negative decisions or delays?
B.12. In practice, do the relevant agencies required provide justification for negative decisions
or delays?
B.13. By regulation, are there appeal mechanisms? (please describe them in the comments
section)
B.14. In practice, are appeal mechanisms used and effective? (please describe them in the
comments section)
                                                            Tax Inspections

C.1. By regulation, do the authorities follow risk-based approaches to planning tax inspections?
C.2. In practice, do the authorities follow risk-based approaches to planning tax inspections?
C.3.1. By law or regulation, routine tax Inspection visits are announced.
C3.2. The purpose of the tax inspection visit is clearly stated.
C.4. In practice, routine tax Inspection visits are announced.
C.5. By regulation, are the tax compliance requirements are published and accessible on a web
portal or at the relevant authority?
C.6. In practice are the tax compliance requirements are published and accessible on a web
portal or at the relevant authority?
C.7. By regulation, are the tax enforcement decisions vetted by a commission or supervisor, at
least for major decisions (as opposed to the inspector alone)?
C.8. By regulation, do tax inspectors/inspectorates have powers to suspend/stop operations of
businesses?
C.9. By regulation, are tax inspectors required to provide copies of inspection reports to the
inspected firms within a specified time period?
C.10. By regulation, are firms given a grace period during which they may remedy
deficiencies?

                                                                                                                   Page | 159
                                                                                                   Yes / No    Comments

C.11. By regulation, is there a transparent, risk-based system to “filter "or manage complaints
from the public instead of conducting additional tax inspection any time a complaint is
received?
C.12. By regulation, are there grievance reporting and redress mechanisms?
C.13. In practice, are there grievance reporting and redress mechanisms?




                                                           Legal framework
 1    Are there Laws regulating restrictions on conflict of interest?
 2    Is there a Constitutional requirement to avoid specified conflict(s) of interest?
 3    In there a Code of Conduct/Ethics regarding conflict of interest?
                                        Officials covered by regulations on conflict of interest
 5    Are Head(s) of State obligated to avoid specified conflict(s) of interest?
      Are Ministers/Cabinet members obligated to avoid specified conflict(s) of
 6
      interest?
      Are Members of Parliament (MPs) obligated to avoid specified conflict(s) of
 7    interest?
 8    Are Civil Servants obligated to avoid specified conflict(s) of interest?
 9    Are Spouses and children obligated to avoid specified conflict(s) of interest?
             By regulation, are there restrictions for the following public officials regarding the following items?

                                                                                                                       Page | 160
     Head(s) of State
     Income and Assets
10   Accepting gifts
11   Private firm ownership and/or stock holdings
12   Ownership of state-owned enterprises (SOEs)
     Business activities
 13 Holding government contracts
14 Board member, advisor, or company officer of private firm
15   NGO or labor union membership
16   Outside employment
17   Post-employment
     Ministers/Cabinet members
     Income and Assets
14   Accepting gifts
15   Private firm ownership and/or stock holdings
16   Ownership of state-owned enterprises (SOEs)
     Business activities
17   Holding government contracts
18   Board member, advisor, or company officer of private firm
19   NGO or labor union membership
20   Outside employment
21   Post-employment
     Members of Parliament (MPs)

                                                                 Page | 161
     Income and Assets
22   Accepting gifts
23   Private firm ownership and/or stock holdings
24   Ownership of state-owned enterprises (SOEs)
     Business activities
25   Holding government contracts
26   Board member, advisor, or company officer of private firm
27   NGO or labor union membership
28   Outside employment
29   Post-employment
     Civil servants
     Income and Assets
30   Accepting gifts
31   Private firm ownership and/or stock holdings
32   Ownership of state-owned enterprises (SOEs)
     Business activities
33   Holding government contracts
34   Board member, advisor, or company officer of private firm
35   NGO or labor union membership
36   Outside employment
37   Post-employment
     Spouses and children
     Income and Assets

                                                                 Page | 162
38   Accepting gifts
39   Private firm ownership and/or stock holdings
40   Ownership of state-owned enterprises (SOEs)
     Business activities
41   Holding government contracts
42   Board member, advisor, or company officer of private firm
43   NGO or labor union membership
44   Outside employment
45   Post-employment
     Sanctions for the following public officials:
     Head(s) of State
     Are there penal sanctions, Fines or administrative sanctions are stipulated for
46
     violations of COI regulations restricting behavior?
     Ministers/Cabinet members
     Are there penal sanctions, Fines or administrative sanctions are stipulated for
47
     violations of COI regulations restricting behavior?
     Members of Parliament (MPs)
     Are there penal sanctions, Fines or administrative sanctions are stipulated for
48
     violations of COI regulations restricting behavior?
     Civil servants
     Are there penal sanctions, Fines or administrative sanctions are stipulated for
49
     violations of COI regulations restricting behavior?
     Monitoring and Oversight for the following public officials:


                                                                                       Page | 163
     Head(s) of State
50   Is there a specific enforcement body?
51   Is there a process for addressing potential violations of COI restrictions?
     Ministers/Cabinet members
52   Is there a specific enforcement body?
53   Is there a process for addressing potential violations of COI restrictions?
     Members of Parliament (MPs)
54   Is there a specific enforcement body?
55   Is there a process for addressing potential violations of COI restrictions?
     Civil servants
56   Is there a specific enforcement body?
57   Is there a process for addressing potential violations of COI restrictions?




                                                                                   Page | 164
   Legal framework                                                               Yes/No   Details   Citation
 1 Are there Laws regulating requirement to disclose?
 2 Is there a Constitutional requirement to disclose?
 3 Is there a Code of Conduct/Ethics for public officials?
   Are the following Public Officials Covered by Asset disclosure obligations?
 4 Head of State
 5 Ministers/Cabinet members
 6 Members of Parliament (MPs)
 7 Civil Servants
 8 Spouses and children
   Disclosure items
 9 Head of State
10 Ministers/Cabinet members
11 Members of Parliament (MPs)
12 Civil Servants
13 Spouses and children
   Filing frequency
14 Head of State
15 Ministers/Cabinet members
16 Members of Parliament (MPs)
17 Civil Servants
   Sanctions for the following public officials


                                                                                                    Page | 165
18 Head of State
19 Are sanctions stipulated for non-filing (fines, administrative, and/or criminal)?
   Are sanctions stipulated for false disclosure (fines, administrative, and/or
20 criminal)?
21 Ministers/Cabinet members
22 Are sanctions stipulated for non-filing (fines, administrative, and/or criminal)?
   Are sanctions stipulated for false disclosure (fines, administrative, and/or
23 criminal)?
24 Members of Parliament (MPs)
25 Are sanctions stipulated for non-filing (fines, administrative, and/or criminal)?
   Are sanctions stipulated for false disclosure (fines, administrative, and/or
26 criminal)?
27 Civil Servants
28 Are sanctions stipulated for non-filing (fines, administrative, and/or criminal)?
   Are sanctions stipulated for false disclosure (fines, administrative, and/or
29 criminal)?
   Monitoring and Oversight
30 Head of State
31 Are enforcement, depository and verifying bodies explicitly identified?
32 Is a process specified for resolving conflict of interest?
33 Ministers/Cabinet members
34 Are enforcement, depository and verifying bodies explicitly identified?
35 Is a process specified for resolving conflict of interest?
36 Members of Parliament (MPs)
37 Are enforcement, depository and verifying bodies explicitly identified?
38 Is a process specified for resolving conflict of interest?
39 Civil Servants

                                                                                       Page | 166
40 Are enforcement, depository and verifying bodies explicitly identified?
41 Is a process specified for resolving conflict of interest?
    Public access to declarations
42 Head of State
43 Is public availability specified?
44 Is the Length of records maintenance specified
45 Are penalties for violating non-disclosure of declarations specified?
46 Ministers/Cabinet members
47 Is public availability specified?
48 Is the Length of records maintenance specified
49 Are penalties for violating non-disclosure of declarations specified?
50 Members of Parliament (MPs)
51 Is public availability specified?
53 Is the Length of records maintenance specified
54 Are penalties for violating non-disclosure of declarations specified?
55 Civil Servants
56 Is public availability specified?
57 Is the Length of records maintenance specified
58 Are penalties for violating non-disclosure of declarations specified?
59 Spouses and children
60 Is public availability specified?
61 Is the Length of records maintenance specified
62 Are penalties for violating non-disclosure of declarations specified?




                                                                             Page | 167
     Legal Framework:                                                Yes/No   Detailed   Citation
2    Is there a legal right to access information?
3    Is it a Constitutional requirement?
4    Is there a legislation governing access to information
5    Is there a right to Appeal?
     Does access to information cover the following?
 7   Draft legal instruments
 8   Enacted legal instruments
 9   Annual budgets
10   Annual chart of accounts
11   Annual reports
     Are the procedures for accessing information:
13   Written guidelines for request of info
14   Written requests
15   Electronic requests
16   Oral requests
     Do the following exemptions to disclosure requirements apply?
18   Exemptions to coverage
19   Public Interest test
21   Harm test
     Existence of appeals mechanism
24   Are there appeals within public entities?
25   Is there an independent Non-judicial appeals mechanism?
26   Is there a judicial appeals mechanism?
     Enforcement mechanism
28   Are there FOIA contact points?
29   Is there a FOIA enforcement body?
     Do the following deadlines apply for release of information?

                                                                                         Page | 168
31   Initial response deadline of no more than 15 days
32   Right to extend response time
33   Maximum total response time of no more than 40 days
34   Are nominal fees mandated?
     Sanctions for failure to disclose
36   Are there administrative sanctions?
37   Are there fines?




                                                           Page | 169
                  Annex 2: The dynamics of change: a literature review

The role of transparency and political engagement in improving government functioning

1.      Political constraints often make it difficult to pursue policies that are technically sound.
For example, governments often find it challenging to reduce subsides for various goods and
services even when rigorous analysis shows that the benefits of such subsidies are not reaching
the intended beneficiaries, such as poor people. A common reaction to such situations, including
on the part of donors, is to accept the political constraints as given and look for second-based
solutions that may be feasible within the given political scenario.

2.      A recent World Bank study suggests more optimistic possibilities. 52 Based on a rich
survey of available literature, the report analyzes the political behavior of citizens, public
officials and leaders, and concludes that an appropriate mix of political mobilization and
transparency measures can bring about significant change even within a challenging political
economy. In other words, political constraints need not be taken as exogenous and that the
constraints may be relaxed endogenously. However, this requires a good understanding of what
incentives drive political behavior and in what manner.

3.     The report highlights the role of citizens in the political process, particularly in selecting
elected officials and in holding them accountable for delivery. Citizens may also run for office
themselves. Political engagement by citizens creates pressure on the elected officials who, in
turn, exercise their authority, whether as members of parliament or as ministers, to create
pressure on the public institutions responsible for delivery.

4.      The effectiveness of the political engagement of citizens, and perhaps its degree as well,
is influenced by transparency measures. The report cites numerous studies that show how such
measures, combined with political engagement, improves the performance of government. Non-
governmental actors, such as media, civil society organizations, NGOs, think-tanks and business
associations may generate and publicize data on various aspects of a government’s work. They
may organize events where government officials, both politicians and bureaucrats, can have
constructive discussion with different stakeholders to understand the data better and agree on
corrective actions. Government may also directly contribute to transparency through its
disclosure policies. Technological developments are making it easier to both generate data as
well as publicize them widely. Other developments, such as the spread of Right to Information




52World Bank (2016): Making Politics Work for Development: Harnessing Transparency and Citizen
Engagement.
legislation, are also helping.53 Nonetheless, there are challenges and the report discusses both
effective as well as non-effective attempts at enhancing transparency or using transparency as a
driver for change.

5.      The report’s findings have important implications for the work of external catalyst, such
as the World Bank Group. The report states: “A lesson for us at the World Bank also comes out
of this research. We can do more, through relatively small changes in what we are already
doing, to leverage our technical strengths in generating credible data and evidence, and to work
with our clients to diminish political constraints to achieving development goals.?

6.      This study on privilege-resistant policy making is inspired by such a line of argument. It
contributes to transparency in at least two ways. First, by benchmarking countries on different
dimensions of policy-making that has implications for privilege-seeking, it helps reveal how
countries have made their policy regimes vulnerable to capture. The country-specific data, as
well as cross-country comparisons, may thus help focus public attention on such deficiencies and
generate pressure for change. Secondly, many of the policy features covered by this study are
themselves transparency-related, be it a database on investment incentives, online provision of
information on documents and fees required to register a business, or publication of draft laws
and regulations so that stakeholders may provide feedback.

7.     The report argues that transparency initiatives should not focus on the mere provision of
information but also pay attention to the specifics of the information shared, the manner in which
it is made available and the purpose behind it. There is a caution: making governments more
transparent is a challenge since the same political economy factors that make transparency
important may also make it difficult to achieve.

8.      Political engagement by citizens is likely to be most effective in democratic environments
characterized by regular elections. This raises an important question about the scope for the
political engagement of citizens, in combination with transparency measures, to make the needle
move in the MENA context. However, the report reassures us that “political engagement
happens in every institutional context, from democracies to autocracies, albeit in different
ways.? 54 Although the process would differ, there are ways in which citizens may engage
politically, armed with information, to help improve public sector delivery even in less
democratic contexts.



53
   According to the report, 99 countries have enacted right-to-information legislation as of 2014,
compared with only 29 countries that had done so by 2000.
54
   It further states that: “Even when formal institutions restrict the power of “ordinary? citizens, who hold
no public office and are not organized into influential groups, research suggests that leaders are
nevertheless constrained by the informal powers of non-elite citizens to engage in protests or revolts.?
                                                                                                Page | 171
Box A1: The role of political engagement and transparency: some quotes from World
Bank: Making Politics Work for Development: Harnessing Transparency and Citizen
Engagement

In sum, the trends discussed in this chapter suggest transparency is on the rise across a
variety of institutional contexts. Several reasons likely explain this emergence, including
international and domestic political pressure, but also the spread of market forces and
information and communications technology. Transparency and political engagement, in
short, are together gaining strength around the world as interlinked forces that can
potentially affect governance for economic development.

A defining feature of principal-agent problems are informational asymmetries, which exist
even when political engagement happens in healthy ways to select and sanction leaders on
the basis of performance in providing public goods. Principals have imperfect information
about the actions of agents and the consequences of these actions. Transparency, which
provides such information, is therefore central to addressing principal-agent problems in
government.

Transparency can play a role in institutional transition, working together with broad-based
political engagement. Accounts of historical transitions from weak to stronger institutions
in the public sector in the United States and Britain suggest that independent mass media
played a role in that transition by working together with political engagement.

Another channel through which transparency might improve public sector performance is
by strengthening professional behavioral norms among public officials and service
providers. This channel may be especially important for sectors such as health and
education, in which professional expertise and pride in work can have a role.

Transparency might also contribute to increasing competition among public officials and
increasing peer pressure to improve performance. Experiential evidence from the success of
initiatives such as the Doing Business project demonstrates that publicizing performance
indicators can bring about governance reforms by spurring competition among countries to
attract private investment. However, there is as yet no theoretical or empirical research
available on the impact of such a channel of transparency.

Finally, transparency could play a direct role in shifting political beliefs of a “culture of
corruption? that that stems from rational beliefs about how others are behaving.

Practitioners may be able to make greater contributions to incremental change by more
effectively using the levers available to them to overcome political impediments to good
policy. This approach includes not just getting governments to adopt good policies, but
designing implementation arrangements that are more likely to succeed because they are
based on a better understanding of political incentives and behavioral norms in the public
sector.


                                                                                           Page | 172
Virtuous cycles of change and “working with the grain?

9.      A recent publication provides another set of arguments and evidence on the possibilities
of change even in situations with challenging political economy and governance characteristics.
Partly based on direct experience gained through many years of governance work in the World
Bank, Brian Levy states the case for “working with the grain? as a practical approach to finding
islands of opportunity and triggering virtuous cycles of change.55 A few core ideas presented in
this work are particularly relevant for our study.

10.    First, is the concept of “islands of effectiveness?, i.e., pockets of good governance, sound
policymaking and effective implementation, in the midst of a sea of governance dysfunction.
These islands are often created and sustained by horizontal, peer-to-peer stakeholder interactions
within government, which may be distinguished from top-down attempts to resolve principal-
agent problems in government that usually require strong, sustained leadership at the top.
Horizontal reform efforts in the pursuit of such “islands of effectiveness? may be pursued even
in the absence of such leadership and, as Levy states, “While an “islands? approach is
incremental by definition, its cumulative consequences can be powerful.?

11.      The second idea is that of virtuous cycles of change which, in Levy’s analysis, is driven
by three mutually reinforcing factors, i.e., inclusive growth, positive expectations and ongoing
institutional performance. Positive changes in any of these drivers may induce similar changes in
the others, with the feedback loop often completed as the second-round changes further improve
performance on the initial driver. For example, sustained growth, especially if it is inclusive, may
strengthen the private sector, civil society and the middle class who, in turn, demand better
performance from public sector institutions, including through policy and regulatory reforms.
These demands are often the result of positive expectations generated by growth. For example,
sustained growth may create expectations of high returns to investment but these additional
investments may require a conducive business environment. The expectations of high returns
may create additional incentive for businesses to lobby ever more strongly for business
environment reforms. Growth, by expanding the fiscal space for governments, may also help
build the capacity required within government to bring about the changes demanded by
stakeholders. Levy argues, “With continued forward momentum, institutions can strengthen
incrementally, gradually transforming personalized into more impersonal arrangement.?

12.     Levy’s articulation of a model of virtuous cycle of change follows the tradition of
scholars such as Albert Hirschman and Douglass North who argued that development is an
ongoing, cumulative process where small, individual changes, by reinforcing each other, can lead
to transformative change. The reinforcement comes from the interconnectedness of the small

55
 Brian Levy, Working with the Grain: Integrating Governance and Growth in Development Strategy,
Oxford University Press, 2014.
                                                                                        Page | 173
initiatives. Initiators of a small change may believe that its impact will be modest. Such actors,
whether in government or outside, are usually unable to comprehend even partly, leave alone
fully, the ripple effect of their actions. But for a variety of reasons they are motivated to take
that small initiative. How does one identify such actors, understand their motivations and help
create conditions that may trigger such initiatives, thus converting motivations into actual
actions? And, having helped to trigger the initial change, how can one create conditions for the
ripple effects to play out so that a cumulative change process is unleashed? These questions
bring us to the third important idea of the book, which is reflected in its title, i.e., “working with
the grain? and summarized by Levy: “Effective action will seek to work with rather than against
a country’s grain in order to nudge forward this interdependent, dynamic process.?

13.     The “working with the grain? approach moves away from a formulaic, best -practice way
of fostering change to one that recognizes that there can be multiple pathways to initiating and
sustaining change and that the choice of a path should be well grounded in the institutional and
political economy reality of a country. This approach recognizes path-dependence and the
importance of understanding the trajectory that a country, government or society is on, where it
is currently placed on that trajectory and where it can feasibly move to. These trajectories define
both needs and possibilities, and working with the grain implies identifying and supporting
reforms that correspond to these. It is a good-fit rather than a best-practice approach. It involves
finding the right entry point that creates, or strengthens, islands of effectiveness and unleashes a
virtuous cycle of change.

Mind, behavior and nudging

14.      The World Bank Group’s 2015 World Development Report focused attention on the role
of human behavior and incentives in decision-making, including decisions that relate to the
subject matter of this study, such as the award of privileges to well-connected businesses or
initiating reforms to restrain such actions. 56 Human behavior is influenced by psychological,
social and cultural factors and this, in turn, shapes the decisions and actions people take,
including the decision not to act. What may appear as irrational behavior is, according to this
approach, often a perfectly rational behavior following from the particular objective functions of
the decision-makers and the constraints within which they operate. The WDR summarizes
research findings that show how such change agents may harness such influences on people’s
behavior, instead of taking them as given, in order to induce desirable decisions and initiatives.
The wealth of evidence provided in the WDR relates to a diverse range of challenges, such as
inducing households to save more, firms to increase productivity, and consumers to save energy.

15.   A core take-away of the WDR is the importance of understanding not only what type of
change to bring but also how. The WDR emphasizes the importance of understanding what

56
     World Bank, Mind, Society and Behavior, World Development Report 2015.
                                                                                          Page | 174
motivates people to initiate change, and what inspires others to learn from pioneers and replicate
such changes. It also underscores the need to experiment, adapt and learn as implementation
proceeds. It recognizes that people have psychological biases that affect decision making. Thus,
a good understanding of such biases not only helps prevent interventions that are doomed to
failure because they go against the biases but, on a more positive note, helps leverage some
biases to catalyze desirable change. This line of thinking leads to the concept of the nudge,
whereby actors, such as government officials, are steered towards actions that are aligned with
their intrinsic motivations and yet lead to desirable outcomes. 57 This is different from a
prescriptive, command and control of approach that is often difficult to implement given the
psychological biases of people. The Nudge approach is increasingly being used to catalyze
reforms in government, an example being the work of the Behavioral Insights Team in the UK
government.




57
     Cass Sunstein and Richard Thaler, Nudge, Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness.
                                                                                           Page | 175
           Annex 3: A model of change for privilege-resistant policy making

1.      The strands of work summarized in Annex 3 share some common ideas. Change is
possible even in seemingly intractable situations. Potentially far-reaching change processes may
be unleashed even through small changes in one part of the system. Even within a scenario of
widespread dysfunction, there may exist island of opportunities through which the small, initial
changes may be carried out. A change in one part of a system may generate ripple effects as
others observe the changes and are motivated to introduce similar changes in their jurisdictions.
Sometimes, these second-order changes may directly build upon or complement the first-order
changes; sometimes these may happen in parallel with no obvious synergy. Over time, however,
synergy may develop between a set of such parallel changes, thus triggering a cumulative
process of transformative change. This reasoning is the essence of Levy’s “Working with the
Grain? approach, but also follows from the vast literature summarized in World Bank (2016) on
political engagement by citizens and its synergy with transparency, and the WDR 2015’s work
on mind, society and behavior.

2.      If the above processes are viewed as the engine of change, the fuel is provided by the
incentives and the behavioral modes of people, and the factors that shape these. All three strands
of work summarized above see possibilities in the behavioral tendencies of people, even if at first
glance these appear irrational or immune to change. Interventions, such as political engagement
of citizens and transparency-enhancing actions, leverage human incentives, working with the
grain of human behavior not against, often through small nudges, rather than by attempting big
changes that are contextually inappropriate.

3.      Drawing upon the above insights, we develop a model of change related to the agenda
underlying this study, i.e., how to initiate reforms that may make policy systems privilege-
resistant, especially in countries with a challenging political economy and governance context.
This work is motivated by the belief that, in any country at a given point in time, a set of feasible
actions exist that may enhance the privilege-resistance of the government’s policy apparatus, and
that a sequence of such actions implemented over time may have a cumulative effect, often by
setting in motion a virtuous cycle of change. Thus, even though the problem of privilege-driven
policy making may appear intractable in the absence of a revolutionary change in politics, such
incremental actions could make a serious dent in the system. This argument is developed below
through the articulation of a model of change.

4.      There are two stages of the change process in our model: a) the initiation of change
(reforms) in one part of government, and b) the ripple effect of the initial reform giving rise to a
virtuous cycle of change. We suggest that there are two main drivers of change in each of these
stages: a) a desire to do good on the part of some government functionaries; and b) transparency



                                                                                         Page | 176
enhancing measures. The former is the ignition of change and the latter the fuel that keeps the
engine running.

Bureaucratic motivations: desire to do good vs. playing it safe

5.      Our model has three actors: a) the political leadership (such as ministers) which
provides guidance and signals, sets the parameters within which policy is formulated and
approves the important policies; b) the top bureaucrats, who formulate the policies and have
approval authority over some policies and rules; and c) the mid-level bureaucrats, who
implement policy and can take some good practice initiatives within the set policy parameters.

6.      In this model, we assume that the political leadership and top bureaucrats play the most
important role in determining the scope for privileged treatment through their policy-setting
roles, and in the award of privileges through their administrative approval authority. The mid-
level bureaucrats may indulge in petty corruption, exploiting their front-line implementation
roles, but do not have an important role in the award of major privileges (we are making a
distinction between major privileges and favors given by officials in return for small bribes; only
the former is the subject of this study). However, as mentioned above and discussed in detail
below, mid-level officials may take initiatives that may constrain privilege seeking.

7.      The core actor in our model is the mid-level bureaucrat, henceforth called the official. 58
In this model, officials are driven by two considerations: a) having a quiet life, vs. b) proactively
doing some good. We suggest that government officials are often motivated to lead a quiet life of
acquiescence where they go along with the decision of their bosses (such as the top policy
makers) and colleagues even if they do not agree with them personally. At the same time,
officials like to do something good such as making sure government actions, whether important
policy decisions or small projects, serve broad societal interest rather than the interests of a
privileged few. Such motivations may be triggered by a variety of factors, such as patriotism,
pride in one’s job or empathy with ordinary people.

8.      In our model, there is a trade-off between these two motivations. A desire to do good will
often mean sacrificing a quiet life. This trade-off is depicted in the diagram below. I and II
represent a set of indifference curves showing the trade-off between the motivations. When on a
particular indifference curve, say “I?, officials are able to do more good (i.e., move right along
the horizontal axis) only if they are willing to sacrifice a quiet life (i.e., move down the vertical
axis), and vice-versa. The slope of the indifference curve shows how large the trade-off is.
However, there are also costs to both. Acquiescing in wrong decisions now in order to lead a
quiet life may incur costs, including a feeling of personal guilt as well as the possibility of

58
   Although the mid-level bureaucrat is the core actor in this model, the role and incentives attributed to
the mid-level official may also apply to some senior officials.
                                                                                                 Page | 177
disciplinary action later. On the other hand, doing some good may also have costs. For example,
opposing the grant of privileges to a select few may mean going against the wishes of bosses and
colleagues, thus disturbing collegiality, and may even incur the wrath of powerful people inside
and outside government. It may lead to career stagnation and inconvenient postings, or even job
losses and other more extreme forms of harassments. These relative costs are captured by the
straight line touching the indifference curve “I?. Utility is maximized at point A; hence, this is
the initial equilibrium. As we can see, in the particular scenario depicted by this diagram, the
officials like to play it safe and their proclivity to do good is rather limited.

9.      In this model, government officials could be motivated to do more good in two ways.
First, by changing the relative costs of playing it safe vs. doing good. This will be represented by
a change in the slope of the relative cost line. For example, a flattening of the line will generate a
new equilibrium (at point B) where officials are more willing to rock the boat so that they can do
more good. Alternatively, if the indifference curve itself shifts to “II?, officials can do more
good without sacrificing a quiet life (moving to point C).
               Leading a quiet life




                                      A       C


                                          B
                                                               II

                                                  I



                                                  Doing something good

The initiation of change

10.      We shall now discuss some operational ways in which the above changes (shifts in the
indifference curve or changes in the slope of the cost line) can be triggered, thus creating the
initial impetus for change. Let us consider the case of a database on investment incentives. A
small group of government officials, or even an individual, can work under the radar screen to
pull together data on existing investment incentives, including names of awardees. Such a
database may reveal privileged treatment and create pressure for corrective actions in future
when a more conducive environment exists for such action. In the short run, this under-the-radar
screen action of creating a database may not disturb the quiet life of the officials while allowing



                                                                                          Page | 178
them the pleasure of doing something good. The opportunity to create such a database implies a
shift in the indifference curve from “I? to “II? (and a move from A to B).

11.     Alternatively, let us assume there is a regime change where some people in important
government positions (perhaps a new minister, or an existing minister who undergoes a change
in heart) decide to make the incentive regime less privilege-driven. This changes the relative cost
line. With new signals coming from the top, the costs of doing something good (such as
incurring the displeasure of bosses or colleagues) is now reduced. This is the same as a move
from A to B.

12.     The appointment of a new minister who wants to make policy regimes privilege-resistant
can be seen as a positive exogenous shock to the system. External change agents, such as donors,
are sometimes able to catalyze such changes but in our model we are not considering such
options. Thus, this change is truly exogenous. However, often a reform-minded minister is
unclear about which actions to take within an agenda, or even which agenda to pick. The
minister is simply interested in doing something good and important. An external change agent,
such as a donor, or internal change agents such as reform-minded government officials, can steer
such a minister towards a specific “privilege-resisting? agenda, such as making the investment
incentive regime privilege-resistant. Such an engagement helps convert the minister’s general
desire to do something good to a concrete agenda for action.

13.     However, this is not enough. Having now focused on a specific agenda, the minister will
need some tools to get the agenda endorsed (for example get buy-in at the Cabinet) and then
implement it. Let us continue with the example of investment incentives to illustrate this. Let us
assume that, thanks to a WBG project, and the actions of a small group of officials who were
willing to do some good, a good database on investment incentives had been created and
maintained for a few years before this minister took office. Also, an assessment of the impact of
such incentives had been carried out which showed the limited impact, or complete
ineffectiveness, of the incentive regime – not a surprising result given that incentives are driven
by privileges, and not any efficiency consideration. The database and analysis had not been used
before because the conditions were not conducive. Thus, these had remained as “below-the-
radar-screen? exercises.

14.    Now, these outputs/tools (the database and the economic analysis) come handy. They
enable the minister to go to Cabinet or head of government and make a case for incentive
reforms. The important thing is the ready availability of the tools. If these were not readily
available, some time would have to be spent in creating the database and carrying out the
assessment. Such scenarios are common and WBG projects often support such work after a
reform champion has emerged and asks for ideas. The project outputs help design the reforms.
However, often the window of opportunity is limited and by the time an output is produced,


                                                                                       Page | 179
conditions may change – either the reform champion is gone or has changed his/her mind. Thus,
it is often helpful to have such work done ahead of time so that the tools are ready the moment a
reform champion emerges. Often, mid-level bureaucrats can carry out such work under-the-
screen and wait for a propitious moment to use it. Even in the short run, i.e., before that big
moment arrives, such initiatives may make some dent in the system towards greater privilege-
resistance.

15.      The above reasoning suggests that, even in a privilege-driven atmosphere, there is scope
for the WBG and other external catalysts to support initiatives that create some dent in the
system while also generating tools that come handy in more propitious circumstances. These
initiatives are compatible with the incentives of the officials and illustrate the principle of
“working with the grain?.

From one change to more

16.    As we saw above, the initial driver of change was the desire of some government
functionaries to do some good. Such a desire generated a database on investment incentives and
an analysis of the effectiveness of investment incentives. This work came handy when a more
important player (the reform-minded minister) emerged with a similar desire to do good. The
work of the officials was useful because it introduced an element of transparency by revealing
who were getting the incentives and what its impact was. In our model, this dose of transparency
strengthened the hand of the reforming minister. In other words, the desire to do good is the
engine of change and transparency is the fuel that keeps the engine running.

17.     The role of transparency and other disciplining measures in strengthening the impetus of
change is further explained by the three corrective/preventive mechanisms discussed in Chapter
2: a) conflict of interest restrictions; b) financial disclosure; and c) freedom of information. Here
we relate these important areas to our behavioral model. As explained in Chapter 2, conflict of
interest restrictions provide clear definitions of prohibited conduct. This impacts both the top
officials, who are the main grantors of privileges in our model, as well as their subordinates (the
mid-level bureaucrats) who do not grant privileges but can oppose such actions by their bosses.
Firstly, such restrictions reduce the degree of impunity felt by the top officials and may thus
change their calculations of the costs and benefits of granting privileges to cronies. Mid-level
officials may refer to such restrictions when they refuse to acquiesce to the grant of privileges by
their bosses.

18.     In our model, this has two effects. Firstly, bosses are less likely to put pressure on
subordinates to acquiesce in the granting of privileges, since the costs of potential whistle-
blowing is greater. This enlarges the space for mid-level officials to do some good. Thus, the
indifference curve shifts to the right. Secondly, the costs of acquiescing becomes greater because
mid-level officials may also be subject to greater scrutiny. These effects change the costs of

                                                                                         Page | 180
leading a quiet life (which has now gone up) relative to that of doing some good. This leads to a
flatter relative cost curve. Both effects are in the same direction and combine to move the
equilibrium towards a more desirable direction, i.e., from A to B. Mid-level officials are now
able to do greater good (as shown by the horizontal arrow) while willing to sacrifice a bit of their
quiet life (vertical arrow). As discussed in Chapter 2, the impact of conflict of interest
restrictions is further enhanced if there are requirements for financial disclosure and provisions
for freedom of information.
                         Leading a quiet life




                                                A

                                                    B
                                                             II

                                                    I



                                                    Doing something good




A virtuous cycle of change

19.     The second dimension of our model is about how an initial reform action can eventually
trigger a virtuous cycle of change through a series of ripple effects. A reform action in one area
can demonstrate the benefits of reform to stakeholders within the government, both functionaries
in the agency carrying out the reform and also in other parts of government. It may also show to
risk-averse bureaucrats that actual risks of carrying out a reform are less than perceived, thus
reducing their resistance to change.

20.      The ripple effect of an initial reform may follow different paths. The figure below
illustrates this using the policy areas and policy governance dimensions covered by this study.
Let us assume that, through some dynamics similar to those described in the previous section, a
reform champion takes action to introduce rule-based decision-making in the allocation of public
land. This is shown as the “first-round reform? in the following chart. Once that reform has taken
hold and its benefits demonstrated, the same reform champion or others involved in the
allocation of public land decide to consolidate the gains through additional reforms. Thus, they
may establish a grievance mechanism to address cases where applicants for public land feel that
the rule-based decision-making process has not worked well for them. They may also want to put


                                                                                        Page | 181
their initial reform (establishment of rule-based decision-making) on a more solid footing by
creating an appropriate policy and legal framework for it.59

21.     Once the reform momentum gets further consolidated, a third round of reforms may be
initiated. Thus, the authorities in charge of land allocation may now be ready to become even
more participatory and transparent by putting in place mechanisms for stakeholder consultation
and public sharing of information on allocation of public land. This third round of reforms often
requires an even greater amount of courage since these imply opening up to scrutiny by a broad
range of stakeholders outside the government. Thus, government officials may initially be
willing to interact with non-governmental stakeholders on a limited basis, such as through a
grievance mechanism, but not in a more open manner. However, after testing the waters through
a limited grievance mechanism, the may muster the courage to go for more participatory and
transparent systems.

22.      The above scenario exemplifies what may be called a “vertical? set of “reform ripple?
effects where the second and third round of reforms happen in the same policy area where the
initial reform took place (shown by the blue arrows). Another scenario is that of a “horizontal?
set of ripple effects as shown by the brown arrows. Here, the establishment of a system of rule-
based decision making in the allocation of public land triggers the establishment of similar
systems in other policy areas. For example, as depicted in the chart below, rule-based decision
making is now introduced in the area of public procurement and business regulations. This is the
second round of reforms. Subsequently, there is a third round where similar systems are
introduced for customs and trade, and for investment incentives.

                            Figure A.1: The ripple effects of initial reforms

Policy           Policy areas     Customs and    Business         Allocation of   Public           Investment
governance                        trade policy   regulations      public land     procurement      incentives
dimensions
Policy, legal and institutional                                   Second round
framework                                                            reform

Rule-based (non-                      Third         Second         First round        Second           Third
discriminatory) decision-             round          round           reform            round           round
making                               reform         reform                            reform          reform

Grievance mechanisms                                 Third        Second round        Third
                                                  round reform       reform        round reform




59 In a classic scenario, the policy and legal framework may come first, followed by the specific processes/systems
that the framework is supposed to underpin. However, in the real world, reforms sometimes follow an idiosyncratic,
opportunistic path and is initiated in the middle, rather the beginning, of a stylized linear sequence.

                                                                                                      Page | 182
Integrity mechanisms                                          Second round
                                                                 reform

Stakeholder consultation                                       Third round
                                                                 reform
Public information sharing                                     Third round
                                                                 reform



23.     We can add further nuances to this model and consider scenarios that combine horizontal
and vertical movements. For example, the establishment of rule-based decision making in the
allocation of public land may lead to a “vertical? ripple effect by encouraging the land authority
to then establish grievance mechanisms as well. However, the vertical effects do not go any
further than this and no further reforms happen in land allocation (at least not for a while).
Instead, in the third round, grievance mechanisms are triggered in other policy areas, such as
public procurement and business regulation (as shown by the green arrow). In this way, reforms
in one policy area trigger reforms in other areas.

24.     Eventually, these ripple effects may find their way back to the initial reform arena. Thus,
in the above example, the transparency initiatives in the area of public land allocation (grievance
mechanisms) may be taken further with the establishment of stakeholder consultation
mechanisms and public sharing of information in the same policy area. This may then encourage
other parts of government, such as responsible for land allocation, to open up (dotted lines in
Figure A.1). As we discussed in chapters 1 and 2, such transparency measures may create
pressure to sustain and strengthen the initial reform in land allocation, i.e., the introduction of
rule-based decision making. When that happens, the rounds of ripple effects brings the story full
circle; i.e., a virtuous cycle of reforms is established. Examples of virtuous cycles of reform in
action are given in the Box below.

     Box A2: The ripple effects of reforms: an example from Nepal

     In February 2013, the Government of Nepal officially inaugurated new e-services for the
     Office of the Company Registrar (OCR). The launch signified enhanced transparency and
     greater accountability of service delivery at the OCR as a means to promote good governance.
     However, the official launch by itself did not immediately produce the intended result. The
     uptake of online registration was very low - around 10% - as most companies were still using
     the old manual system during the initial months of online registration. The government soon
     realized that the online registration system needed to be complemented by other measures.
     Effective October 2013, online business registration was made mandatory and help-desks
     (kiosks) were established at the OCR with additional support staff dedicated to help
     technology-challenged businesses with online registration. As a result, almost 100% company
     registration is now done online in Nepal.

     In addition to follow-up actions that enhanced its effectiveness, the online business registration
     reform triggered a second reform, i.e., the interoperability between OCR and the tax

                                                                                                Page | 183
registration at Inland Revenue Department (IRD). Starting from October 2013, OCR and IRD
started sharing data and harmonized their data requirements from businesses (for example, at
the time of company registration, a tax ID called Permanent Account Number (PAN) was
issued by the OCR).

The launch of the online business registration also led to growing awareness within the
Nepalese government about the potential for ICT led Government to Business (G2B) service
delivery, and has catalyzed two additional sets of reforms within the government across other
agencies:

       Enabling ICT infrastructure for G2B and G2C services across government (ICT
        horizontals) through (i) commissioning of Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) to rollout
        digital signature for selected government services and (ii) implementation of shared
        ICT Cloud Computing Platform to integrating selected line agencies initially.

       Demand from additional agencies being inspired by the reforms at OCR (ICT
        verticals): Department of Industry requested WBG to help replicate the success at OCR
        and provide technical support for the development of online registration of local and
        foreign investors at the Department of Industry (DoI). Automation of DoI investor
        registration process is at the final stage of implementation and will be launched by
        September 2016. WBG has entered into a similar partnership with the Department of
        Tourism (DoT) to implement a tourism licensing system in Nepal, to be launched by
        June 2017.




                                                                                        Page | 184
                                         References

Avinash Dixit (2014), How Business Community Institutions Can Help Fight Corruption; Policy
Research Working Paper 6954The World Bank; June 2014

Benchmarking Public Procurement 2016 report, World Bank.

Benchmarking Public Procurement 2017 report, World Bank.

Bank for International Settlements, Basel Core Principles for Banking Supervision (2012)

Bank for International Settlements Principles for Enhancing Corporate Governance (2010)

Bank for International Settlements Principles for Managing Credit Risk (2000)

Camette, Melani Clair (2007), Globalization and Business politics in the Arab North Africa: A
Comparative Perspective. Cambridge University Press.

Devarajan, Shantayanan (2015). An Exposition of the New Strategy, “ Promoting Peace and
Stability in the Middle East and North Africa?. The World Bank

Devarajan, Shantayanan., Stuti Khemani and Michael Walton, (2014). “Can Civil Society
Overcome Government failure in Africa?? World Bank Research Observer, Previously circulated
as “Civil Society, Public Action and Accountability in Africa,? Policy Research Working Paper
Number 5733, Development Research Group, The World Bank

Diwan, Ishac, Philip Keefer, and Marc Schiffbauer (2013), “The Effect of Cronyism on Private
Sector Growth in Egypt?, World Bank.

Diwan, Ishac, Haidar, Jamal Ibrahim (2016) Do Political Connections Reduce Job Creation?
Evidence from Lebanon, working paper, Harvard Kennedy School.

Farazi et al, Bank Ownership and Performance in the Middle East and North Africa Region
(World Bank WPS5620, 2011)

FATF, International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Financing of Terrorism
and Proliferation: The FATF Recommendations (2012)

FATF, Guidance on Politically Exposed Persons- Recommendations 12 &22 (June 2012)

Fiszbein, Ariel, Dena Ringold, and F. Halsey Rogers (2011), “Making Services Work Indicators,
Assessments, and Benchmarking of the Quality and Governance of Public Service Delivery in the
Human Development Sectors?, World Bank WPS No. 5690, June 2011.

Hallward-Driemeier, Khun-Jush, Pritchett, How Business is Done in the Developing world:
Deals versus Rules, Journal of Economic Perspective, Summer 2015.

                                                                                     Page | 185
Hanieh, Adam (2011), Capitalism and Class in the Gulf Arab States. Palgrave Macmillan.

Heydemann, Steven, ed. (2004), Networks of Privilege in the Middle East: The Politics of
Economic Reform Revisited. Palgrave Macmillan.

Hellman, Joel, S., Geraint Jones, Daniel Kaufmann and Mark Schankerman (2000), “Measuring
Governance, Corruption, and State Capture: How Firms and Bureaucrats Shape the Business
Environment in Transition Economies?, World Bank WPS No. 2312, April 2000.

International Accounting Standards Board, IAS24

IOSCO, Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation

Ivaldi, Marc, Frédéric Jenny, and Aleksandra Khimich. “Cartel Damages to the Economy: An
Assessment for Developing Countries.? In World Bank and OECD. Forthcoming in 2016. A Step
Ahead: Competition Policy for Shared Prosperity and Inclusive Growth. Washington, DC: World
Bank Group (forthcoming 2016)

Karpowitz, Financial Inclusion, Growth and Inequality: A Model Application to Colombia (IMF
WP/14/166)

Kitzmuller Markus and Martinez Licetti Martha, World Bank Competition Policy Viewpoint
(September 2012), “Encouraging Thriving Markets for Development?, Public Policy for the
Private Sector, Note No. 331

Keefer, P. and Stuti Khemani. 2012. “Do Informed Citizens Receive More or Pay More? The
Impact of Radio on the Government Distribution of Public Health Benefits,? Policy Research
Working Paper No. 5952, Development Research Group, The World Bank

Keefer, P. and S. Knack, 2007. “Boondoggles, rent-seeking, and political checks and balances:
public investment under unaccountable governments,? Review of Economics and Statistics,
89(3): 566-572

Khemani, S. 2006. “Local Government Accountability for Health Service Delivery in Nigeria?,
Journal of African Economies, June 2006, 15(2): 285-312

Khwaja, A. I., & Mian, A. (2005). Do lenders favor politically connected firms? Rent provision
in an emerging financial market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(4), 1371-1411

Kirkpatrick, “The Corporate Governance Lessons from the Financial Crisis?, in OECD Journal:
Financial Market Trends, Vol.2009/1.

Leighton, Wayne, A. and Edward J. Lopez (2013), Madmen, Intellectuals and Academic
Scribblers, Stanford University Press.



                                                                                    Page | 186
Ling, Christina and Dawn Roberts (2014), “Evidence of Development Impact from Institutional
Change: A Review of the Evidence on Open Budgeting?, World Bank WPS No. 6968, July 2014.

Litan et al Eds., Financial Sector Governance: The Role of the Public and Private Sectors (2002)

Ottow, Annetje “Market and Competition Authorities: Good Agency Principles?, Oxford 2015

OECD Revolving Doors, Accountability and Transparency - Emerging Regulatory Concerns and
Policy Solutions in the Financial Crisis (5 May 2009)

OECD Draft Report of Best Practice Principles for Improving Regulatory Enforcement and
Inspections (2013)

OECD Best Practice Principles on the Governance of Regulators (2014)

OECD Institutional Design of Competition Authorities – Note by Allan Fells and Henry Ergas
(18 December 2014)

OECD Summary Record of the Roundtable on Changes in Institutional Design (23 March 2015)

OECD, Guide on Related Party Transactions in the MENA Region (September 2014)

Raslan, Azza. “Mixed Policy Objectives in Merger Control: What Can Developing Countries
Learn from South Africa?? World Competition 39(2), Kluwer Law International (forthcoming
2016)

Rijkers, Bob, Caroline Freund and Antonio Nucifora (2014), “All in the Family: State Capture in
Tunisia?, World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper 6810, World Bank, March 2014

Robinson, James A. (2003), “Politician-Proof Policy??, Background paper for World Bank, 2004
World Development Report.

Rodrik, Dani (2014), “When Ideas Trump Interests: Preferences, Worldviews, and Policy
Innovations, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 28, No. 1, Winter 2014.

Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 December
2013 establishing a common organisation of the markets in agricultural products and repealing
Council Regulations (EEC) No 922/72, (EEC) No 234/79, (EC) No 1037/2001 and (EC) No
1234/2007, OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 671–854

Shen, X and Sun, X, “Untying the land knot?, The World Bank 2012.

Stiglitz, Joe (2002), “Transparency in Government? in WBI, The Right To Tell: The Role of
Mass Media in Economic Development.

World Bank (2009), “From Privilege to Competition: Unlocking Private-Led Growth in the
Middle East and North Africa?
                                                                                     Page | 187
World Bank (2014), “Jobs or Privilege: Releasing Prosperity in the Middle East and North
Africa?.

World Bank (2014), “Jobs for Shared Prosperity: Time for Action in the Middle East and North
Africa?.

World Bank (2014), “More Jobs, Better Jobs: A Priority for Egypt?.

World Bank (2014),“Why Doesn’t MENA Export More? A Firm Level Perspective?.

World Bank (2015a) World Development Report 2015: Mind, Society and Behavior?

World Bank (2015b), Tunisia: Systematic Country Diagnostic, June 2015.

World Bank (2015c), Enabling Implementation of Public Procurement Reform in MENA
countries: A case study of Jordan and Morocco, April 2015.

World Bank (2016) Making Politics Work for Development: Harnessing Transparency and
Citizen Engagement, Policy Research Report.

World Bank (forthcoming), Markets and Competition Policy Assessment Toolkit.

World Bank and Africa Competition Forum, Breaking Down Barriers: Unlocking Africa’s
Potential through Vigorous Competition Policy (June, 2016)

World Bank, Global Financial Development Report 2013, Rethinking the Role of the State.

World Bank, Global Financial Development Report 2014, Financial Inclusion.

World Bank, The Unfinished Revolution: Bringing Opportunities, Good Jobs, and Greater
Wealth to All Tunisians (2014)

World Bank, From Privilege to Competition: Unlocking Private Led Growth in the Middle East
and North Africa (2009)

World Bank, Financial Access and Stability: A Road Map for the Middle East and North Africa
(2011)




                                                                                  Page | 188
