 TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2017




TDRP Quarterly
Report
        FY17: JANUARY- MARCH 2017




                                            1
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2017




Table of Contents

ACRONYMS	                                                                             3	

1.	 SUMMARY	                                                                          4	

2.	 THE	AFRICAN	UNION	AND	DDR	FEATURED	ACTIVITIES	                                    4	
2.1	 TDRP	AND	NTF	MISSION	TO	ADDIS	ABABA	                                             4	
2.1.2		FORWARD	PLANS	                                                                 5	

3.	 SUPPORT	PROVIDED	TO	REINSERTION	AND	REINTEGRATION	OPERATIONS	AT	COUNTRY	LEVEL	    6	
3.1	THE	CENTRAL	AFRICAN	REPUBLIC	                                                     6	
3.2	REPUBLIC	OF	MALI	                                                                 8	
3.3	REPUBLIC	OF	SOUTH	SUDAN	                                                          8	

4.		PROGRAM	MANAGEMENT	AND	STATUS	OF	TRUST	FUND	                                      9	

4.1	TDRP	TRUST	FUND	COMMITTEE	ANNUAL	MEETING,	PARIS	                                 10	

5.	FORTHCOMING	EVENTS	                                                               10	




                                                 2
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2017


ACRONYMS

 ACFPE        Agence Centrafricaine pour la Formation Professionnelle et l’Emploi
 APSA         African Peace and Security Architecture
 AU           African Union
 AUDDRCP      African Union DDR Capacity Program
 BETF         Bank Executed Trust Fund
 BICC         Bonn International Center for Conversion
 CAR          Central African Republic
 CEMAC        Central African Economic and Monetary Community
 CMU          Country Management Unit
 CoE          Center of Excellence
 DDR          Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
 DDRR         Disarmament, Demobilization, Reinsertion and Reintegration
 DPKO         UN Department of Peace Keeping Operations
 ECCAS        Economic Community of Central African States
 DRC          Democratic Republic of Congo
 FAO          Food and Agriculture Organization
 FCV          Fragility, Conflict and Violence
 ICRS         Information, Counselling and Referral System
 INPP         Institut National de Préparation Professionnelle
 JMEC         Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
 LRA          Lord Resistance Army
 MDTF         Multi Donor Trust Fund
              United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
 MINUSCA
              Republic
 MINUSMA      United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
 MIS          Management Information Systems
              United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
 MONUSCO
              Congo
 MNJTF        Multinational Joint Task Force to Fight Boko Haram
 NDDRC        National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission
 NTF          Nordic Trust Fund
 OGN          Operational Guidance Note
 OMC          Operational Mechanism for Coordination
 PAD          Project Appraisal Document
 PIU          Project Implementation Unit
 PSD          Peace and Security Department
 PSO          Peace Support Operation
 RECs         Regional Economic Community
 RMs          Regional Mechanisms
 ToR          Terms of Reference
              Unité d’Exécution du Programme National de Désarmement, Démobilisation et
 UEPNDDR
              Réintégration
 UNMISS       United Nations Mission in South Sudan
 UNOAU        United Nations Office to the African Union




                                                  3
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2017


1. Summary

During this quarter, the TDRP made progress in supporting implementation for the next phase of the African
Union DDR Program (DDRCP), maintains its technical and financial assistance provided at the country
level in CAR, DRC, and Mali and continues to monitor events in South Sudan. This report contains brief
updates of work undertaken at country level over this first quarter and covers the key partnership agreements
reached with the African Union (AU).

Whilst all activities noted below are associated with the TDRP portfolio, not all the deliverables or outputs
were directly funded by the TDRP trust fund. There are pre-existing World Bank and other trust fund
allocations channeled through other projects, outside of TDRP that support engagement with the African
Union, CAR, DRC, Mali and South Sudan. Similarly, consultants and staff working with TDRP are not
paid entirely by the TDRP Trust Fund, but also through World Bank’s own budget for DDR operations
across and through other trust funds, such as the United Nations – World Bank Partnership Trust Funds,
and World Bank budgets made available to support implementation of activities in CAR, DRC, Mali, and
South Sudan.

2. The African Union and DDR Featured Activities


2.1 TDRP AND NORDIC TRUST FUND MISSION TO ADDIS ABABA

The TDRP and Nordic Trust Fund (NTF) undertook a technical support mission to AU Head Quarters in
Addis between February 23 and March 3, 2017. The objectives of the mission were to; (i) discuss with
partners the common 2017 work plan for the AU, UN, and WB with a focus on scaling up collaboration at
the HQ level between the WB, UN and the AU (Defense and Security Division (DSD), Post Conflict
Reconstruction and Development (PCRD), Political Affairs Human Rights, the AU Training and Roster
Units) in line with the African Peace and Security Architecture (APSA) and African Governance
Architecture (AGA) priorities; (ii) explore potential areas for cooperation at the regional level with a focus
on scaling up cooperation between the AU, UN, WB and regional mechanisms, using a more robust DDR
knowledge management system and a focus on DDR training and human rights; (iii) agree on concept notes
and activity plans related to strengthening cross institutional knowledge platforms and capacities, with a
focus on human rights, so as to ensure the sustainability and impact of the support program; (iv) strengthen
the validation process of knowledge products to ensure validity and relevance by focusing on working
relationships between the AU Peace and Security Department (AU PSD) with other relevant departmental
units and regional mechanisms such as Human Rights, the Regional Economic Communities (RECs),
Centers of Excellence (COEs) and Member States and; (v) identification of mechanisms to better strengthen
coordination and collaboration of initiatives targeting the AU.

The mission outcomes were the following:

    •   A final costed Program Document that serves as the overall chapeau for joint engagement between
        the AU, UN and WB, as well as the engagement with the WB Nordic Trust Fund (NTF), focusing
        on the need to operationalize the nexus between human rights mainstreaming and broader
        stabilization efforts undertaken by the AU, Peace Support Operations, REC’s and Member States;

                                                      4
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2017


       •      Agreement on focus countries/regions for increased collaboration between the AU, UN and WB,
              based on AU policies and priorities, namely: Somalia (AMISOM), LRA affected countries (DRC,
              South Sudan and CAR), CAR, Mali, countries affected by Boko Haram (and where the MNJTF is
              now in operation) and Guinea Bissau;
       •      Agreement on priority need for identification and operationalization to increase field level
              cooperation and collaboration between the AU, World Bank and UN DPKO;
       •      Agreement on revised 2017 Quarter I and Quarter II work plans based on feedback from
              consultations;
       •      Agreement on the importance of leveraging existing resources to maximize organizational learning
              within the AU, UN and WB and partners.
       •      Agreement on focus of phase II for the AU, UN and WB on operationalizing support to Member
              States, nexus between the African Governance Architecture (AGA) and APSA with an emphasis
              on data collection, information sharing and cooperation. Increased cooperation at the regional level
              will include a focus on scaling up cooperation between the AU (PCRD, DSD and HR), UN, WB
              and regional mechanisms through a focus on DDR knowledge management and DDR training;
       •      On knowledge management, the AU DSD online data base is recognized as being best practice and
              will be the model used to combine and enhance existing knowledge structures within PCRD and
              Human Rights across the continent.
       •      Feedback from Donor partners, as well as a Partner meeting held in Addis emphasized the
              importance of stronger and more regular coordination and communication between the World
              Bank, the AU and donors in Addis Ababa.

2.1.2 FORWARD PLANS

Moving forward, the WB team together with the AU and UN will coordinate regular briefing meetings as
implementation of the second phase of the AU DDR Program advances. GIZ and the AU Human Rights
section are interested in identifying ways to best utilize the online DDR database developed by the WB for
the AU DSD as a template. Emphasis will be placed on linking these various knowledge management
initiatives.

During the coming quarter the main focus of activities will be;

       1. A revision of DDR Operational Guidance Notes with an emphasis on the mainstreaming of human
          rights approaches and perspectives;

       2. The mapping and scoping of current training provision, needs assessment and the development of
          draft training materials (based on the OGNs). Approaches to the development of training materials
          will take into account existing training and rostering processes within the AU. The AU will be
          partnering with African Peace Support Training Association (APSTA).1

       3. A systematic review of knowledge management approaches by the AU and partners. This will
          inform the development of a forward strategy that builds on progress to date and addresses the
          needs of multiple end users. This will also consider Knowledge Management platforms and
          approaches being developed across the APSA and AGA more widely.
																																																													
1
  APSTA exists to facilitate the development of African capacity for peace and security through coordination, advocacy, harmonization and
standardisation of training, research and policy implementation support among its member institutions.




                                                                   5
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2017


3. SUPPORT PROVIDED TO REINSERTION AND REINTEGRATION OPERATIONS
   AT COUNTRY LEVEL

3.1 THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC


During this quarter, the task team conducted a combination of technical, pre-appraisal and appraisal
missions in preparation for the proposed CAR Reintegration of Ex-Combatants Project [P160272]. These
took place from January 9-22, and March 6-22. These missions broadly sought to:

1. Convene with DDRR-PIU and MINUSCA to finalize implementation and fiduciary arrangements,
project activities, target beneficiaries, mechanism for support to host communities and proposed pilot
initiative for DDRR;

2. Meet with potential implementing partners and other stakeholders to discuss implementation modalities;

3. Support DDRR-PIU and CS-REF [Cellule de Suivi des Réformes Economiques et Financières] on the
effective use of CEMAC contribution and the development of a strategy and results framework to monitor
activities under the convention; and

4. Corrdinate with DDRR-PIU and MINUSCA in developing the DDR MIS.

During the Decision Review meeting, the project deepened its assessment on preliminary profiling of ex-
combatants and host communities to finalize target beneficiaries for the project. It expanded on coordination
between DDRR-PIU and CS-REF; implementation arrangement and potential partners; and linkages with
security sector reforms and national reconciliation. It further redesigned activities to accommodate support
to host communities in lieu of another project as previously decided and initiating draft procurement plan
for the initial phase of the project. A separate component was added to accommodate support to host
communities through rehabilitation of basic small-scale infrastructure and promotion of social cohesion.

The focus of activities is highlighted in the table below;

 Focus Area             Key activities
                           1. Subsequent to the visit of the Vice President for the Africa Region to CAR, the
                                proposed grant amount for the project was doubled from 15M to 30M USD.
                           2. Increased the number of ex-combatants targeted for the project from 2,000 to
                                5,000. The remaining caseload of 2,000 ex-combatants consists of foreign
                                fighters and children associated with armed forces and/or groups, both of whom
                                will be supported by UNICEF and other development partners.
                           3. Based on aforementioned adjustments, negotiations for the project were held with
                                the Government on March 13, 2017. Negotiated documents were approved by the
 Emerging and on-
                                Ministry of Economy, Planning and Cooperation.
 going support
                           4. Meanwhile, the task team continues to provide guidance to DDRR-PIU and CS-
                                REF to initiate utilization of 2B FCFA allocated by CEMAC in support of DDRR.
                                It supported in drafting a convention between the DDRR-PIU and CS-REF,
                                which provides the legal framework on financing activities and operations in line
                                with the Bank’s fiduciary guidelines. This convention was signed on January 27,
                                2017.
                           5. The task team also coordinates with the Government and MINUSCA on the
                                development of a DDR Management Information System [MIS]. The bank


                                                       6
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2017


                                prepared detailed guidelines describing MIS required, technical specifications,
                                development timeframe and list of data collection items based on relevant prior
                                experience of DDR programs in other countries. Together with MINUSCA, it
                                evaluated the feasibility of IT infrastructure and proposed backup mechanisms in
                                case of system disruptions and establishment of a server room with secure
                                fingerprint based access control device. The list of equipment and licenses, and
                                data collection requirements for the registration modules, were finalized. The task
                                team is currently supporting the recruitment of an IT Specialist within DDRR-
                                PIU to support ongoing development of the MIS.
                           6. Ahead of launching the National DDRR Program, the task team is also
                                conducting technical sessions with MINUSCA to finalize preparations for the
                                pilot initiative and the proposed IDA-financed project. In view of growing
                                substance abuse and needs for psychosocial support amongst ex-combatants, the
                                team will conduct a rapid mapping of capacities and needs for psychosocial
                                support nationwide. It has also been visiting Beal and BSS camps to orient ex-
                                combatants, currently participating in the Community Violence Reduction [CVR]
                                program and receiving some vocational training, on opportunities for
                                socioeconomic reintegration.
                           1. Reviewed budget and procurement plan provided and recommended the PIU to
                                expand on the priority activities constituted.
                           2. The review suggested that the financing provided should account for a proposed
                                pilot operation on community-level reintegration of 300 ex-combatants;
                           3. To that end, the task team also recommended producing an action plan for
 Budget and
                                communications and sensitization to accompany related activities taking place in
 procurement
                                host communities and elsewhere.
                           4. The review reiterated the need for a procurement plan for the proposed activities,
                                justification of allowances granted to armed groups involved in the mediation
                                process and other required items in the package prior to obtaining non-objection
                                from the Task Team Leader.
                           1. The task team convened with the Agence Centrafricaine pour la Formation
                                Professionnelle et l'Emploi [ACFPE] on developing training modules on
                                vocational training for ex-combatants during socioeconomic reintegration. It
                                interacted with Cooperazione Internazionale [COOPI], Agency for Technical
                                Cooperation and Development [ACTED], International Rescue Committee
                                [IRC], and Première Urgence, to further discuss on the implementation modalities
                                and assess their capacities in the targeted areas. Following additional
 Partnerships and               consultations with Government and MINUSCA, it met with Agency for
 meetings                       Technical Cooperation and Development [ACTED] and Cooperazione
                                Internazionale [COOPI] to further assess their operational capacities, particularly
                                in Bambari, for the proposed DDRR pilot project.
                           In addition, the Bank met with the Agence Française de Développement [AFD] to
                           explore synergies on ongoing and forthcoming projects on vocational training. AFD
                           proposed to combine efforts on an upcoming mapping mission to list training centers
                           nationwide, assess their capacities, and propose appropriate plans for training centers'
                           rehabilitation and capacity-building.


The board approval date for the proposed IDA-financed project is confirmed for April 13, 2017. Following
approval and leading up to effectiveness, the task team will support DDRR-PIU in finalizing a final draft
of the Project Implementation Manual and recruiting necessary staff in form and substance satisfactory to
the International Development Association. The next mission will follow-up on some of the aforementioned
task activities and is scheduled for April 15-30, 2017.




                                                       7
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2017


3.2 REPUBLIC OF MALI


During this quarter, the task team conducted one mission to Bamako, Mali during January 17-22, 2017 for
the Mali Reinsertion of Ex-Combatants Project [P157233]. It sought to hold negotiations for Mali
Reinsertion of Ex-combatants Project in collaboration with the Ministry of Economy and Finance, Ministry
of Defense and Veterans Affairs, and the National DDR Commission. It provided technical assistance to
the National DDR Commission in the drafting of the Project Implementation Manual [PIM] and, with the
support of MINUSMA, in developing the Management Information System [MIS].

The project was approved on February 28, 2017 and the financing agreement was countersigned by the
government on April 5, 2017. In order to reach effectiveness, the task team prioritizes supporting the Project
Implementation Unit [PIU] in finalizing the PIM and recruitment of select staff positions.

The PIU will be housed within the National Commission for DDR [NCDDR], whose members have already
been agreed upon and will report to the Minister of Defense and Veterans Affairs. The Government
contribution of approximately US$10M will finance the staffing of NCDDR, corresponding operating costs,
preparation of Terms of References and selection process of consultants and non-consultants relevant to
specific project activities as well as communications and sensitization activities at national and regional
levels.

In order to meet additional financing needs for DDR programming in Mali, the task team continues to
support the government in following up with partners present during the Donors Roundtable held on
December 8, 2017. A number of donors indicated their intention to provide financial support to the program.
The World Bank task team remains ready to establish a Multi-Donor Trust Fund, as needed, to pool donor
financing and initiate implementation of project activities. Financing gap for reinsertion activities and
addressing an additional caseload of 6,000 ex-combatants is currently estimated at US$ 28M.

The task team coordinates with MINUSMA to follow-up on updates on the progress on the construction of
cantonment sites, political developments, lists of combatants from armed groups, appointments to the
National Commission for DDR and the Integration Commission. Construction of three cantonment sites are
completed; and the remaining five are operational, with access to power and water supply, as construction
continues in parallel.

The World Bank is providing technical support to MINUSMA, upon request of the government, to develop
an Information, Counselling and Referral System [ICRS]. While some features, such as registration, are
already available, the Management Information System is planned to be finalized prior to beginning of the
DDR program.



3.3 REPUBLIC OF SOUTH SUDAN

Current political and security contexts are not conducive for operational support to DDR in South Sudan
for multiple reasons. However, the World Bank continues to monitor events and to have dialogue with
stakeholders on issues related to the potential future role of DDR in supporting peace and stabilization..


                                                      8
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2017



Moving forward when security and political conditions on the ground permit, the task team may collaborate
with the Bonn International Center for Conversion [BICC] to develop a paper on community-based
reintegration in South Sudan and participate in technical meetings on DDR. Additional activities may later
extend to technical and advisory support to the National DDR Commission in South Sudan in drafting a
common DDR strategic plan in coordination with UN Mission in the Republic of South Sudan [UNMISS]
and other partners.

4. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT AND STATUS OF TRUST FUND

During this quarter, contributions to TDRP Trust Fund remained at US$ 42,583,887.89, with disbursement
reaching 98.77%at US$ 42,062,191.12. The remaining balance of US$ 679,731.49 includes
US$ 278,512.60 of the Government of Sweden’s contribution to co-finance the DRC Reinsertion and
Reintegration Project activities. The remainder of US$ 306,703.23 will continue to be disbursed as
previously agreed with donor partners, as noted below.

            Program/Recipient                                                Budget (USD)
            African Union DDR Program                                              100,000
            Technical Assistance to South Sudan DDR Process                        80,000
            Technical Assistance to CAR DDR Program                                50,000
            Technical Assistance to Mali DDR Program                               40,000
            Additional Requests (Somalia, Libya, Yemen etc.)                       110,000

            Management and Administrative Costs                                     20,000




                                                    9
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2017


4.1 TDRP TRUST FUND COMMITTEE ANNUAL MEETING, PARIS


An Annual Trust Fund Committee Meeting for the TDRP was held on March 8, 2017 in Paris, France. The
objectives of the Donors Meetings were to discuss status of TDRP programming, country updates,
institutional capacity building results, overall lessons learned from the TDRP and the closure process and
scheduled work program for the remaining period of implementation. The meeting also canvased opinion
as to how best to ensure that the knowledge and experience generated through TDRP activities can be used
to strengthen the work of partners going forward in the interconnected fields of DDR and stabilization more
broadly. The meeting was attended by representatives from France, Belgium, Finland and Norway. Sweden
participated though audio connection from the embassy in Addis Ababa.

The donors were briefed on the progress of TDRP funded activities since the last donor meeting in 2016.
This included a detailed update on the DRC DDR program and the Phase II of the AU DDR Program.
Meeting participants agreed that the TDRP would closed as scheduled on 31 December, 2017 and that there
would be no extension. The donor representatives were interested in exploring options, based on
recommendations from TDRP lessons learned and recommendations outlined in the TDRP evaluation 2016,
for a follow-on, lean and agile facility that could focus on funding initiatives that supported broader efforts
of partners working in stabilization contexts. Participants welcomed the suggestion that the TDRP develop
an options paper based on the lessons learned from the TDRP and convene a larger meeting to reflect on
lessons and options for future support, tentatively scheduled for September, 2017



5. FORTHCOMING EVENTS

Over the upcoming quarter the WB team will provide ongoing technical support in several areas;

On support to the African Union DDR Programme;

    •    Support will be provided to AU colleagues as they plan and prepare for a regional meeting
         of stakeholders in Chad to discuss stabilization efforts in Boko Haram affected areas. This
         includes approaches to information management and the handling of former combatants.

    •    The DDR OGNs revised with Human Rights issues incorporated will be validated;

    •     Terms of Reference on work taking forward DDR training standards with the AU, APSTA
         and the UN will be finalized.

    •    The next implementation support mission to the AU in Addis is scheduled for early June
         2017. The objectives of this meeting will be to discuss and validate work undertaken both
         with the core programme team but also amongst wider stakeholders.


A workshop to reflect on lessons learned from the TDRP programme and to assess future needs and options
for collaborative approaches is planned for September, 2017.

                                                      10
