                                                  WPS7898


Policy Research Working Paper                    7898




                  Food Prices and Poverty
                               Derek D. Headey




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
November 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7898


  Abstract
  Do higher food prices help or hinder poverty reduction?                            uncovers indicative evidence that increases in food prices are
  Despite much debate, existing research has almost solely                           associated with reductions in poverty, not increases. A likely
  relied on simulation models to address this question. In this                      empirical explanation is the relatively strong agricultural
  paper World Bank poverty estimates are used to systemat-                           supply and wage responses to food price increases, and the
  ically test the relationship between changes in poverty and                        fact that the majority of the world’s poor still heavily rely on
  exogenous changes in real domestic food prices. The paper                          agriculture or agriculture-related activities to earn a living.




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author
  may be contacted at d.headey@cgiar.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
                                Food Prices and Poverty

                                       Derek D. Headey




   JEL Codes: I32; O11
   Keywords: Food crisis, food prices, poverty reduction, agricultural supply response, wages


Acknowledgements: Derek Headey is a Senior Research Fellow at the Poverty, Health and
Nutrition Division of The International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington DC,
d.headey@cgiar.org. The author would like to thank three anonymous reviewers and the managing
editor, as well as a range of colleagues for helpful comments on the paper and for insights on
poverty measurement. Particular thanks go to Will Martin, Harold Alderman, Hanan Jacoby, John
Hoddinott, Kathleen Beegle, Shaohua Chen, Dean Jolliffe, Walter Falcon, Rosamund Naylor, and
David Lobell.
                                                               INTRODUCTION
Sharp increases in international food prices in recent years have understandably raised serious
concerns about potential impacts on the poor. After several decades of secular decline and relative
stability, the international prices of staple grains increased sharply in 2007 and 2008 and again in
2010 and 2011 with most of this increase being passed on to domestic markets (see figure 1 and
also Ivanic and Martin 2014). Such dramatic changes in the price of food could indeed have major
consequences for the world’s poor, who spend most of their income on food but also heavily rely
on food production to earn a living.


Figure 1. Trends in international and domestic real food prices for 95 developing countries




    Source: The international food price index is the real FAO (2014) food price index and the ILO (2013) domestic
food price index is the cross-country median of the ratio of the food CPI to the total CPI.




The earliest simulation-based attempts to gauge the welfare impacts of higher prices invariably
concluded that, in the short run, global poverty would increase sharply as the result of a ceteris
paribus increase in food prices (Ivanic and Martin 2008; De Hoyos and Medvedev 2009).1 Yet,
over the medium term, the impacts of higher food prices on global poverty reduction are far more
ambiguous. The prevailing wisdom prior to the 2008 food crisis was that low agricultural prices
were retarding poverty reduction, since most of the world’s poor work in agriculture or related
                                                            
     1. Subsequent estimates of the impact of the 2010-11 price surge suggested a further 44 million people would be
thrown into poverty (Ivanic et al., 2011). A number of country studies have also found that higher food prices typically
increase poverty. See Headey and Fan (2010) and Compton et al. (2011) for reviews.

                                                                                                                      2 
 
sectors (Swinnen 2011). Survey-based evidence also suggested no net deterioration in self-
reported food insecurity (Headey 2013; Verpoorten et al. 2013) or poverty (World Bank 2014)
during the food price hikes of 2007–2008. Moreover, recent general equilibrium models for India
(Jacoby 2013), Uganda (Van Campenhout et al. 2013) and a larger 31-country sample (Ivanic and
Martin 2014) all find that higher agricultural prices reduce poverty in the longer run through a
combination of agricultural supply and wage responses.
    In this paper, we aim to further explore this question by examining the relationship between
changes in food prices, agricultural production. and poverty across a large swathe of developing
countries. While there is a large and related literature statistically analyzing the drivers of poverty
reduction using cross-country data (Christiaensen et al. 2011; De Janvry and Sadoulet 2010;
Loayza and Raddatz 2010; Ravallion et al. 2007), and within that literature a handful of papers
exploring the links between inflation and poverty reduction (Easterly and Fischer 2000; Ravallion
and Datt 2002), the present paper appears to be the first cross-country empirical examination of
whether higher food prices help or hinder net poverty reduction. A more empirical examination of
this question is important given that simulation models are methodologically somewhat opaque
because of their complexity, potentially sensitive to the assumptions and parameters that feed into
the model, and silent on how quickly agricultural production and wages might respond to higher
prices.2 Hence, the empirical analysis in the present paper overcomes these deficiencies to some
extent and should therefore be seen as a complement to the more structural insights afforded by
simulation approaches.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section II briefly reviews existing theory
and evidence on the impact of food prices on poverty and welfare. Section III discusses data and
methods. Section IV tests the relationship between changes in food prices and changes in prices
(both domestic and international). Section V explores likely explanations of this result, namely,
agricultural supply and wage responses to higher food prices. Section VI provides some cautious
interpretation of the results.


                                                               II. THEORY AND EVIDENCE TO DATE
The workhorse model of research into food prices and economic welfare has undoubtedly been
Deaton’s (1989) net benefit ratio approach. In this partial equilibrium approach, the decisive
influence on welfare outcomes is whether a household is a net consumer or net producer of food.
Applications of this approach in recent years have almost invariably found that most poor
households in developing countries are net consumers of food such that higher food prices are
expected to increase poverty in the short run (Ivanic and Martin 2008, 2011, 2014; De Hoyos and
Medvedev 2009).
    Despite the consistency of this finding across different samples of countries, several critiques
have emerged. First, the suitability of household surveys for accurately measuring net benefit ratios
is questionable (Headey and Fan 2008, 2010; Carletto 2012). Consumption estimates typically
employ short recall modules (typically from one to two weeks) that are then annualized to match
up with annual recalls on agricultural production. Yet, recent World Bank research shows that both
food consumption and food production estimates suffer from large biases (Beegle et al. 2012;
                                                            
    2. Jacoby (2013) conducts both a simulation analysis and an econometric analysis, but his econometric estimates
of wage responses to higher food prices cover a five-year period and thus do not shed light on the speed of wage
adjustment within that period, which is surely an important welfare concern.

                                                                                                                 3 
 
Deininger et al. 2012). In Uganda, for example, Deininger et al. (2012) find that crop production
might be underestimated by half due to recall biases, suggesting that standard surveys might also
be underestimating net benefit ratios from higher food prices.
    Other critiques focus on behavioral and market responses to higher food prices. Even if many
rural people are net food consumers, their engagement in farming provides them scope to adjust
production in response to higher food prices (Headey and Fan 2008, 2010). Agricultural supply
responses could stem from a range of inputs, including labor, land, variable farm inputs like
improved seeds or fertilizers, or longer term capital inputs such as irrigation and increased R&D.
Obviously, major capital investments in R&D, irrigation, and land conversion will only induce a
supply response over the longer term, but labor and other variable inputs might adjust quickly
(Ivanic and Martin 2014). Land is potentially an intermediate case, depending on the availability
of fallow land requiring little new investment, only more variable inputs like labor, seeds, and
chemicals.
    Given what we know about the diversification of activities within households, it seems likely
that labor reallocation is the major mode of adjustment and the input most likely to have broader
general equilibrium impacts on the demand for unskilled labor and its associated wages. To explore
this more systematically, Jacoby (2016) develops a simple general equilibrium model to show that,
if agriculture is a large sector, then a given agricultural supply response will result in a relatively
large increase in demand for unskilled labor, which will need to be accommodated by shifting
labor out of the services and manufacturing sectors. However, if the services sector is large, labor-
intensive, and non-tradable (as it mostly is in poor countries), then the wage adjustment required
to equilibrate labor demands across sectors will mostly need to come from the manufacturing
sector and will need to be relatively large to extract sufficient labor out of that sector. Hence, the
model predicts that a standard economic structure (large agricultural and services sectors) will
result in an elasticity of wages with respect to food prices that is large and positive in the long run,
typically close to unity (Jacoby 2013; Ivanic and Martin 2014). Much less clear, theoretically and
empirically, is the speed of wage adjustments to higher food prices, though econometric estimates
suggest that short-run wage elasticities vary between 0.25 and 0.69 (Ravallion 1990; Palmer‐Jones
1993; Rashid 2002; Lasco et al. 2008).
    In summary, the effects of higher food prices on the incomes or expenditures of the poor are
complex, dynamic, and ambiguous a priori. Undoubtedly, higher food prices create both winners
and losers. But given that the bulk of the world’s poor are still predominantly rural (Ravallion et
al. 2007), any sizeable agricultural supply and wage responses to higher food prices could well
result in net poverty reduction over the medium term.


                                      III. DATA AND METHODS
This section describes in detail the data and methods used in the analysis with particular attention
to some of the limitations involved.
                                          Poverty Indicators
In this paper, we first explore these medium-term impact of higher prices on changes in national
poverty rates in a sample of around 300 observations from the World Bank’s (2014) POVCAL



                                                                                                      4 
 
database, mostly covering the 1990s and 2000s.3 Changes in poverty are estimated across
consecutive household surveys that vary in duration (i.e., based on survey frequency). To avoid
mixing very long with very short changes in poverty, we focus on observation in which the gap
between consecutive surveys varies between one and five years of duration and test sensitivity to
restrictions within that range. The poverty measures we focus on are changes (first differences) in
the $1.25/day and $2/day headcounts, measured at 2005 international dollars. We also drop
countries with very low levels of initial poverty (less than 5% in the $1.25 per day headcount) to
exclude upper-middle income countries in which food is less important for both consumption and
production, and to prevent the sample from being heavily overloaded with such countries.4
    While there are many challenges in measuring comparable poverty rates across countries and
over time, one particular concern with POVCAL estimates is the possibility that they suffer from
biases stemming from the use of consumer price indices (CPIs) to deflate nominal estimates of
household expenditure or income (or equivalently, to deflate poverty lines). Here there are two
sources of bias. First, if the weights in the CPI consumption basket differ substantially from the
expenditure patterns of the poor, there is a possibility of CPI bias during periods of real increases
in the price of food. However, the POVCAL series used herein contains adjustments for this
problem whenever food weights in the CPI were deemed to be excessively low. Moreover, a recent
World Bank study of poverty in Africa in fact found evidence that CPI bias during periods of high
food inflation typically works in the opposite direction: corrections for CPI bias in Africa would
lead to faster poverty reduction during the recent period of rising food prices (Beegle et al. 2016).5
    Second, when food prices increase, the poor will presumably do little to reduce the quantity of
food consumed, particularly if their food expenditure is already focused on the cheapest sources
of calories and if their calorie consumption is already close to minimum subsistence levels. In the
extreme case, food quantities consumed might be entirely unaffected by higher prices, meaning
that an increase in food prices would result in a commensurately large increase in food expenditure
shares. Hence, even if the original food expenditure share used in the CPI calculation were correct
prior to an increase in real food prices, it would be an underestimate of the amount the poor spend
on food after an increase in real food prices. This second type of CPI bias—a classic index number
problem—is likely to be smaller in magnitude than the first type of CPI bias referred to above, but
both types of bias raise the concern that changes in food prices and changes in poverty could be
spuriously correlated because of the way POVCAL data are calculated. It is partly for this reason
that we also investigate the impacts of food price changes on FAO agricultural production statistics
(see below), since the latter do not suffer from these CPI biases.
                                                               Food Price Indicators
The explanatory variable of interest in all our regressions is the change in real food prices,
measured as the ratio of the food CPI to the total CPI. Relative to other indicators of relative food
price changes, this series seemed to have little signs of substantial measurement error (though we
                                                            
    3. The median endyear of changes in poverty in this sample is 2002.
    4. Without this restriction, around one-third of observations would be derived from Eastern Europe and Central
Asia and another third from Latin America and the Caribbean.
    5. Personal communications with the researchers managing the POVCAL database confirmed that CPI
adjustments were made for approximately 20 countries for which the weight on food products was deemed to be
excessively low. For Africa, the aforementioned World Bank study used the assumption that differences in the food
budget share among demographically similar households with the same level of consumption at different points in
time would indicate the CPI’s mismeasurement of the true cost of living. Strikingly, the official CPIs seem to have
overestimated changes in the cost of living for the poor in 13 of the 16 countries examined.

                                                                                                                 5 
 
dropped several hyperinflation observations, such as Zimbabwe), and was available for a large
range of developing countries.6 However, since domestic price movements might be endogenous
with respect to poverty (see below), we use an international price index to identify exogenous
externally driven variation in domestic prices. To do so we construct an international price index
with country-specific weights based on consumption (calorie) patterns for nine commodities for
which international prices were available. This has the effect of creating an international price
series that has cross-country as well as time series variation. For example, rice accounts for around
70 percent of caloric intake in Bangladesh, so international rice prices receive a very high weight
in Bangladesh’s index, while wheat, maize, sorghum, and so on get very low weights. This
approach helps minimize the weak instrument problem stemming from the fact that international
price transmission may be highly variable across countries for a variety of reasons.
                                                               Agricultural Indicators
In section V, we chiefly focus on agricultural production indicators to test for agricultural supply
response and to circumvent some of the issues with the POVCAL data raised above. These
indicators are mostly sourced from the FAO (2004). This set includes value-added measures of all
agricultural production as well as food and crop production components. Growth in crop
production can also be decomposed into increases in production per hectare and increases in land
area harvested, often referred to as the intensive and extensive margins, respectively. We also
examine another common indicator of the intensive margins: cereal yields.
                                                                Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 shows some summary statistics for some of our key indicators, all of which are measured
as annualized changes or percentage changes across consecutive surveys. The statistics are broken
up by regions to illustrate one other serious limitation of POVCAL data, namely, that it is
overpopulated with countries from Latin America (approximately half the sample), while there are
only about 50 observations (i.e., first differences in poverty) each for sub-Saharan Africa and Asia
(South and East Asia combined). Eastern Europe and Central Asia contain around 40 observations
(and are also somewhat overrepresented relative to their population sizes), while the Middle East
and Africa contains only a handful of observations for Tunisia and Morocco only. Average changes
in $1.25/day poverty over these observations are highest for East Asia (-2.2 points), as expected,
followed by Eastern Europe and Central Asia (-1.6), sub-Saharan Africa (-1.5) and South Asia (-
1.2). Mean changes in food prices are positive in all regions but substantially larger in Asia and
sub-Saharan Africa.




Table 1. Summary statistics for key variables


                                                            
    6 .We investigated a number of different series, including the FAO series on producer prices and an index based
on GDP deflators. However, results reported in appendix S1 suggest that these two series are measured with much
more error than the consumer price index series. Both series are weakly correlated with international prices, for
example. It also seems conceptually less suitable to focus on producer prices, since even producers also make
substantial purchases of food.

                                                                                                                 6 
 
                                                                       East Asia &        South          Sub-Saharan
                                                                         Pacific          Asia              Africa
                                                                         (N=35)          (N=19)            (N=52)

Annual change in $1.25/day poverty rate                                      -2.2          -1.2              -1.5
(% points per year)
Annual change in $2/day poverty rate                                         -2.3          -1.2              -0.9
(% points per year)
Annual percentage change in domestic food prices                             0.6           0.7                0.6
(% per year)
Annual percentage change in food production                                  4.4           3.3                4.0
(% per year)
                                                                        Europe &      Latin America      Middle East &
                                                                       Central Asia    & Caribbean       North Africa
                                                                         (N=41)         (N=157)             (N=4)
Annual change in $1.25/day poverty rate                                      -1.6          -0.5              -0.4
(% points per year)
Annual change in $2/day poverty rate                                         -1.7          -0.7               0.0
(% points per year)
Annual percentage change in domestic food prices                             0.2           0.4                0.0
(% per year)
Annual percentage change in food production                                  0.9           3.5                4.2
(% per year)
        Source: Author’s estimates from World Bank (2013) poverty data and ILO (2013) food price data.




                                                                   Methods
For systematically testing the relationship between poverty and food prices, we use both least
squares regressions and instrumental variables (IV) approach. In the least squares approach the
first difference in the poverty headcount (P)7 is regressed against the first difference in the log of
domestic food prices (pd) and series of time dummies (T), with v denoting the error term:

              (1)            ,           . ln           ,      ,

One concern with equation (1) is that changes in food prices might be correlated with the error
term because of omitted variables. The 1998 Indonesian financial crisis, for example, increased
                                                            
     7. First differences is preferable to percentage differences for two reasons. First, poverty headcounts are already
measured in percentage terms, and taking percentage changes of very small values produces results that are arguably
counterintuitive. For example, an increase in the poverty rate from 1% to 3% in one country and 30% to 32% in
another country should arguably be regarded as equivalent. In contrast, the two changes are very different in
percentage terms: 200% in the first case, and 6.67% in the second case. See Deaton (2006) for a discussion of this
problem in the context of mortality rates. A second problem is that taking percentage changes can sometimes produce
outliers.

                                                                                                                         7 
 
food prices (through a large exchange rate devaluation), but also increased unemployment and
reduced investment, and, therefore, likely affected poverty by other routes. In this example, an
omitted variable (a financial crisis) induces a potentially spurious positive relationship between
food prices and poverty, but one can also articulate biases in the other direction (e.g., expansionary
monetary or fiscal policies), such that it is difficult to say in which direction OLS coefficients
might be biased.
     To address this concern we use a relatively simple instrumental variables strategy implemented
with the two-step instrumental variables general method of moments (IV-GMM), using an optimal
weighting matrix. The identification strategy rests upon the exogeneity of the international food
price index (described above), which is assumed to only influence national poverty rates through
its effect on domestic food prices. Hence, the IV-GMM approach results in an equation similar in
structure to (1), but in which we use domestic price changes predicted by international price
changes.
     In addition to these basic least squares and IV-GMM approaches, we engage in several
robustness tests. First, IV approaches can sometimes be sensitive to the choice of estimator. While
results from standard IV and LIML estimators are also very similar (available on request), in our
appendix we also report results for the Arellano and Bond (1991) dynamic panel estimator, in
which lagged poverty rates are introduced.
     Second, we conduct robustness tests to gauge whether the introduction of potentially
confounding factors to the model has any influence on our core results. For example, increases in
food prices might be strongly associated with increases in non-food commodities, so we control
for changes in the overall terms of trade but also overall inflation, monetary expansion, exchange
rate movements, changes in trade and foreign investment ratios, and non-agricultural growth rates.
     Third, we test robustness of results to splitting up the sample by region and by time periods.
The former is implemented to test whether any particular region might be driving the result, while
the latter is done to test whether the effects of food prices were systematically different in the
2000s, a period of heightened international price volatility. We also extensively tested for
interactions between changes in food prices and other structural indicators of interest (such as
indicators of the size of agriculture in total GDP or total employment and the magnitude of initial
poverty rates), to see whether there is observable heterogeneity in the effects of food price changes
on national poverty (results available upon request).
     Lastly, we also investigate whether changes in food prices influence agricultural production
and input use and unskilled wages. For the agricultural production regressions, we adopt the same
form as equation (1) and its IV-GMM analog, but we replace poverty rates with various measures
of agricultural output or input use. We also exploit the availability of monthly data on rural and
urban wages in Bangladesh to test whether rice prices differentially influence rural and urban labor
markets, using both auto-distributed lag (ADL) models and vector error correction models
(VECM). These results are reported in section V.


           IV. ESTIMATING THE NET POVERTY IMPACTS OF INCREASES IN FOOD PRICES


This section presents some core results on the associations between changes in poverty headcounts
and changes in real food prices, followed by a description of their robustness to different
methodological variations.

                                                                                                    8 
 
                                                               Core Results
Table 2 reports regressions of changes in the $1.25/day and $2/day poverty headcounts against
percentage changes in food prices using OLS and the IV GMM. For both regressors the standard
errors are clustered at the country level, and, though not reported, both models include time
dummies to control for generic international economic trends.
    The most striking feature of regressions 1 through 4 in table 2 is that all the coefficients are
negative and significant at the 5% level or higher, implying that increases in real food prices tend
to reduce poverty rates at both the $1.25/day and $2/day poverty lines. The magnitude of the
estimated coefficients is similar across the two poverty lines but very different across estimators.
Specifically, the IV GMM estimates are several times larger than the robust regression estimates,
suggesting that the OLS estimates might be biased upwards, perhaps because increases in domestic
food prices are often driven by negative domestic shocks such as droughts or broader economic
crises.8
    Even so, the IV GMM point estimates also need to be interpreted cautiously. While the
exclusion assumption is supported by the hypothesis tests in the bottom of table 2, the Kleibergen-
Paap rk Wald F statistic suggests that our instrument (international food prices) is relatively weak,
which is to be expected since international price transmission into domestic markets is quite
variable and since the basket of nine international prices is not always relevant to domestic
consumption and production patterns.9 Consistent with a weak instrument problem, the standard
errors on the IV GMM coefficient estimates are relatively large. This suggests we should be
cautious in attaching too much importance to an economic interpretation of the magnitudes of
these coefficients. Bearing that caveat in mind, the six percent food price increase in the median
country from 2005 to 2008 would predict a 1.76 percentage point decline in $1.25 poverty in the
average country based on the least squares regression result and a 4.9 point decline based on the
IV GMM result.




                                                            
    8. OLS estimates reported in appendix S2 are also significant and negative but somewhat smaller than the robust
regression estimates.
    9. In appendix table S2.4, we explore whether the instrument is stronger in a sample of more recent poverty
observations in which there was more variability in international food prices, restricting the sample to 200.

                                                                                                                 9 
 
Table 2. Estimating the effect of percentage changes in domestic food prices on changes in the
$1.25/day and $2/day poverty headcounts in robust and IV GMM models
    Regression Number                                          1                   2                   3                   4

    Poverty line for headcount measure                      $1.25/day           $1.25/day            $2/day             $2/day

    Estimator                                                 OLS               IV GMM                OLS               IV GMM



    Change in log of domestic food prices                   -19.27**            -81.67**            -17.65***           -71.87**

                                                             (9.24)              (40.10)             (7.48)             (36.09)



    N                                                         302                 300                 313                 310

                                                                                                                     

    Tests                                                                                                                           

    Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic                                          12.20                                   13.68

    Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                                               0.01                                    0.01

    Stock-Wright LM statistic                                                     0.04                                    0.04

Source: Author’s estimates from World Bank (2013) poverty data and ILO (2013) food price data.

Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
Standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. For the IV GMM, errors are clustered at the country
level and the excluded instrument is the change in international prices (see section III for details). All regressions control for time
dummies. The null hypothesis of the Hausman tests is that the variable under consideration can be treated as exogenous. The
Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic measures weak instruments, with critical values varying between 5.53 and 16.38, suggesting
that the regressions above may suffer from a weak instrument problem. The null hypothesis of the Kleibergen-Paap rk LM
statistic is that the equation is underidentified. The null hypothesis of the Stock-Wright LM test has the null hypothesis that the
coefficient on the change in real food prices is equal to zero and overidentifying restrictions are valid.




                                                       Robustness Tests
Qualitatively, the results reported in table 2 are largely quite robust to important variations in data
and methods, which are reported in appendix S2. Table S2.1 reports the specifications from table
2 after using a robust regressor instead of ordinary least squares. The robust regressor yields
slightly larger and more precise coefficients relative to OLS, suggesting that the latter are
somewhat influenced by outliers. Tables S2.2 and S2.3 report Arellano-Bond dynamic GMM
regression models with lagged poverty rates as an additional dependent variable. The dynamic
GMM results are closer to the OLS results than to the IV GMM. Table S2.4 restricts the sample to
observations in which the last survey year used is 2002 onwards to examine whether the results
are robust to the more recent period of international price variability. The results in table S2.4
suggest that they are. Table S2.5 looks at sample restrictions in which we exclude each major

                                                                                                                                       10 
 
region one at a time. Though these are weak tests of parameter heterogeneity across regions, there
is some suggestion that higher food prices are more beneficial in Latin America and sub-Saharan
Africa. Table S2.6 imposes increasingly tight restrictions on the permitted gap between successive
surveys, moving from one-year to five-year intervals (as in table 2) to 1–4 year, 1–3 year and 1–2
year intervals. We do indeed see some evidence that the coefficients reduce in size over these
shorter intervals, although it is unclear as to whether these weaker effects in the 1–2 year sample
stem from dynamic processes or changes in sample composition, given that very few low income
countries conduct household survey at high frequency (i.e., 1–2 year gaps).10 Finally, tables S2.7
and S2.8 add various additional control variables to the least squares and IV-GMM models
respectively, namely, changes in the total CPI, a country’s terms of trade, money supply, foreign
investment, trade ratio, and non-agricultural GDP. The core results remain highly robust in the
presence of such controls, though the IV-GMM results are sensitive to the addition of non-
agricultural growth rates to the model (though the coefficient remains relatively large). In general,
then, the results in table 2 are quite robust to different samples, different estimators and different
specifications.


                                     V. SUPPLY AND WAGE RESPONSES TO HIGHER FOOD PRICES
In this section, we explore two important mechanisms that may explain why changes in food prices
seem to be negatively associated with changes in the poverty: agricultural supply responses to
higher prices and wage responses stemming from increased demand for labor in the agricultural
sector. Different literatures have argued that there is substantial evidence that poverty reduction is
linked to both stronger agricultural growth (Christiaensen, Demery, and Kühl 2011) and higher
unskilled wages (Deaton and Dreze 2002). Hence, econometric evidence of a systematic effect on
production and wages would go a long way to explaining the effects observed in the previous
section.
                                          Agricultural Supply Responses to Higher Food Prices
Figure 2 shows annual changes in the international food price index and annual changes in net
agricultural production in less developed countries from 1991 to 2012 (note that the two series are
measured on different axes and hence different scales). Strikingly, even this highly aggregated
production series demonstrates some signs of supply response in developing countries, especially
from 2003 onwards when international prices first started to trend upwards. In 2008, the aggregate
supply response was weak, but the price crash in late 2008 and early 2009 coincided with slower
growth in production followed by a strong rebound in 2010–11 as prices again increased.11 Figure
S3.1 in appendix S3 shows analogous graphs for major developing regions and some of the larger
countries. Most strikingly, production in South America and India has moved very closely with
international prices in the past decade. In contrast, strong production growth in China and
Southeast Asia preceded international price increases, and, therefore, seems less likely to be a

                                                            
     10. In the full one- to five-year sample, low income countries comprise 17.5% of the sample, but, in the one- to
two-year sample, they comprise just 8.6%. 
     11. A caveat here is that the timing of production in the FAO series is actually somewhat heterogeneous across
countries and does not necessarily follow the conventional calendar. It may be that production responds to higher food
prices with some lag.

                                                                                                                   11 
 
specific response to rising international prices.12 Africa looks like an intermediate case with some
positive trends prior to 2007–2008 and a further acceleration in the wake of international price
increases. In Nigeria, Africa’s largest country, agricultural production seems very closely
connected to international price movements.


Figure 2. Annual changes in international food prices and agricultural production in less
developed countries (LDCs)




       Source: Author’s estimates from FAOSTAT (2013) data.


Table 3 more formally tests supply response in the POVCAL sample by regressing changes in
various aggregated agricultural production indicators against exogenous changes in real domestic
food prices using the IV GMM model.13 Regressions 1 to 3 respectively estimate the response
elasticities for total agricultural production, total food production and total crop production. The
point estimates of these elasticities are all significant at the 1% level and progressively increase
from 1.76 to 2.48 to 2.96, respectively. In regressions 4, 5, and 6, we explore the extent to which
this growth comes from the extensive margin or the intensive margin, though we note that any

                                                            
     12. Many Asian countries use price supports for agriculture, of course, and very actively insulate rice markets in
particular, so low price transmission is a likely explanation for weaker linkages in Asia (Dawe 2008).
     13. The workhouse supply response model derived by Nerlove (1958) depicts supply responding to expected price
changes, which are a function of lagged price changes. In these very aggregated data in which different seasons are
aggregated into calendar years, it isn’t immediately obvious whether lags should be included or not, but in practice
lagging one year makes no material difference to the results (available on request), so we model supply responses to
approximately contemporaneous price changes. Note also that appendix S3 reports least squares results linking
domestic prices to changes in agricultural production. These estimates tend to be insignificantly different from zero,
but unsurprisingly so since changes in agricultural production can obviously affect food prices rather than vice versa.

                                                                                                                    12 
 
systematic errors in estimating land area could bias all of these results. Regression 4 estimates an
elasticity of crop production per hectare of 0.95, though this estimate is highly insignificant. The
elasticity of crop area harvested is 1.90 and statistically significant, however, which perhaps that
the extensive margin is important for generating supply response. However, in regression 6 we
also find a large and highly significant coefficient on cereal yields (2.41), suggesting that cereals
production, at least, might respond on the intensive, as well as extensive, margin.
    Clearly, all the supply response elasticities in table 3 are highly significant, but how large are
they in economic magnitudes? From 2005 to 2008 the domestic food price index rose by six
percent, which would predict a 10.6 percent increase in agricultural output based on the coefficient
of 1.76 reported in regression 1 of table 3. This in itself is a sizeable effect, but higher prices will
also have a direct effect on farm revenue in addition to any supply response. Assuming that farmers
receive the full six percent increase in real food prices, the total effect on farm revenue in this
example would be an increase of about 17 percent. While the data do not permit us to estimate
potential increases in input costs (and hence farm profits or net farm income), it nevertheless seems
likely that higher output prices are associated with higher farm incomes, which the literature tells
us should, in turn, produce quite strong poverty reduction effects (Christiaensen, Demery, and
Kühl 2011).14
    In appendix table S3.1, we report a series of robustness tests of the crop production response
to higher food prices by again imposing sample restrictions. As was the case with the poverty
results, we again find suggestive evidence that supply responses are stronger in Latin America and
sub-Saharan Africa and weaker in Asian countries. This result seems consistent with differences
in land endowments across regions. Indeed, we find weaker supply responses in a sample that
excludes more land abundant countries. Consistent with the poverty evidence and with the
aggregate supply response observed in figure 2, we find substantially stronger supply responses in
a more recent sample of poverty observations (2003 to 2011), during which time there was more
variability in international prices. Finally, we find evidence that this supply response exists even
in the relatively short run; restricting the sample to poverty differences 1–3 years in duration leaves
the point estimate materially unchanged.




                                                            
     14. One possibility to consider is that public policies partially explain this strong supply response. In response to
higher food prices, governments might increase subsidies (decrease taxes) to agriculture. There is some evidence of
this, such as a number of governments resorting to larger input subsidies. A paucity of data on these parameters
prevents us from exploring this issue further, however.

                                                                                                                       13 
 
Table 3. Instrumental variable (IV GMM) regressions of the agricultural supply response to
changes in instrumented domestic food prices changes
    Regression number                                     1                          2                            3
    Dependent variable                               Agricultural                   Food                         Crop
    (growth rates)                                   production                  production                   production
    Estimator                                         IV GMM                      IV GMM                       IV GMM

    Change in log of domestic food prices               1.76**                     2.48**                       2.86***
                                                        (0.76)                     (0.97)                        (1.11)

    N                                                    300                         300                          300
    Tests
    Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic                 12.20                       12.20                        12.20
    Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                      0.01                       0.01                         0.01
    Stock-Wright LM statistic                            0.00                       0.01                         0.21

    Regression number                                    4                            5                            6
    Dependent variable                            Crop production                 Crop area                      Cereal
    (growth rates)                                  per hectare                   harvested                      yields
    Estimator                                         IV GMM                      IV GMM                       IV GMM

    Change in log of domestic food prices                0.95                      1.90**                        2.41**
                                                        (0.84)                     (0.87)                        (1.19)

    N                                                    300                         300                          300
    Tests
    Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic                 12.20                       12.20                        10.82
    Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                      0.01                       0.01                         0.01
    Stock-Wright LM statistic                            0.02                       0.01                         0.09
Source: Author’s estimates from World Bank (2013) poverty data and ILO (2013) food price data.

     Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
Standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. The excluded instrument is the change in international
prices (see section III for details). All regressions control for time dummies. The Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic measures
weak instruments, with critical values varying between 5.53 and 16.38, suggesting that the regressions above may suffer from a
weak instrument problem. The null hypothesis of the Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic is that the equation is underidentified. The
null hypothesis of the Stock-Wright LM test has the null hypothesis that the coefficient on the change in real food prices is equal
to zero and overidentifying restrictions are valid.




                                                                                                                                 14 
 
                                                        Wage Responses to Higher Food Prices
In principle, the indicator of agricultural GDP used in table 3 includes farm wage incomes as part
of value added. However, higher food prices might also result in increases in non-farm wages. Yet,
as we noted in section II, only a small empirical literature has focused on these issues. Rarely has
this literature used sufficiently high frequency data to accurately inform the question of how long
it takes for wages to react to food price increases, and only one paper has examined the responses
of urban wages to higher food prices (Headey et al. 2011). We therefore revisit short-run
adjustment issues using high frequency data on rural and urban wage indices for Bangladesh from
2001 to 2011.15 Although the data are monthly, the noise in the data prompts us to aggregate the
data into quarters, which also more closely approximates Bangladesh’s different agricultural
seasons (aman, aus, boro). Our expectation was that labor demand and supply may be less likely
to respond in the current season but may respond more substantially in subsequent seasons as
planting decisions constitute an important behavioral response to higher food prices.
     Figure 3 shows trends in these nominal rural and urban wage indices along with the nominal
producer price of rice, which is easily the most important crop in Bangladesh. Nominal rice prices
roughly doubled from July 2006 to July 2008 in close accordance with international prices.
Nominal rural and urban wages also increased, but rural wages increased much faster than urban
wages. Indeed, from July 2006 to January 2011, the ratio of rural to urban wages increased rapidly
from 59 percent to 82 percent. This suggests two important conclusions. First, rural and urban
wages (and hence labor markets) may not be very closely integrated in the short term. Second, it
is plausible that higher food prices were the leading factor behind the declining rural-urban wage
gap, though there are other possible explanations such as accelerated out-migration from rural
areas (Zhang et al. 2013).




                                                            
     15. The rural wage index places most of its weight on the agricultural wage series for Bangladesh while the urban
series includes wages for construction, masons, carpenters, plumbers, painters, electricians, and brick-breaking.

                                                                                                                   15 
 
Figure 3. Rice prices and rural and urban wages in Bangladesh, 2001-2011




       Source: Author’s estimates from Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS 2014).




    To explore the relationship between food prices and wages more rigorously, we first conducted
a graphical analysis of growth rates in wages and rice prices before deriving wage-food price
elasticities in a vector error correction model (VECM). Both the graphical analysis in figure 4 and
the VECM reveal a statistically significant short-run elasticity between wages and the one quarter
lag of rice prices of 0.14 and a long-run elasticity of 1.11. For urban wages, we also find evidence
of long-run cointegration (an elasticity of 0.78), but a short-run elasticity that is highly insignificant
and close to zero (-0.02). The short-run results for rural and urban wages are also robust to various
robustness tests,16 though the OLS auto distributed lag (ADL) model with a second lag of rice
price changes also yields a significant coefficient of 0.08 and an elasticity on the first lag of rice
prices of 0.11. This suggests that a 100 percent increase in rice prices would increase wages by
almost 20 percent over two-quarters.




                                                            
     16. If we run a VECM with food prices and both rural and urban wages, we derive the same rural wage-rice price
elasticity of 0.14 and again derive an insignificant urban wage-food price elasticity. An OLS regression of growth
rates of rural wages against lagged growth rates in rice prices and wages (with a time trend) also yields an almost
identical short-run rural wage-food price elasticity (0.13) and insignificant elasticities for urban wages.

                                                                                                                16 
 
Figure 4. Quarterly changes in rural wages and lagged changes in rice prices (%), Bangladesh
2001-2011
 




                                                                                     
    Source: Author’s estimates from Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS 2014).




                                                                                               17 
 
Table 4. VECM estimates for rural and urban wage models
    Regression Number                                          1                         2
    Wage series included                                       Rural wages               Urban wages
    Number of observations                                     37                        37
    R-squared: wage regression                                 0.58                      0.45
    R-squared: rice price regression                           0.51                      0.48

    Short run coefficients:
    Wage regression
    Cointegration term, lag 1                                  -0.005 (0.035)            -0.04 (0.04)
    Rural wages, lag 1                                         0.15 (0.159)              0.10 (0.17)
    Rice prices, lag 1                                         0.14** (0.058)            -0.02 (0.05)

    Rice price regression
    Cointegration term, lag 1                                  0.33*** (0.035)           0.38 (0.11)
    Rural wages, lag 1                                         0.15 (0.159)              -0.31 (0.54)
    Rice prices, lag 1                                         0.135 (0.058)             0.63*** (0.114)

    Cointegrating relationship
    Wages                                                      1                         1
    Rice prices                                                -1.11*** (0.13)           -0.78***
    Constant                                                   -1.56                     -2.92
Source: Author’s estimates from Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS 2014).

Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.



    These results should be interpreted with some caution—certainly they are still relatively
imprecise and almost certainly lack broader external validity—but they have several important
implications. First, the conclusion that the long-run rural wage-rice price elasticity is
approximately equal to unity is similar to the conclusions of Jacoby (2013) for India, Lasco et al.
(2008) for Bangladesh, and Ivanic and Martin (2014) for a broader range of countries. Second, the
short-run food price elasticity is quite low (0.14 to 0.19), though our use of higher frequency data
reveals that the response is relatively quick: wages start to change in the next quarter. Third,
consistent with Headey et al.’s (2011) results for Ethiopia, urban wages might adjust to higher
food prices quite strongly in the long run but they show no substantial adjustment in the short run.
This further suggests that rural and urban labor markets may be quite weakly integrated, perhaps
because of low levels of short-term mobility between rural and urban areas.17 In summary, wage
adjustments seem to provide some compensation for rural laborers—and relatively quickly at
that—but it would appear that agricultural supply responses are likely to be the main explanation
of the poverty-reducing effects of higher food prices.




                                                            
   17. This is in contrast to the assumption in Ivanic and Martin’s (2014) model, in which rural and urban labor
markets are perfectly integrated.

                                                                                                                                    18 
 
                                         VI. CONCLUSIONS
When international food prices first rose sharply in 2007 and 2008 there was understandable
concern that higher prices constituted a grave risk for the world’s poor. While there was much
debate about the true extent of these risks, extensive evidence on the relationship between food
prices and poverty is only now emerging (Ivanic and Martin 2014; Jacoby 2016). Consistent with
recent simulation exercises for subsets of developing countries, this paper finds that increases in
international food prices typically predict reductions in national poverty rates in a large sample of
developing countries over periods of one to five years.
     This core result is subject to two important caveats. First, the magnitudes of these associations
are much larger in IV-GMM regressions than in OLS and dynamic panel GMM regressions, but
the IV-GMM regressions potentially suffer from a weak instruments problem and certainly suffer
from imprecision. Second, in section III we noted that the POVCAL data utilize CPIs to deflate
their income and expenditure series, and it is quite possible that these CPIs series understate true
increases in the cost of living for the poor during food price increases. While the World Bank has
taken some steps to address this problem, these potential biases warrant further investigation.
     Bearing these caveats in mind, a negative relationship between changes in food prices and
changes in poverty could stem from three factors. First, the most recent estimates suggest that
around three-quarters of the world’s poor are still rural (Ravallion et al. 2007) and are therefore
either directly dependent on farm income or on non-farm incomes that are likely to be strongly
influenced by agricultural production decisions, particularly the demand for labor. Second, we
find that higher food prices appear to have produced a positive, large, and relatively quick
agricultural supply response in developing countries. Third, there are some indications from
Bangladeshi data that wage increases provide compensation for rural wage earners relatively
quickly, though there is no evidence that urban workers benefit from any wage response except
perhaps in the long run.
     These findings potentially point to some important implications. Most importantly, they
suggest that international food price movements might be important drivers of national and global
poverty trends as well as rural-urban inequality within countries. The data at hand should not be
used to draw conclusions on the contributions of higher food prices to global poverty trends, but
it is notable that poverty reduction over 2005-2012—a period of relatively high international food
prices—was relatively rapid in the developing world. More recently (2013 to early 2016), food
prices have plummeted. Time will tell, but the evidence in this paper suggests that declining food
prices could have adverse implications for many of the world’s poor by suppressing their most
important sources of income: agricultural production and rural wages.



                                            REFERENCES

Arellano, M., and S. Bond. 1991. “Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo
   evidence and an application to employment situations.” Review of Economics and Statistics
   58: 277–97.
BBS. 2014. Agricultural Price Series. Dhaka: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics.
Beegle, K., J. De Weerdt, J. Friedman, and J. Gibson. 2012. “Methods of household consumption
   measurement through surveys: Experimental results from Tanzania.” Journal of Development
   Economics 98: 3–18.
                                                                                                   19 
 
Beegle, K., L. Christiaensen, A.L. Dabalen, and I. Gaddis. 2016. Poverty in a Rising Africa.:
   Washington DC: World Bank.
Boyce, J.K., and M. Ravallion. 1991. “A Dynamic Econometric Model of Agricultural Wage
   Determination in Bangladesh.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 53: 361–76.
Carletto, C. 2012. “Presumed poorer until proven net-seller: measuring who wins and who loses
   from high food prices.” Development Impact [Online]. [Accessed 09/19/2012.]
Christiaensen, L., L. Demery, and J. Kühl. 2011. “The Role of Agriculture in Poverty Reduction:
   An Empirical Perspective.” Journal of Development Economics 96: 239–54.
Compton, J., S. Wiggins, and S. Keats. 2011. “Impact of the global food crisis on the poor: what
   is the evidence?” Report for DFID. London: Overseas Development Institute (ODI).
Cororaton, C.B., and G.R. Timilsina. 2012. “Impacts of large-scale expansion of biofuels on
   global poverty and income distribution.” Policy Research Working Paper Series No. 91279.
   Washington DC: World Bank.
Dawe, D. 2008. “Have Recent Increases in International Cereal Prices Been Transmitted to
   Domestic Economies? The experience in seven large Asian countries.” ESA Working Paper
   No. 08–03. Agricultural Development Economics Division, Food and Agriculture
   Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
Deininger, K., C. Carletto, S. Savastano, J. Muwonge. 2012. “Can diaries help in improving
   agricultural production statistics? Evidence from Uganda.” Journal of Development
   Economics 98: 42–50.
De Hoyos, R., and D. Medvedev. 2009. “Poverty Effects of Higher Food Prices: A Global
   Perspective.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 4887. Washington DC: World Bank.
De Janvry, A., and E. Sadoulet. 2010. “Agricultural Growth and Poverty Reduction: Additional
   Evidence.” The World Bank Research Observer 25 (1): 1–20.
Deaton, A. 1989. “Rice prices and income distribution in Thailand: a non-parametric analysis.”
   Economic Journal 99: 1–37.
———. 2006. “Global Patterns of Income and Health: Facts, Interpretations, and Policies.” NBER
   Working Paper No.12735. Cambridge, MA.
Deaton, A., and J. Dreze 2002. “Poverty and Inequality in India: A Re-Examination.” Economic
   and Political Weekly, September 7, 3729–48.
Easterly, W., and S. Fischer. 2000. Inflation and the poor. The World Bank.
   FAO, 2013. AGROSTAT. Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome.
Headey, D. 2011. “Rethinking the global food crisis: The role of trade shocks.” Food Policy 36:
   136–46.
Headey, D., and S. Fan. 2008. “Anatomy of a crisis: the causes and consequences of surging
   food prices.” Agricultural Economics 39: 375–91.
———. 2010. “Reflections on the global food crisis: How did it happen? How has it hurt? And
   how can we prevent the next one?” International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI),
   Washington DC.
Headey, D., F. Nisrane, I. Worku, M. Dessa, and A. Seyoum Taffesse. 2012. “Urban Wage
   Behavior During Food Price Hikes: The Case of Ethiopia.” ESSP-II Working Paper No. 41.
   Ethiopia Strategy Support Program II (ESSP-II), International Food Policy Research Institute
   (IFPRI), Ethiopia.
Hertel, T., R. Keeney, M. Ivanic, and L.A. Winters. 2007. ”Distributional effects of WTO
   agricultural reforms in rich and poor countries.” Economic Policy 22: 289–337.
ILO, 2013. LABORSTA Internet. International Labour Organization (ILO), Geneva.

                                                                                              20 
 
Ivanic, M., and W. Martin. 2014. “Short- and long-run impacts of food price changes on
   poverty.” Policy Research Working Paper 7011. Washington DC: World Bank:.
———. 2008. “Implications of Higher Global Food Prices for Poverty in Low-Income Countries.”
   Agricultural Economics 39 (s1), 405–16.
Ivanic, M., W. Martin, and H. Zaman. 2011. “Estimating the Short-Run Poverty Impacts of the
   2010–11 Surge in Food Prices.” Policy Research Working Paper 5633, World Bank.
Jacoby, H.G. 2016. “Food prices, wages and welfare in rural India.” Economic Inquiry 54: 159–
   76.
Lasco, C., R.J. Myers, and R.H. Bersten. 2008. “Dynamics of rice prices and agricultural wages
   in the Philippines.” Agricultural Economics 38: 339–48.
Loayza, N.V., and C. Raddatz. 2010. “The composition of growth matters for poverty
   alleviation.” Journal of Development Economics 93: 137–51.
Nerlove, M. 1958. The dynamics of supply: estimation of farmers’ response to price. Baltimore,
   MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Palmer‐Jones, R.W. 1993. “Agricultural wages in Bangladesh: What the figures really show?”
   The Journal of Development Studies 29: 277–300.
Rashid, S. 2002. Dynamics of agricultural wage and rice price in Bangladesh. MSSD Discussion
   Paper No. 44. International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington DC.
   <http://ideas.repec.org/p/fpr/mssddp/44.html>
Ravallion, M. 1990. “Rural welfare effects of food price changes under induced wage responses:
   theory and evidence for Bangladesh.” Oxford Economics Papers 42: 574–85.
Ravallion, M., S. Chen, and P. Sangraula. 2007. “New Evidence on the Urbanization of Global
   Poverty.” World Bank Working Paper No. WPS4199. Washington DC: World Bank.
Ravallion, M., and G. Datt. 2002. “Why has economic growth been more pro-poor in some states
   of India than others?” Journal of Development Economics 68: 381–400.
Sah, R.K., and J.E. Stiglitz. 1984. “The Economics of Price Scissors.” Working Paper No. 1156.
   Cambridge, MA. <http://ideas.repec.org/p/nbr/nberwo/1156.html>
Swinnen, J. 2011. “The Right Price of Food.” Development Policy Review 29: 667–88.
The Economist. 2012. “Global poverty: A fall to cheer.” The Economist.
Van Campenhout, B., K. Pauw, and N. Minot. 2013. “The impact of food prices shocks in
   Uganda: First-order versus long-run effects.” IFPRI Discussion Paper 1284, The
   International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington DC.
Verpoorten, M., M. Arora, and J. Swinnon. 2011. “Self-Reported Food Security in Africa During
   the Food Crisis.” LICOS Working Paper, LICOS Centre for Institutions and Economic
   Performance and Department of Economics, University of Leuven (KUL).
World Bank, 2013a. PovCalNet. Washington DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2013b. World Development Indicators Online. Washington DC: World Bank.
Zhang, X., S. Rashid, K. Ahmad, V. Mueller, H.L. Lee, S. Lemma, S. Belal, and A.U. Ahmed.
   2013. Rising wages in Bangladesh. International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI),
   Washington DC.




                                                                                           21 
 
Supplementary Appendix (for online publication only)

Contents
Appendix S1. Alternative price indices ...................................................................................................  23 
    Table S1.1 Correlations between different domestic and international price indices .................... 24 
Appendix S2. Robustness tests for the poverty-food price regressions ................................................ 25 
    Table S2.1 Re-estimating the core results with the robust regressor ............................................... 25 
    Table S2.2 Arellano-Bond dynamic GMM regressions of the $1.25/day poverty headcount against
    food prices under different survey gaps ..............................................................................................  26 
    Table S2.3 Arellano-Bond dynamic GMM regressions of the $2/day poverty headcount against
    food prices under different survey gaps ..............................................................................................  27 
    Table S2.4 $1.25/day and $2/day OLS and IV GMM results after restricting the sample to more
    recent poverty observations (ending in 2003 or later) .......................................................................  28 
    Table S2.5 OLS and IV-GMM regression results for the $1.25/day poverty headcount after
    removing one major region at a time ..................................................................................................  29 
    Table S2.6 Estimating the effects of percentage changes in domestic food prices on changes in the
    $1.25/day poverty headcount for different gaps between successive poverty observations ........... 30 
    Table S2.7 Adding control variables to the least squares regression model for $1.25/day poverty
    headcounts ............................................................................................................................................. 31 
    Table S2.8 Adding control variables to the IV-GMM model for changes in $1.25/day poverty
    headcounts ............................................................................................................................................. 32 
Appendix S3. Additional results on supply and wage responses .......................................................... 33 
    Figure S3.1 International prices and production indices in major countries and regions, 2000-
    2012 ........................................................................................................................................................ 33 
    Table S3.1 Testing the sensitivity of growth in crop production to international prices under
    various sample restrictions (IV GMM) ...............................................................................................  34 
    Table S3.2 Least squares regressions of the agricultural supply response to changes in domestic
    food prices changes ...............................................................................................................................  35 
Appendix S4. Time series estimates of wage responses to rice price increases in Bangladesh .......... 36 
                                                                                ............................ 36 
    Table S4.1 Dickey-Fuller test for unit roots (McKinnon approximate p-values) 
    Table S4.2 OLS auto distributed lag (ADL) estimates for changes in rural and urban wages as a
                                      .........................................................................................................  36 
    function of changes in rice prices 
Appendix S5. Characteristics of the POVCAL sample .........................................................................  38 
    Table S5.1 List of poverty changes from the World Bank (2013) used in the statistical analysis . 38 
    Figure S5.1 Histogram of the duration of gaps between POVCAL surveys .................................... 45 
 



                                                                                                                                                                22 
 
Appendix S1. Alternative price indices
Food prices can be measured in different ways. The analysis in this paper uses the consumer food price
index relative to the total price index to measure changes in real food prices. Alternative aggregated price
indices include the FAO producer price index for all agricultural commodities or all cereals, or the
agricultural GDP deflator. All three indices uses production data to weight the indices, and all are deflated
using the total GDP deflator to capture real price changes. All are also available for a reasonably large
array of countries, although the FAO producer price indices are only available after 1990, and are not
available for all countries. These series are also widely regarded as being prone to substantial
measurement error, and the same is likely true of the agricultural GDP deflator, since national accounting
systems are quite poor in many African countries in particular. Finally, international price indices were
also available to us. We constructed country-specific indices of international prices based on weighting
prices for nine food staples by domestic consumption patterns, as measured by the share of calories
obtained from each of these food items. Since international prices are exogenous, we use this price series
as an instrument in most of our regressions.

Table A1 shows a correlation matrix of these various price indices, all measured in real terms using either
the total CPI or the total GDP deflator to convert the nominal indices into real price indices. Strikingly,
the correlation between the domestic price indicators is often quite weak. The correlation between the real
consumer food price index and the agricultural GDP deflator is moderately strong (0.47), but the FAO
agricultural and cereal price indices are quite weakly correlated with both consumer prices and the
agricultural GDP deflator, suggesting these FAO series may include substantial measurement error.
Perhaps most pertinent – at least in terms of our instrumentation strategy – is that it is the consumer food
price index which shares the strongest correlation with the two international prices indices (0.31-0.34).
This suggests that consumer food price indices are quite sensitive to international prices relative to the
other indices.




                                                                                                          23 
 
Table S1.1 Correlations between different domestic and international price indices
                                     Consumer        Producer            Producer cereal   Agricultural   International   International
                                     food price      agricultural        price             GDP deflator   food price      grain price
                                     index           price index         index                            index           index
    Consumer food price index        1.00

    Producer agricultural price      0.08            1.00
    index
    Producer cereal price index      0.08            0.69                1.00

    Agricultural GDP deflator        0.47            0.27                0.25              1.00

    International food price index   0.32            0.23                0.16              0.28           1.00

 International grain price      0.35              0.24                  0.21               0.28           0.77            1.00
 index
Source: Authors’ estimated from various sources, described in the text.

Notes: All indices are measured in real terms, relative to general prices.




                                                                                                                                          24 
 
Appendix S2. Robustness tests for the poverty-food price regressions


Table S2.1 Re-estimating the core results with the robust regressor
    Regression Number                               2                  4
    Estimator                                       Robust             Robust
                                                    $1.25/day          $2/day
                                                    poverty            poverty

    Change in log of domestic food prices           -29.34***          -21.69***
                                                    (6.02)             (6.56)


    R-squared                                       0.12               0.07
    N                                               302                313
Source: Author’s estimates.
Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
Regressions are estimated using the rreg command in STATA.




                                                                                                                                   25 
 
Table S2.2 Arellano-Bond dynamic GMM regressions of the $1.25/day poverty headcount against
food prices under different survey gaps
    Regression Number                               1                          2                          3

    Length of gap between surveys                   1-5 years                  1-4 years                  1-3 years

    Change in log of domestic food prices           -18.77**                   -25.04***                  -24.21***
                                                    (7.69)                     (8.08)                     (6.93)

    Initial poverty level (%)                       0.72***                    0.66***                    0.52***
                                                    (0.06)                     (0.09)                     (0.10)

    Times dummies included?                         Yes                        Yes                        Yes

    Tests
    Arellano-Bond autocorrelation p-value           0.21                       0.18                       0.06
    Sargan over-identification p-value              0.99                       0.99                       0.90
    No. of observations                             308                        278                        253
    No. of countries                                60                         48                         46
    No. of instruments                              97                         97                         97
Source: Author’s estimates.
Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. Time dummies are included in all regressions. *, ** and *** indicate significance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The null hypothesis of the
overidentification test is that the instruments are uncorrelated with the error term. Arellano-Bond autocorrelation test is for the
second lag of the first differenced error.




                                                                                                                                26 
 
Table S2.3 Arellano-Bond dynamic GMM regressions of the $2/day poverty headcount against food
prices under different survey gaps
    Regression Number                                 1                         2                         3

    Length of gap between surveys                     1-5 years                 1-4 years                 1-3 years

    Change in log of domestic food prices             -23.06**                  -29.79***                 -30.65***
                                                      (9.60)                    (10.9)                    (11.77)

    Initial poverty level (%)                         0.78***                   0.70***                   0.60***
                                                      (0.06)                    (0.08)                    (0.09)

    Times dummies included?                           Yes                       Yes                       Yes

    Tests
    Arellano-Bond autocorrelation p-value             0.13                      0.15                      0.10
    Sargan over-identification p-value                0.97                      0.96                      0.65
    No. of observations                               319                       288                       262
    No. of countries                                  70                        57                        54
    No. of instruments                                97                        97                        97
Source: Author’s estimates.
Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. Time dummies are included in all regressions. *, ** and *** indicate significance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The null hypothesis of the
overidentification test is that the instruments are uncorrelated with the error term. Arellano-Bond autocorrelation test is for the
second lag of the first differenced error.




                                                                                                                                27 
 
Table S2.4 $1.25/day and $2/day OLS and IV GMM results after restricting the sample to more
recent poverty observations (ending in 2003 or later)
    Regression Number                                    1                    2                    3                   4
    Poverty line for headcount measure               $1.25/day            $1.25/day             $2/day              $2/day
    Estimator                                          OLS                IV GMM                 OLS               IV GMM


    Change in log of domestic food prices              -22.12              -89.13**             -13.72              -60.18**
                                                       (13.56)              (37.39)             (9.67)               (26.87)
                                                
    N                                                    145                 144                  153                  151
                                                
    Tests
    Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic                                     17.81                                     19.5
    Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic                                         0.01                                      0.02
    Stock-Wright LM statistic                                               0.03                                      0.04
Source: Author’s estimates.

Notes: The sample consists of observations in which the last poverty observation is in 2003 or thereafter. See text for definitions
of the variables. *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. Standard errors clustered at the
country level are reported in parentheses. For the IV GMM, errors are clustered at the country level and the excluded instrument
is the change in international prices (see Section 3 for details). All regressions control for time dummies. The null hypothesis of
the Hausman tests is that the variable under consideration can be treated as exogenous. The Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic
measures weak instruments, with critical values varying between 5.53 and 16.38, suggesting that the regressions above may
suffer from a weak instrument problem. The null hypothesis of the Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic is that the equation is
underidentified. The null hypothesis of the Stock-Wright LM test has the null hypothesis that the coefficient on the change in real
food prices is equal to zero and overidentifying restrictions are valid.




                                                                                                                                28 
 
Table S2.5 OLS and IV-GMM regression results for the $1.25/day poverty headcount after
removing one major region at a time
    Excluded region                                   Latin              Eastern                Asia            Sub-Saharan
                                                    America &           Europe &                                   Africa
                                                    Caribbean          Central Asia
    Estimator                                           OLS                 OLS                 OLS                  OLS

    Change in log of domestic food prices             -14.64*             -16.90*             -21.62**             -13.62*
                                                       (8.23)              (9.75)              (10.71)              (7.71)

    Estimator                                        IV-GMM              IV-GMM              IV-GMM               IV-GMM

    Change in log of domestic food prices              -41.92             -85.56*               -81.6              -59.08*
                                                      (48.26)             (46.74)              (53.65)             (34.32)

    N                                                   246                  266                 249                 250
Source: Author’s estimates.

Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively,
and # indicates marginal insignificance at the 10% level. Standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in
parentheses. All regressions control for time dummies. For the IV GMM, errors are clustered at the country level and the
excluded instrument is the change in international prices (see Section 3 for details). IV-GMM hypothesis tests are available upon
requests. In general, weak instruments remain a concern in all IV-GMM regressions.




                                                                                                                              29 
 
Table S2.6 Estimating the effects of percentage changes in domestic food prices on changes
in the $1.25/day poverty headcount for different gaps between successive poverty
observations
                                                                            Robust regression results
    Regression Number                                              1                   2                          3
    Gap between successive poverty observations                1-4 years           1-3 years                  1-2 years

    Change in log of domestic food prices                     -22.36***               -21.59***                 -10.85
                                                                (5.95)                  (6.45)                  (8.04)

    Number of observations                                        273                    248                     198
    Observations from low income countries (%)                  15.23%                 11.27%                   8.65%

                                                                                  IV-GMM results
    Regression Number                                              4                     5                        6
    Gap between successive poverty observations                1-4 years             1-3 years                1-2 years

    Change in log of domestic food prices                        -50.02                 -63.79                   6.70
                                                                (37.84)                (45.76)                 (40.20)

    Number of observations                                        273                    248                     198
    Observations from low income countries (%)                  15.23%                 11.27%                   8.65%
Source: Author’s estimates.

Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The robust regressor corresponds to the rreg command in STATATM. For the IV
GMM, errors are clustered at the country level. Specification tests for the IV-GMM results are omitted for the sake of brevity, but
are similar to those reported in Table 2, with weak instruments being a potential problem.

 




                                                                                                                                30 
 
Table S2.7 Adding control variables to the least squares regression model for $1.25/day poverty
headcounts
    Regression No.                               1                    2                       3                     4
    Control added (% change)                    None             Exchange rate          Terms of trade          Trade/GDP

    Change in domestic food prices            -19.27**              -19.92**                -19.58*               -18.01*
                                                (9.24)               (9.56)                 (10.86)                (9.52)

    Change in control variable                                        1.328                 -4.048                  -1.69
                                                                      (2.02)                (2.97)                 (3.22)

    N                                            300                   297                    251                   300

    Regression No.                               5                     6                      7                    8
    Controls added                            FDI/GDP               M2/GDP                Total CPI          Non-agricultural
                                                                                                                  GDP

    Change in domestic food prices           -23.15***               -18.08*               -19.54**               -17.63*
                                               (8.482)                (9.60)                (9.36)                 (9.69)

    Change in control variable                   -0.57               -6.05**                 0.87                -16.69***
                                                (0.82)                (2.51)                (1.03)                 (3.39)

    N                                            300                   284                    300                   236
Source: Author’s estimates.
Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. All right hand side variables are measured as percentage changes. *, ** and ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively, and # indicates marginal insignificance at the 10% level.
Standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. All regressions control for time dummies.




                                                                                                                                31 
 
Table S2.8 Adding control variables to the IV-GMM model for changes in $1.25/day poverty
headcounts
    Regression No.                               1                     2                      3                     4
    Control added (% change)                    None              Exchange rate         Terms of trade          Trade/GDP

    Change in domestic food prices            -81.67**               -83.91*               -84.48**               -96.98*
                                               (40.10)               (43.02)                (40.67)               (55.61)

    Change in control variable                                          2.2                   -2.95                 5.58
                                                                      (2.98)                 (3.20)                (6.08)

    N                                            300                   297                    251                   300

    Regression No.                               5                     6                      7                    8
    Controls added                            FDI/GDP               M2/GDP                Total CPI          Non-agricultural
                                                                                                                  GDP

    Change in domestic food prices            -82.57**               -74.84                -84.68**                -30.16
                                               (40.74)               (45.54)                (39.54)               (33.32)

    Change in control variable                   -1.00               -5.93**                  1.28               -16.46***
                                                (1.06)                (2.64)                 (1.18)                (3.60)

    N                                            298                   284                    300                   296
Source: Author’s estimates.
Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. All right hand side variables are measured as percentage changes. *, ** and ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively, and # indicates marginal insignificance at the 10% level.
Standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. All regressions control for time dummies. For the IV
GMM, errors are clustered at the country level and the excluded instrument is the change in international prices (see Section 3 for
details). IV-GMM hypothesis tests are available upon requests. In general, weak instruments remain a concern in all IV-GMM
regressions.




                                                                                                                                32 
 
Appendix S3. Additional results on supply and wage responses
Figure S3.1 International prices and production indices in major countries and regions, 2000-2012
    200                                                                                       110       120                                              200
                                sub‐Saharan Africa                                                                        Central Asia
                                                                                              105       110
    150                                                                                                                                                  150
                                                                                              100       100
    100                                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                                              95         90
     50                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                              90         80

      0                                                                                       85         70                                              0




                                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                              2001
                                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                              2003
                                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                              2005
                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                              2007
                                                                                                              2008
                                                                                                              2009
                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                              2011
                                                                                                              2012
          2000
                 2001
                        2002
                               2003
                                      2004
                                             2005
                                                    2006
                                                           2007
                                                                  2008
                                                                         2009
                                                                                2010
                                                                                       2011
                  Prices (right axis)                             Quantity (left axis)                        Quantity (left axis)       Prices (right axis)

    130                                                                                       200       130                                               200
                                  South America                                                                            South Asia
    120                                                                                                 120
                                                                                              150                                                         150
    110                                                                                                 110
                                                                                              100                                                         100
    100                                                                                                 100
                                                                                              50                                                          50
    90                                                                                                  90

    80                                                                                        0         80                                                0
          2000
          2001
          2002
          2003
          2004
          2005
          2006
          2007
          2008
          2009
          2010
          2011
          2012




                                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                              2001
                                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                              2003
                                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                              2005
                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                              2007
                                                                                                              2008
                                                                                                              2009
                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                              2011
                                                                                                              2012
                  Quantity (left axis)                              Prices (right axis)                       Quantity (left axis)       Prices (right axis)
    120                                                                                       200       120                                               200
                                 South‐East Asia                                                                            China
    110                                                                                       150       110                                               150
    100                                                                                                 100
                                                                                              100                                                         100
     90                                                                                                  90
     80                                                                                       50                                                          50
                                                                                                         80
     70                                                                                       0          70                                               0
          2000
          2001
          2002
          2003
          2004
          2005
          2006
          2007
          2008
                                                                   2009
                                                                   2010
                                                                   2011
                                                                   2012




                                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                              2001
                                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                              2003
                                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                              2005
                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                              2007
                                                                                                              2008
                                                                                                              2009
                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                              2011
                                                                                                              2012




                  Quantity (left axis)                              Prices (right axis)                       Quantity (left axis)       Prices (right axis)
                                                                                                     
    120                                                                                       200       150                                              200
                                       Nigeria                                                                                India
    110                                                                                                 130
                                                                                              150                                                        150
    100                                                                                                 110
                                                                                              100                                                        100
     90                                                                                                  90
                                                                                              50                                                         50
     80                                                                                                  70

     70                                                                                       0          50                                              0
          1999
          2000
          2001
          2002
          2003
          2004
          2005
          2006
          2007
          2008
          2009
          2010
          2011
          2012




                                                                                                              1999
                                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                              2001
                                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                              2003
                                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                              2005
                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                              2007
                                                                                                              2008
                                                                                                              2009
                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                              2011
                                                                                                              2012




                                 Production                          Prices                                             Production         Prices
                                                                                                     

                                                                                                                                                                33 
 
Table S3.1 Testing the sensitivity of growth in crop production to international prices under various sample restrictions (IV GMM)
    Regression Number                           1                2                 3                4                 5                6                 7                8
    Sample restrictions                       None           No Latin        No Eastern          No sub-            No              No land            No            No survey
                                                             America          Europe &           Saharan            Asia           abundant        observations     gaps longer
                                                                             Central Asia         Africa                           countriesa      before 2003      than 3 years

    Sample restrictions
    Change in domestic food prices          2.86***            2.25*            2.70**           1.44**            3.97**            2.16*           3.15***           2.63**
                                             (1.11)            (1.36)           (1.17)           (0.68)            (1.90)            (1.10)           (1.06)           (1.17)


    N                                          300              244               264              248               249              246               144              248
Source: Author’s estimates.
Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. a. Land abundant countries are defined as those where harvested area per agricultural capita exceeds 2 hectares, which corresponds
to the 90th percentile. *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively, and # indicates marginal insignificance at the 10% level. Standard errors
clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. For the IV GMM, errors are clustered at the country level and the excluded instrument is the change in international
prices (see Section 3 for details). All regressions control for time dummies. Hypothesis tests are not reported for the sake of brevity, but weak instruments are a problem in some
samples. Details available upon request.




                                                                                                                                                                                   34 
 
Table S3.2 Least squares regressions of the agricultural supply response to changes in
domestic food prices changes
    Regression number                                    1                          2                            3
    Dependent variable                              Agricultural                   Food                        Crop
    (growth rates)                                  production                  production                   production
    Change in log of domestic food prices                0.02                       0.06                         0.17
                                                        (0.08)                     (0.09)                       (0.11)

    N                                                    300                        302                           302

    Regression number                                   4                           5                             6
    Dependent variable                           Crop production                Crop area                       Cereal
    (growth rates)                                 per hectare                  harvested                       Yields
    Change in log of domestic food prices                0.03                      0.22**                        0.01
                                                        (0.12)                     (0.10)                       (0.14)

    N                                                    302                        302                           301
Source: Author’s estimates.
Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
Standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in parenthesis. All regressions control for time dummies.




                                                                                                                                   35 
 
Appendix S4. Time series estimates of wage responses to rice price increases in Bangladesh


Dickey-Fuller tests were first used to confirm that all of the series were I(0), as Figure C2 suggests. We
then tested for lag order selection and lag pre-selection for the VECM. The results favored one lag length,
although we also tested sensitivity to an additional lag. VECM results are reported in the main text and
OLS-ADL results are reported in Table D2.



Table S4.1 Dickey-Fuller test for unit roots (McKinnon approximate p-values)
                    Levels                First differences

    Rice prices, log        0.95              0.01***

    Rural wages, log        0.99              0.00***

    Urban wages, log        0.99              0.02**



Table S4.2 OLS auto distributed lag (ADL) estimates for changes in rural and urban wages as a
function of changes in rice prices
                                   1                   2               3                 4
                                   Rural wages         Rural wages     Urban wages       Urban wages

    Change in rice prices, lag 1   0.13***             0.11***         -0.01             -0.03
                                   (0.04)              (0.04)          (0.04)            (0.05)

    Change in rice prices, lag 2                       0.08*                             0.03
                                                       (0.05)                            (0.06)

    Change in rural wage, lag 1    -0.02               -0.09           -0.09             -0.16
                                   (0.08)              (0.10)          (0.15)            (0.21)

    Change in rural wage, lag 2                        -0.33**                           0.01
                                                       (0.13)                            (0.10)

    Change in urban wage, lag 1    -0.26               -0.24           -0.10             -0.11
                                   (0.17)              (0.14)          (0.10)            (0.13)

    Change in urban wage, lag 2                        0.17                              -0.20*
                                                       (0.15)                            (0.12)

    Time trend                     0.003***            0.003***        0.003***          0.003***
                                   (0.001)             (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)

    R-squared                      0.36                0.50            0.21              0.24
    N                              37                  36              37                36
Source: Author’s estimates.

                                                                                                        36 
 
Notes: See text for definitions of the variables. *, ** and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.




                                                                                                                                   37 
 
Appendix S5. Characteristics of the POVCAL sample
 

Table S5.1 List of poverty changes from the World Bank (2013) used in the statistical analysis
    Country           Observation   Change in        Change in $2/day      Change in real food prices
                                    $1.25/day        poverty               (%)
                                    poverty
    Armenia           1999-2001     1.81             1.91                  -3.70%
    Armenia           2001-2002     -4.87            -4.03                 1.12%
    Armenia           2002-2003     -4.34            -3.4                  2.02%
    Armenia           2003-2004     -3.2             -11.44                3.25%
    Armenia           2004-2005     -3.45            -8.48                 0.19%

    Bangladesh        1986-1989     11.42            3.42                  -1.74%
    Bangladesh        1989-1992     3.53             2.34                  -0.91%
    Bangladesh        1992-1996     -9.31            -7.59                 -0.20%
    Bangladesh        1996-2000     -2.32            -1.17                 2.80%
    Bangladesh        2000-2005     -8.12            -4.2                  0.87%
    Bangladesh        2005-2010     -7.22            -3.9                  6.01%

    Belize            1994-1996     0.73             3.22                  -0.21%
    Belize            1996-1997     2.79             4.25                  0.69%
    Belize            1997-1998     -1.14            -1.94                 -0.09%
    Belize            1998-1999     0.9              -3.97                 -0.49%

    Bolivia           1993-1999     14.82            12.32                 -2.76%
    Bolivia           1999-2000     3.57             4.26                  -2.35%
    Bolivia           2000-2001     -5.46            -6.26                 -0.98%
    Bolivia           2001-2002     0.57             1.36                  -1.76%
    Bolivia           2002-2006     -5.8             -7.61                 3.32%
    Bolivia           2006-2007     -3.15            -1.01                 4.55%
    Bolivia           2007-2008     2.55             0.61                  -5.65%

    Brazil            1993-1996     -4.65            -7.24                 13.74%
    Brazil            1996-1997     -0.07            -0.05                 -5.80%
    Brazil            1997-1998     -1.29            -1.03                 -0.38%
    Brazil            1998-1999     0.35             0.76                  -1.38%
    Brazil            1999-2001     0.44             0.41                  -1.91%
    Brazil            2001-2002     -1.26            -2.24                 1.12%
    Brazil            2002-2003     0.65             1.07                  4.92%
    Brazil            2003-2004     -1.44            -1.93                 -2.43%
    Brazil            2004-2005     -1.25            -2.16                 -3.54%
    Brazil            2005-2006     -0.88            -2.02                 -4.00%
    Brazil            2006-2007     -0.51            -1.18                 3.03%


                                                                                                    38 
 
    Brazil          2007-2008   -1.12    -2.12    6.98%
    Brazil          2008-2009   0.13     -0.32    0.87%

    Burkina Faso    1998-2003   -13.49   -6.57    -9.69%

    Cambodia        2007-2008   -9.48    -7.03    7.82%
    Cambodia        2008-2009   -4.15    -3.77    -5.04%

    Chile           1990-1992   -2.32    -4.66    5.48%

    China           1996-1999   -0.74    -3.54    -3.47%
    China           1999-2002   -7.27    -10.27   9.24%
    China           2002-2005   -12.11   -14.27   16.57%
    China           2005-2008   -3.19    -7.01    1.41%
    China           2008-2009   -1.26    -2.54    3.62%

    Colombia        1996-1999   3.18     4.79     -5.33%
    Colombia        1999-2000   1.67     4.72     -0.44%
    Colombia        2000-2001   1.33     -0.31    0.00%
    Colombia        2001-2002   1.08     1.11     1.63%
    Colombia        2002-2003   -0.65    0.1      0.13%
    Colombia        2003-2004   -0.63    -0.99    -0.17%
    Colombia        2004-2005   -6.27    -7.99    0.91%
    Colombia        2005-2006   -1.67    -2.95    1.11%
    Colombia        2006-2007   -2.2     -2.94    2.20%
    Colombia        2007-2008   2.48     3.17     3.84%
    Colombia        2008-2009   -1.65    -2.36    -0.48%
    Colombia        2009-2010   -1.51    -2.72    -1.29%

    Costa Rica      1995-1996   1.01     1.59     -2.29%
    Costa Rica      1996-1997   -1.72    -2.77    -0.52%
    Costa Rica      1997-1998   -1.08    -1.84    3.35%
    Costa Rica      1998-2000   1.31     2.26     -3.25%
    Costa Rica      2000-2001   0.49     0.72     0.23%
    Costa Rica      2001-2002   0.01     -0.35    0.93%
    Costa Rica      2002-2003   -0.23    -0.68    0.58%
    Costa Rica      2003-2004   -0.52    -0.54    2.02%
    Costa Rica      2004-2005   -1.37    -1.44    2.36%

    Cote d'Ivoire   1986-1988   9.65     10.45    9.65%
    Cote d'Ivoire   1988-1993   4.03     8.31     -0.17%
    Cote d'Ivoire   1993-1995   3.3      4.43     0.18%
    Cote d'Ivoire   1995-1998   2.97     1.3      -3.01%
    Cote d'Ivoire   1998-2002   -0.72    -2.33    -4.03%


                                                           39 
 
    Dominican Republic   1989-1992   -7.5     -12.49   4.60%
    Dominican Republic   1992-2001   -0.93    -3.9     -11.60%
    Dominican Republic   2001-2003   2.9      4.99     -1.51%
    Dominican Republic   2003-2004   1.5      4.47     11.65%
    Dominican Republic   2004-2005   -1.99    -5.12    -5.53%
    Dominican Republic   2005-2006   -1.91    -3.08    -3.23%

    Ecuador              1999-2003   -11.75   -15.47   -1.85%
    Ecuador              2003-2005   -3.04    -4.85    -1.14%
    Ecuador              2005-2006   -2.99    -5.08    2.36%
    Ecuador              2006-2007   1.09     0.96     0.85%
    Ecuador              2007-2008   -0.78    -1.43    7.86%
    Ecuador              2008-2009   -0.07    0.39     0.64%
    Ecuador              2009-2010   -1.77    -2.95    1.25%

    El Salvador          1991-1995   -7.14    -9.73    -5.24%
    El Salvador          1995-1996   1.54     2.12     4.23%
    El Salvador          1996-1998   5.88     4.86     -1.26%
    El Salvador          1998-1999   -3.57    -3.74    -2.02%
    El Salvador          1999-2001   0.59     0.42     -1.02%
    El Salvador          2001-2002   0.35     0.48     -0.08%
    El Salvador          2002-2003   -1.45    -1.72    -0.12%
    El Salvador          2003-2004   -1.81    -2.67    1.76%
    El Salvador          2004-2005   0.08     1.18     1.44%
    El Salvador          2005-2006   -6.25    -6.76    -1.00%
    El Salvador          2006-2007   1.26     -0.28    1.62%
    El Salvador          2007-2008   -1.14    0.66     4.57%
    El Salvador          2008-2009   3.53     2.91     -4.87%

    Ethiopia             2000-2005   -16.62   -9.09    21.58%

    Georgia              1998-1999   10.06    16.11    -0.50%
    Georgia              1999-2000   1.38     2.28     -2.63%
    Georgia              2000-2001   0.24     1.92     1.81%
    Georgia              2001-2002   -3.8     -6.57    1.86%
    Georgia              2002-2003   1.92     2.73     2.17%
    Georgia              2003-2005   -1.67    -3.14    6.56%
    Georgia              2005-2006   -0.4     0.08     2.35%
    Georgia              2006-2007   -0.39    1.26     0.45%
    Georgia              2007-2008   0.08     -2.64    1.12%

    Ghana                1989-1992   1.7      -0.04    -5.08%



                                                                 40 
 
    Guatemala         1989-2000   -27.22   -30.15   -8.23%
    Guatemala         2000-2002   13.87    14.44    4.74%
    Guatemala         2002-2003   -3.19    -5.17    0.15%
    Guatemala         2003-2004   1.87     4.6      2.49%
    Guatemala         2004-2006   -10.9    -12.87   4.37%

    Guinea            1994-2007   -20.47   -12.33   24.88%

    Honduras          1990-1991   -13.87   -11.23   6.95%
    Honduras          1991-1992   -5.71    -7.37    -2.55%
    Honduras          1992-1993   -3.83    -3.23    1.90%
    Honduras          1993-1994   12.39    12.76    4.45%
    Honduras          1994-1995   -8.57    -9.9     -0.79%
    Honduras          1995-1996   4.1      3.93     0.65%
    Honduras          1996-1997   -10.81   -12.48   -0.27%
    Honduras          1997-1998   4.91     1.76     -1.76%
    Honduras          1998-1999   -0.09    1.28     -3.34%
    Honduras          1999-2001   -7.45    -9.6     -4.94%
    Honduras          2001-2002   10.18    10.91    -3.62%
    Honduras          2002-2003   -2.01    -1.24    -3.70%
    Honduras          2003-2004   -0.88    -1.09    -1.32%
    Honduras          2004-2005   1.17     0.56     1.25%
    Honduras          2005-2006   -3.59    -4.88    -1.05%
    Honduras          2006-2007   -6.59    -5.32    3.57%
    Honduras          2007-2008   5.1      2.8      6.77%
    Honduras          2008-2009   -3.44    -2.6     -2.34%

    India             1983-1988   -1.92    -1.02    -0.53%
    India             1988-2010   -20.91   -15.34   1.08%

    Indonesia         1987-1990   -13.89   -6.71    5.76%
    Indonesia         1990-1993   0.13     0        -3.54%
    Indonesia         1993-1996   -11.02   -7.74    7.30%
    Indonesia         1996-2002   -14.07   -10.29   14.14%
    Indonesia         2002-2005   -7.87    -13.18   -6.70%
    Indonesia         2005-2008   1.2      0.61     13.18%
    Indonesia         2008-2010   -4.58    -8.21    6.81%

    Kazakhstan        2002-2003   -2.03    -4.3     0.49%

    Kenya             1994-1997   -8.93    -10.92   -0.42%

    Kyrgyz Republic   1998-2002   2.19     5.84     0.47%
    Kyrgyz Republic   2002-2004   -19.81   -27.83   -1.11%


                                                             41 
 
    Kyrgyz Republic   2004-2005   8.72     7.11     0.86%
    Kyrgyz Republic   2005-2006   -17      -13.9    3.06%
    Kyrgyz Republic   2006-2007   -4.04    -2.77    6.66%
    Kyrgyz Republic   2007-2009   4.33     -7.3     -0.85%
    Kyrgyz Republic   2009-2010   0.47     1.19     6.48%
    Kyrgyz Republic   2010-2011   -1.67    -1.33    1.81%

    Lao PDR           1997-2002   -5.36    -3.14    -8.59%

    Latvia            2002-2003   0.36     1.37     -0.19%

    Macedonia, FYR    2000-2010   -3.68    -2.4     -0.24%

    Madagascar        1997-1999   10.28    3.87     1.86%
    Madagascar        1999-2001   -5.98    -4.44    -3.06%
    Madagascar        2001-2005   -8.51    0.72     17.48%
    Madagascar        2005-2010   13.46    3.2      -12.43%

    Mali              2006-2010   -1       1.52     7.78%

    Mauritania        1996-2000   -2.24    -4.09    0.49%
    Mauritania        2000-2004   4.25     8.4      5.64%
    Mauritania        2004-2008   -1.98    -4.88    5.89%

    Mexico            1994-1998   6.05     7.59     7.53%
    Mexico            1998-2002   -5.69    -8.55    -5.38%
    Mexico            2002-2005   -1.12    -1.73    3.68%
    Mexico            2005-2006   -1.41    -2.63    0.02%

    Moldova           1998-1999   11.77    14.78    -4.68%
    Moldova           1999-2001   -12.52   -12.73   4.81%
    Moldova           2001-2002   -8.98    -13.33   -0.90%
    Moldova           2002-2003   -10.73   -13.17   1.64%
    Moldova           2003-2004   1.38     1.08     0.24%
    Moldova           2004-2005   -6.13    -17.36   -1.76%

    Mongolia          1998-2002   0        0        -9.00%

    Niger             1994-2008   -34.55   -16.81   0.85%

    Nigeria           1996-2011   -14.14   -8.17    -7.77%

    Pakistan          1991-1999   -35.66   -22.19   4.07%
    Pakistan          1999-2002   6.82     7.45     -2.52%
    Pakistan          2002-2005   -13.28   -13.78   3.45%


                                                              42 
 
    Pakistan      2005-2006   -0.01   0.69    0.56%
    Pakistan      2006-2008   -1.54   -0.83   9.24%

    Panama        1991-1995   -5.2    -6.17   1.36%
    Panama        1995-1997   -1.1    -1.21   -1.19%
    Panama        1997-2001   0.77    2.41    -2.90%
    Panama        2001-2002   -4.36   -3.7    0.50%
    Panama        2002-2003   -0.46   -1.02   -2.24%
    Panama        2003-2004   -0.7    -1.05   2.29%
    Panama        2004-2005   -0.34   -0.88   2.43%
    Panama        2005-2006   0.67    0.83    -1.16%
    Panama        2006-2009   -4.28   -3.41   11.87%
    Panama        2009-2010   0.67    -0.57   -0.60%

    Paraguay      1998-1999   1.16    0.91    -3.43%
    Paraguay      1999-2001   -3.12   -2.84   -3.75%
    Paraguay      2001-2002   4.69    8.43    -0.22%
    Paraguay      2002-2003   -5.04   -6.44   6.56%
    Paraguay      2003-2004   -2.6    -3.92   2.96%
    Paraguay      2004-2005   -0.93   -2.78   -1.36%
    Paraguay      2005-2006   3.72    5.94    5.60%
    Paraguay      2006-2007   -2.15   -4.55   7.80%
    Paraguay      2007-2008   -3.18   -2.3    5.09%
    Paraguay      2008-2009   1.97    0.6     -2.02%
    Paraguay      2009-2010   -0.4    -0.78   3.70%

    Peru          1998-1999   1.48    1.82    -3.59%
    Peru          1999-2000   -3.4    -4      -2.85%
    Peru          2000-2001   2.07    3.44    -1.47%
    Peru          2001-2002   -2.07   -3.24   -0.49%
    Peru          2002-2003   -2.92   -2.1    -1.42%
    Peru          2003-2004   -2.13   -3.31   1.75%
    Peru          2004-2005   1.19    1.63    -0.62%
    Peru          2005-2006   -1.36   -2.62   0.41%
    Peru          2006-2007   0.75    0.46    0.75%
    Peru          2007-2008   -1.74   -3.33   3.16%
    Peru          2008-2009   -0.66   -0.79   1.20%
    Peru          2009-2010   -0.63   -1.26   1.03%

    Philippines   1988-1991   0.2     -1.48   -3.16%
    Philippines   1991-1994   -2.57   -2.77   -3.71%
    Philippines   1994-1997   -6.5    -8.77   -0.16%
    Philippines   1997-2000   0.84    1.01    -4.31%


                                                       43 
 
    Philippines     2000-2003   -0.46    -1.04    -3.81%
    Philippines     2003-2006   0.63     1.25     -1.54%
    Philippines     2006-2009   -4.2     -3.55    6.38%

    Senegal         1994-2005   -20.14   -18.93   1.43%

    South Africa    1995-2000   4.77     3.06     0.84%
    South Africa    2000-2009   -12.43   -11.6    19.39%

    Sri Lanka       1996-2007   -9.28    -17.36   2.46%
    Sri Lanka       2007-2010   -2.93    -5.31    6.68%

    Tajikistan      2004-2007   -6.11    -12.87   3.73%
    Tajikistan      2007-2009   -8.1     -9.17    4.16%

    Thailand        1990-1992   -2.95    -7.22    1.60%
    Thailand        1992-1994   -4.49    -9.46    0.62%

    Tunisia         1990-1995   0.61     1.35     -0.36%
    Tunisia         1995-2000   -3.93    -7.49    1.31%

    Uganda          1992-1996   -5.62    -2.74    -6.23%
    Uganda          1996-1999   -3.9     -3.34    7.38%
    Uganda          1999-2002   -3.12    -2.83    -10.98%
    Uganda          2002-2006   -5.84    -4.34    14.78%
    Uganda          2006-2009   -13.52   -10.45   14.22%

    Venezuela, RB   1992-1998   5.48     10.56    -11.23%
    Venezuela, RB   1998-1999   1.53     2.52     -5.49%
    Venezuela, RB   1999-2001   -1.84    -2.29    -4.68%
    Venezuela, RB   2001-2002   6.28     8.4      4.68%
    Venezuela, RB   2002-2003   3.21     5.38     5.08%
    Venezuela, RB   2003-2004   -3.18    -5.22    9.90%
    Venezuela, RB   2004-2005   -2.44    -7.44    4.42%
    Venezuela, RB   2005-2006   -6.81    -8.96    5.67%

    Vietnam         1998-2002   -9.6     -9.63    -0.15%
    Vietnam         2002-2004   -11.8    -11.89   1.82%
    Vietnam         2004-2006   -6.83    -8.91    2.25%
    Vietnam         2006-2008   -4.57    -4.72    14.14%

    Zambia          1998-2003   8.93     10.38    -1.56%
    Zambia          2003-2004   -0.31    -3.62    -1.37%
    Zambia          2004-2006   4.22     1.1      -3.55%
    Zambia          2006-2010   5.94     4.15     -6.01%


                                                            44 
 
Figure S5.1 Histogram of the duration of gaps between POVCAL surveys

        2.5
        2 1.5
    Density
        1
        .5
        0




                1         2                 3                    4     5
                           Duration of poverty episode (years)




 




                                                                           45 
 
