                                                      WPS7917


Policy Research Working Paper                        7917




    Building an Ex Ante Simulation Model
  for Estimating the Capacity Impact, Benefit
       Incidence, and Cost Effectiveness
            of Child Care Subsidies
   An Application Using Provider-Level Data from Turkey

                                Meltem A. Aran
                            Ana Maria Munoz-Boudet
                                 Nazlı Aktakke




Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
December 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7917


  Abstract
  Public financing of child care can allow for more equitable                        in Turkey. The results reveal that the choice of the subsidy
  access to these services in places where public provision and                      delivery model has a strong bearing on the benefit inci-
  capacity are low. However, the mechanisms of subsidy deliv-                        dence and cost effectiveness of the subsidy. In the case of
  ery will affect who benefits, and the overall cost effectiveness                   Turkey, where significant supply-side constraints exist in
  of such subsidies. This paper sets out an ex ante simulation                       the market, a demand-side voucher system is shown to be
  model for estimating the benefit incidence of expanded                             the least cost-effective subsidy delivery model. A targeted
  capacity and enrollments resulting from different child care                       demand-side voucher does not necessarily deliver the most
  subsidy mechanisms. It uses a supply-side provider level                          “pro-poor results,” and combinations show different benefits
  and a demand-side household model, and combines the                                and costs. The proposed simulation model can be applied
  two models. The paper considers investment grants to pro-                          in other country contexts, with the only data require-
  viders, operational monthly grants to child care providers,                        ments being micro data on the costs and pricing structure
  combinations of the investment and operational grants, and                         of child care providers, as well as household data with
  demand-side vouchers to households. The model is applied                           variables on household welfare and child care utilization.
  to empirical data from child care centers and households



  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to
  provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
  Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at
  amunozboudet@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
	
Building	an	Ex	Ante	Simulation	Model	for	Estimating	the	Capacity	Impact,	
Benefit	Incidence,	and	Cost	Effectiveness	of	Child	Care	Subsidies:	
                                                               	
          A n 	 A p p l i c a t i o n 	 U s i n g 	 P r o v i d e r ‐ L e v e l 	 D a t a 	 f r o m 	 T u r k e y 1	
	
                                                                   Meltem	A.	Aran	 Development	Analytics 	
                                                                   Ana	Maria	Munoz‐Boudet	 World	Bank 	
                                                                   Nazlı	Aktakke	 Development	Analytics 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Keywords:	day	care	centers,	subsidies	and	evidence‐based	policy,	vouchers,	education	finance,	poverty	
JEL	Classification	Numbers:				H22,	H23,	H32,	I22,	I24,	I38.		
	
	                                                             	

                                                               	
																																																																
	
1	 The	 study	 was	 supported	 by	 the	 Swedish	 International	 Development	 Cooperation	 Agency	 SIDA 	 under	 the	

Umbrella	 Facility	 for	 Gender	 Equality	 Trust	 Fund	 of	 the	 World	 Bank.	 The	 authors	 would	 like	 to	 thank	 Rıdvan	
Kurtipek,	 Yıldız	 Yapar,	 Pınar	 Özel	 Ucuzal	 and	 Dilek	 Okkalı	 Şanalmış	 Turkey	 Ministry	 of	 Development ;	 Burcu	
Ertuğrul	 and	 Fatih	 Kaynar	 Turkey	 Ministry	 of	 Education ;	 Güler	 Özdoğan,	 Akın	 Yumuş	 and	 Fatma	 Küçükbaşol	
 Turkey	 Ministry	 of	 Family	 and	 Social	 Policies ;	 Facundo	 Cuevas	 The	 World	 Bank ;	 Öykü	 Uluçay	 and	 Tomas	
Bergenholtz	 Swedish	Consulate 	for	comments	and	guidance	received	during	methodology	review	meetings	held	
in	Ankara	in	February	2016.		

	
	
1.	Motivation	
Public	financing	and	partial	subsidization	of	child	care	can	allow	for	more	equitable	access	to	child	care	in	
places	where	public	provision	and	capacity	are	low.	Countries	have	used	a	number	of	supply‐	and	demand‐
side	subsidies	in	order	to	expand	access	to	child	care	services.	Various	mechanisms	have	been	experimented	
with	in	various	countries,	including	and	not	limited	to:		 i 	per	child	operational	grants	to	supply‐side	service	
providers;	 ii 	 tax	 subsidies	 to	 working	 parents	 and	 iii 	 vouchers	 or	 direct	 cash	 transfers	 provided	 to	
households.				

In	Mexico,	in	2007	a	supply‐side	grant	program	to	expand	child	care	services	was	created	with	the	goal	of	
increasing	labor	force	participation	of	poor	mothers	 Mateo	Diaz	and	Chamussy,	2013 .	Child	care	centers	
were	provided	with	one‐time	initial	investment	subsidies	to	open	up	new	centers	or	to	improve	their	existing	
facilities.	 Additionally,	 monthly	 grants	 were	 provided	 to	day‐care	 centers	 on	 a	 per	 capita	 per	 child 	 basis	
 Calderon,	2014 .	The	operational	costs	of	these	centers	are	covered	by	the	public	subsidy	plus	a	fee	collected	
from	 the	 parents	 Staab	 and	 Gerhard,	 2010 .	 Similarly,	 in	 the	 Republic	 of	 Korea,	 in	 2009	 the	 municipal	
government	of	Seoul	started	providing	financial	support	to	private	child	care	centers	in	meeting	their	labor	
costs.	In	return,	regulations	of	public	child	care	centers	are	applied	in	these	centers,	making	them	semi‐public.	
Nearly	half	of	the	city’s	child	care	centers	are	now	part	of	this	scheme	 OECD,	2012 .			

Demand‐side	grants	and	tax	subsidies	are	also	commonly	applied	in	a	number	of	countries.	The	Netherlands,	
the	United	States,	and	Australia	are	examples	to	countries	providing	vouchers	to	families	for	increasing	access	
to	child	care	services	 Warner	and	Grauds,	2011 .	In	the	Netherlands	and	Australia,	the	government’s	aim	has	
been	 to	 promote	 female	 labor	 force	 participation	 while	 in	 the	 United	 States	 vouchers	 were	 intended	 for	
helping	low‐income	mothers	leave	welfare	and	start	working.	In	the	United	Kingdom,	the	child	care	voucher	
scheme	targets	working	parents	–	and	allows	a	tax	break	on	income	partly	subsidized	by	the	employer,	and	
partly	subsidized	by	the	state.	In	all	four	of	these	developed	countries,	vouchers	or	tax	subsidies	for	child	care	
are	 provided	 to	 the	 household	 or	 working	 parents	 through	 workplace	 benefits.	 In	 the	 United	 States	 and	
Australia,	 the	 vouchers	 are	 primarily	 targeted	 to	 poor	 working	 mothers,	 while	 in	 the	 	 United	 Kingdom,	
Netherlands	and	Austria,	the	vouchers	are	provided	universally	with	non‐poor	working	parents	also	receiving	
a	subsidy	albeit	smaller.			

While	 countries	 have	 experimented	 with	 different	 models	 and	 mechanisms	 for	 expanding	 access	 and	
utilization,	little	research	has	been	carried	out	looking	at	the	impact	of	the	choice	of	supply‐	or	demand‐side	
mechanisms	 in	 targeting	 these	 transfers.	 Where	 countries	 have	 supply‐side	 constraints	 in	 the	 child	 care	
market,	and	rationing	takes	place	for	limited	child	care	spaces	–	the	choice	of	a	supply‐	or	demand‐side	transfer	
might	matter	significantly	in	determining	who	benefits	from	public	subsidies.		This	paper	sets	out	a	practical	
methodology	for	modeling	the	behavior	of	service	providers	 through	a	supply‐side	model 	and	the	behavior	
of	 households	 through	 a	 demand‐side	 model 	 to	 consider	 the	 impact	 of	 supply‐side	 investment	 and/or	
operational	 grants	 given	 to	 child	 care	 providers	 and	 demand‐side	 vouchers	 provided	 to	 households	 as	
subsidies	 for	 child	 care.	 	 The	 paper	 considers	 the	 distributional	 impact	 of	 these	 transfers	 on	 increases	 in	
capacity	 and	 utilization	 of	 services,	 while	 also	 considering	 cost‐effectiveness	 per	 U.S.	 dollar	 spent	 to	 bring	
about	new	enrollments.			

The	paper	is	organized	as	follows:	Section	2	provides	an	overview	and	literature	review	of	exiting	ex	ante	
simulation	models	of	child	care.	In	section	3,	we	present	a	background	on	the	child	care	system	in	Turkey.	In	
Section	4,	we	present	the	model	for	supply‐	and	demand‐side	subsidies	for	the	child	care	market	looking	at	
various	policy	scenarios	through	investment	and/or	operational	grants	to	child	care	providers	and	through	
targeted	household	voucher	schemes.	In	Section	5	we	present	the	data	used	for	the	simulations	and	we	discuss	
the	step‐by‐step	methodology	for	the	supply‐	and	demand‐side	simulation	models.		In	Section	6,	we	present	
the	 main	 results	 when	 the	 methodology	 is	 applied	 to	 the	 Turkish	 data	 and	 in	 Section	 7	 we	 conclude	 with	
possible	practical	implications.		

2.	Literature	Review 		
The	literature	on	ex‐ante	evaluations	of	child	care	policies	uses	micro	simulations	mainly	to	assess	the	impact	
of	 policy	 changes	 on	 maternal	 labor	 force	 participation	 and	 child	 care	 utilization.	 Some	 other	 outcome	
	
	
variables	 investigated	 include	 demand	 for	 child	 care,	 hours	 spent	 in	 household	 production	 and	 the	
distributional	effect	of	the	policies.	The	policies	that	the	authors	investigate	range	from	capacity	expansions	
to	fee	reductions	and	the	provision	of	subsidies.	Most	of	these	papers	focus	on	using	household	level	data,	
sometimes	with	community	level	variables	on	supply‐side	availability.		

Del	Boca	and	Vuri	 2007 	merging	data	from	two	micro‐level	surveys,	simulate	the	impact	of	a	partial	or	a	full	
subsidy	for	child	care	costs	on	female	employment	in	Italy.	They	use	a	discrete	choice	model	where	child	care	
and	 labor	 force	 decisions	 of	 mothers	 are	 jointly	 made.	 The	 authors	 find	 that	 in	 places	 where	 capacity	
constraints	and	rationing	of	child	care	services	are	more	prevalent	the	impact	of	subsidies	is	smaller.		Similar	
to	 Del	 Boca	 and	 Vuri	 2007 ,	 Apps	 et	 al	 2016 	 use	 a	 discrete	 choice	 model	 to	 investigate	 the	 changes	 in	
mothers’	labor	supply	to	policies	effecting	child	care	prices,	taxes	and	subsidies.	In	their	model,	they	use	three	
choice	variables;	mother’s	labor	supply,	her	time	allocated	to	household	production	and	hours	of	child	care	
bought.	They	find	that	mothers’	decision	to	work	is	highly	sensitive	to	earnings	and	child	care	costs.		Both	of	
these	papers	use	household	level	data	and	model	the	labor	supply	behavior	of	mothers	with	changes	in	child	
care	prices	and	availability	faced	by	the	household.				

Vanleenhove	 2013 	investigates	in	an	ex‐ante	simulation	model	impact	of	a	capacity	expansion	in	the	Flemish	
child	care	market	on	the	parents’	choice	of	maternal	labor	supply	and	child	care	usage	using	data	from	Flemish	
Families	and	Care	Survey	of	2005.	According	to	a	new	decree	by	the	government	issued	in	2012,	the	child	care	
coverage	 rate	 will	 rise	 to	50	 percent	by	 2016	 and	by	 2020	all	child	care	 demand	 is	 planned	 to	be	met.	 By	
changing	the	opportunity	set	of	the	households	through	increases	in	formal	care,	the	author	simulates	the	
response	of	households	to	the	capacity	expansion.		Once	again,	the	model	is	entirely	built	using	the	demand‐
side	household	survey	data	and	providing	a	shock	to	the	availability	of	child	care	to	the	household.			

Looking	at	the	distributional	impact	of	various	child	care	policies,	Kornstad	and	Toresen	 2006 	consider	the	
case	of	child	care	in	Norway	and	look	at	the	impact	of	four	different	reforms	on	child	care	choices	of	families,	
maternal	 labor	 supply	 as	 well	 as	 the	 policies’	 distributional	 impact	 and	 their	 costs	 to	 public	 budget.	 The	
reforms	that	are	investigated	are	 i 	increasing	child	care	capacity,	 ii 	reductions	in	fees,	 iii 	rescinding	home	
care	allowance	 the	allowance	for	families	who	do	not	use	center‐based	care 	and	lastly	 iv 	introducing	a	
working	parents	tax	credit	scheme	that	provides	a	certain	amount	of	credit	to	the	mother	working	more	than	
17	hours	per	week	and	a	higher	amount	if	she	works	more	than	24	hours	a	week.	Authors	use	a	discrete	choice	
joint	 labor	 supply	 and	 child	 care	 choice	 model	 and	 estimate	 the	 impact	 of	 these	 policies	 using	 Home	 Care	
Allowance	Survey	of	1998	of	Norway.	According	to	the	results,	all	four	reforms	increase	the	demand	for	center‐
based	 care	 and	labor	 supply	of	 mothers	 while	 fee	 reduction	 reform	 is	 the	 most	 successful	 one	 in	 terms	 of	
increased	demand	and	the	new	tax	credit	scheme	is	the	most	successful	in	terms	of	increased	maternal	labor	
supply.	Yet,	the	fee	reduction	reform	has	a	slightly	negative	effect	on	the	distribution	of	income.	In	other	words	
it	benefits	the	households	that	are	well‐off	slightly	more	than	poorer	households	‐since	the	well‐off	are	already	
using	child	care	and	reducing	child	care	fees	will	benefit	them	directly	‐	while	the	tax	credit	policy	has	a	strong	
positive	and	pro‐poor	redistribution	effect.	In	the	paper,	rescinding	home	care	allowance	has	a	slight	positive	
distributional	effect	and	the	capacity	increase	scenario	does	not	have	any	effect	on	distribution.				

In	 Turkey,	 İlkkaracan	 et	 al	 2015 	 evaluated	 ex‐ante	 a	 policy	 intervention	 that	 would	 increase	 child	 care	
capacity.	They	simulate	the	effects	of	an	increase	in	public	investment	in	child	care	services	on	the	jobs	created	
and	the	distribution	of	these	jobs	by	gender	and	income	status	of	households.	They	investigate	the	impact	of	a	
20.7	 billion	 TL	 worth	 of	 public	 investment	 ‐estimated	 annual	 expenditure	 for	 unenrolled	 preschool	 aged	
children	in	Turkey	to	catch	up	with	the	average	OECD	preschool	enrollment	rate‐	on	preschools	and	child	care	
market	versus	the	same	level	of	investment	in	the	construction	sector.	They	find	that	an	investment	of	this	
amount	will	result	in	719,000	new	jobs	created	in	total	when	it	is	spent	on	the	child	care	sector	while	it	will	
only	create	290,000	new	jobs	when	it	is	spent	on	the	construction	sector.				

Our	paper	contributes	to	the	ex‐ante	simulations	literature	on	child	care	in	two	different	ways:	 i 		firstly	it	
uses	supply‐side	provider	level	data	to	capture	the	behavioral	investment	model	of	service	providers	in	the	
face	of	investment	and	operational	grants	provided	to	the	sector	–	hence	the	ex‐ante	model	not	only	looks	at	
the	 demand	 side	 with	 household	 data	 but	 combines	 the	 investment	 behavior	 of	 the	 service	 provider	 in	
calculating	 the	 capacity	 expansion;	 and	 ii 	 secondly,	 it	 uses	 data	 on	 the	 child	 care	 sector	 of	 a	 developing	
	
	
country	–	Turkey	‐	with	significant	capacity	constraints	in	the	child	care	sector	and	hence	contributes	to	the	
literature	 which	 has	 so	 far	 focused	 in	 terms	 of	 ex‐ante	 evaluations	 in	 the	 child	 care	 sectors	 in	 developed	
countries	such	as	Norway,	Italy	and	Belgium.	Similar	to	some	of	the	aforementioned	papers,	this	paper	looks	
at	the	capacity	increases	and	changes	in	utilization	–	paying	particular	attention	to	the	distributional	impact	
of	different	types	and	combinations	of	policies	including	an	investment	grant	to	service	providers,	an	ongoing	
per	capita	based	monthly	operational	grant	to	service	providers,	and	a	household	targeted	voucher	scheme.			
Hence	same	levels	of	grants	are	distributed	to	households	or	centers	and	the	impact	of	each	in	terms	of	number	
of	 children	 enrolled	 and	 number	 of	 children	 enrolled	 from	 the	 lower	 income	 households	 is	 investigated,	
considering	the	cost‐effectiveness	of	each	scenario	 in	terms	of	per	new	child	enrolled	in	the	system 	as	well	
as	 the	 benefit	 incidence	of	 “new”	child	 care	 service	 capacity	 created.	 This	 approach	 is	 in	 similar	 vein	with	
Kornstad	and	Toresen	 2006 	where	different	types	of	reforms	are	investigated	at	the	same	time	in	order	to	
understand	which	one	is	more	beneficial	to	the	public	and	cost	effective	in	terms	of	the	budget.	Our	findings	
however	will	significantly	differ	from	their	findings	–	given	the	initial	conditions	and	capacity	constraints	in	
the	child	care	market	we	analyze	in	Turkey.			

3.	Background	on	the	Child	Care	System	in	Turkey		
The	 gross	 enrollment	 ratio	 in	 pre‐primary	 education	 remains	 low	 in	 Turkey,	 with	 significant	 capacity	
constraints	in	the	child	care	sector,	particularly	for	the	younger	age	groups.	The	pre‐primary	gross	enrollment	
rate	 was	 38.6	 percent	 in	 Turkey	 in	 2015	 as	 opposed	 to	 82.5	 percent	 in	 OECD	 and	 93.9	 percent	 in	 the	 EU	
countries	in	2013.i		Currently	about	2.7	million	children	aged	3‐5	are	not	benefitting	from	center	based	child	
care	 services	 as	 opposed	 to	 only	 1.0	 million	 children	 enrolled.ii	 	 Hence,	 a	 large	 number	 of	 children	 do	 not	
benefit	from	center‐based	child	care	and	preschool	services	in	Turkey.		In	order	to	serve	these	children	who	
are	 currently	 not	 enrolled	 in	 center	 based	 child	 care	 or	 preschool	 services,	 a	 recent	 World	 Bank	 study	
estimates	that	a	total	of	58,380	facilities	need	to	be	built.iii	For	the	younger	age	group	0‐3,	child	care	capacity	
is	close	to	zero,	with	no	public	provision	of	child	care	for	this	age	group.		

Children	from	disadvantaged	backgrounds	are	even	less	likely	to	benefit	from	center	based	child	care	services.	
Only	16.8	percent	of	the	children	aged	3‐5	living	in	households	in	the	poorest	per	capita	income	decile	benefit	
from	center‐based	child	care	services	as	opposed	to	60.0	percent	of	the	children	in	the	same	age	group	living	
in	households	in	the	richest	per	capita	income	decile.iv	A	recent	paper	looking	at	regulations	in	the	private	
child	care	market	in	Turkey	finds	that	the	infrastructure	related	standards	may	be	too	binding	making	the	
model	expensive	and	unaffordable	for	poorer	households	in	urban	areas	 Aran	et.al,	 forthcoming .	

Private	 provision	 of	 center‐based	 child	 care	 services	 is	 very	 low.	 As	 of	 2011,	 11.6	 percent	 of	 the	 children	
enrolled	in	pre‐primary	education	in	Turkey	were	enrolled	in	private	institutions,	while	this	rate	was	30.5	
percent	for	the	world,	37.0	percent	for	the	OECD	and	29.9	percent	for	the	EU	member	countries.v	Compared	
to	the	world	or	the	EU	countries	the	percentage	of	children	enrolled	in	private	institutions	remains	low	in	
Turkey,	 pointing	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 an	 alternative	 way	 to	 increase	 capacity	 in	 Turkey	 could	 be	 through	
interventions	increasing	private	provision	of	the	services.		

Limited	access	to	affordable	child	care	is	a	significant	impediment	to	female	labor	force	participation	in	the	
country.	In	Turkey	female	labor	force	participation	is	already	low	with	30.3	percent	in	2014	compared	to	the	
OECD	and	EU	averages	which	are	51.4	percent	and	51.5	percent	respectively.vi	It	is	common	for	women	to	
drop	out	of	the	labor	force	due	to	child	care	responsibilities.	According	to	a	household	survey	collected	in	5	
provinces	of	Turkey,	46	percent	of	the	currently	non‐employed	women	in	the	sample	previously	worked	but	
decided	to	leave	the	labor	force	and	the	majority	of	these	women	 71	percent 	reported	leaving	the	labor	force	
“due	to	child	care	responsibilities”	 World	Bank	 2015 .		

In	2015,	the	Turkish	government,	and	in	particular	the	Ministry	of	Family	and	Social	Policies	was	interested	
in	developing	policies	for	supporting	the	expansion	of	child	care	in	Turkey.		 The	Ministry	was	considering	
options	for	subsidizing	these	services	by	the	municipality	through	investment	grants,	operational	grants	to	
service	providers	or	both.		Targeted	demand‐side	vouchers	to	households	were	also	considered	as	a	policy	
option.		More	specifically,	the	policy	scenarios	considered	included:	 i 	an	investment	grant	only	 Scenario	1 ,	
 ii 	an	operational	grant	 with	or	without	a	price	cap	 Scenarios	2	A	and	2B ,	 iii 	through	a	voucher	scheme	
	
	
 Scenario	3 ,	and	 iv 	through	the	interaction	of	an	investment	grant	with	an	operational	grant	or	a	voucher	
scheme	 Scenarios	4A,	4B	and	5	in	Table	1 .	The	purpose	of	the	policy	measures	was	three‐fold:		 i 	to	increase	
the	 capacity	 of	 these	 services,	 ii 	 to	 increase	 accessibility	 and	 affordability	 of	 services	 for	 children	 from	
disadvantaged	backgrounds	and	 iii 	to	increase	female	labor	force	participation	by	increasing	employment	
rates	of	mothers	who	will	utilize	services	as	well	as	creating	new	employment	at	these	child	care	centers	for	
care‐taker	women.	This	model	was	initially	prepared	in	response	to	such	demand	from	the	Turkish	Ministry	
of	Family	and	Social	Policies.			

4.		The	Model:	Supply‐	and	Demand‐Side	Subsidies	for	Child	Care				
We	build	a	model	that	allows	for	three	basic	types	of	subsidies	for	child	care	through	 i 	investment	grants	to	
the	 service	 provider,	 ii 	 operational	 grants	 to	 the	 service	 provider	 and	 iii 	 vouchers	 provided	 to	 the	
household.	Investment	grants	are	one‐time	grants	that	are	provided	to	newly	opening	child	care	centers,	in	
order	to	support	their	investment	and	increase	overall	capacity.	Operational	grants	are	provided	on	a	monthly	
and	per	child	basis	and	transferred	to	the	service	providers.	The	operational	grant	helps	subsidize	the	services	
provided	by	private	providersvii.	They	cover	part	of	the	costs	of	provision	–	and	help	reducing	partly	the	prices	
charged	by	the	providers.	The	vouchers	are	also	provided	on	a	per	child	per	month	basis,	however	the	main	
difference	between	the	voucher	and	the	operational	grant	is	that	the	vouchers	are	provided	to		households	
and	 operational	 grants	 are	 given	 directly	 to	 the	 service	 provider.	 Because	 the	 voucher	 is	 given	 to	 the	
household,	 this	 allows	 for	 additional	 "targeting”	 of	 the	 voucher	 to	 eligible	 households.	 In	 other	 words,	 it	
becomes	 possible	 to	 “select”	 poorer	 households	 and/or	 households	 where	 women	 work	 etc.	 as	 voucher	
beneficiaries,	while	with	the	operational	grant	the	grant	benefits	whoever	enrolls	in	the	child	care	center	‐	
without	any	purposive	targeting.	Figure	1	provides	a	descriptive	overview	of	the	model.			

The	 operational	 grants	 and	 vouchers	 in	 the	 model	 have	 the	 same	 exact	 monthly	 per	 child	 values	 in	 the	
scenarios	–	and	they	only	differ	by	the	mechanism	of	delivery	and	hence	the	targeting	of	the	benefits.	In	the	
voucher	scheme,	the	household	that	receives	the	voucher	brings	it	to	the	service	provider	and	gets	services	
equivalent	to	the	amount	of	the	voucher	for	free,	and	only	pays	for	the	rest	of	the	fees.	In	other	words,	the	
vouchers	enable	households	to	get	discounted	services	by	the	value	of	the	voucher.	The	service	providers	then	
claim	the	vouchers	and	receive	money	from	the	government	equivalent	to	the	total	value	of	the	vouchers.	Both	
operational	grants	and	vouchers	have	monthly	per	child	values	though	the	payments	from	the	government	to	
the	service	providers	can	be	made	on	a	monthly,	semi‐annual	or	annual	basis	depending	on	how	the	program	
is	designed.				

	                                   	




	
	
                   Figure	1:	A	stylized	model	for	supply	and	demand	side	child	care	subsidies	




                                                                                                                   	
The	subsidies	have	an	impact	on	utilization	of	services	in	two	ways:		 i 	through	their	impact	on	expanding	
capacity	and	availability	of	services,	and	 ii 	through	their	impact	on	affordability	of	services.	In	the	model,	
investment	grants	have	an	impact	on	enrollments	 only	through	their	impact	on	capacity.	The	“benefit”	‐	in	
terms	of	financial	gain	‐	of	the	investment	grant	is	fully	realized	by	the	service	provider.	The	vouchers	‐on	the	
other	hand‐	increase	affordability	of	the	services	for	households	and	the	assumption	is	that	their	benefit	is	
fully	realized	by	the	household.	The	impact	of	the	vouchers	on	enrollment	is	mainly	through	their	impact	on	
affordability	of	existing	services	for	households	–	hence	we	assume	in	the	short	term	there	will	be	no	capacity	
impact	of	the	vouchers	in	the	system.	The	operational	grants	fall	somewhere	in	between	–	in	terms	of	its	impact	
on	enrollments.	While	the	operational	grant	is	received	on	a	per	child	basis	by	the	service	provider,	the	model	
assumes	that	there	is	a			“pass‐through”	of	the	operational	grants	to	the	households	in	the	form	of	a	reduction	
in	prices.	In	other	words,	in	our	model	operational	grants	lead	to	decreases	in	the	prices	–	but	the	decrease	in	
price	 is	 a	 portion	 in	 this	 case	 assumed	 at	 50% 	 of	 the	 operational	 grant	 per	 child.	 The	 benefits	 from	 the	
operational	grant	are	assumed	to	be	“shared”	between	the	households	and	the	service	providers,	hence	the	
operational	 grant	 has	 an	 impact	 on	 enrollments	 both	 through	 its	 impact	 on	 enhanced	 capacity	 through	
benefits	realized	by	the	service	provider 	and	through	its	impact	on	affordability	 through	benefits	realized	
by	the	household .			

We	consider	several	scenarios	where	these	grants	are	provided	by	themselves	or	in	combination	with	each	
other.	The	level	of	the	benefits	can	be	varied	once	the	model	is	set	up,	we	consider	here	only	a	fixed	level	of	
benefit	 50,000	TL	one‐time	investment	grant	and	300	TL	per	child	per	month	operational	grant	or	voucher	
value ,	though	this	parameter	can	be	adjusted	to	take	on	different	levels	under	each	scenario.	The	operational	
grant	in	the	scenarios	can	be	provided	with	a	price	cap	option	and	without	a	price	cap	option	 in	Scenario	2A	
and	 2B .	 	 The	 scenarios	 consider	 the	 investment	 grant	 and	 operational	 grants	 provided	 separately	 and	 in	
combination	with	each	other	to	look	at	cost	effectiveness	per	new	enrollment	in	each	scenario.	The	full	list	of	
7	scenarios	is	provided	in	Table	1.		

	

	                                   	




	
	
Table	1.	List	of	policy	scenarios		

    	                        Scenario	      Name	                                     Description	
                             Scenario	1	    Supply	Side	Investment	Grant	only:		      Investment	Grant:	50,000	TL	given	to	the	
                                            One‐time	investment	grant	to	child	       service	provider	one	time	for	initial	
                                            care	centers	                             investment.		
                             Scenario	2A	   Supply	Side	Operational	Grant	only:		     Operational	Grant:	300	TL	per	child	per	month	
                                            Monthly	per	student		operational	grant	   given	to	the	service	provider	for	5	years.		
    Simple	Scenarios	




                                             no	price	cap 	
                             Scenario	2B	   Supply	Side	Operational	Grant	only	       Operational	Grant:	300	TL	per	child	per	month	
                                            with	Price	Cap:		                         given	to	the	service	provider	for	5	years.	
                                            Monthly	per	student		operational	grant	   Price	cap:	750	TL	 the	service	provider	agrees	
                                             with	price	cap 	                         to	limit	the	maximum	price	to	750	TL	per	child	
                                                                                      per	month	under	this	contract	for	the	duration	
                                                                                      of	the	subsidy 		
                             Scenario	3	    Demand	Side	Grant	only:		                 Voucher	to	Household:	300	TL	per	child	per	
                                            Vouchers	to	households	per	child	         month,	targeting	households	in	bottom	40%	of	
                                            enrolled	                                 income	percentile.		
                             Scenario	4A	   Supply	Side	Investment	and	               Investment	Grant:	50,000	TL	given	to	the	
                                            Operational	Grant	combined:		             service	provider	one	time	for	initial	
                                            One‐time	investment	grant	and	            investment.		
                                            monthly	per	child	operational	grant	        	
                                            combined	 no	price	cap 	                  Operational	Grant:	300	TL	per	child	per	month	
                                                                                      given	to	the	service	provider	for	5	years.	
                             Scenario	4B	   Supply	Side	Investment	and	               Investment	Grant:	50,000	TL	given	to	the	
                                            Operational	Grant	combined	with	Price	    service	provider	one	time	for	initial	
    Combination	Scenarios	




                                            Cap:		                                    investment.		
                                            One‐time	investment	grant	and	              		
                                            monthly	per	child	operational	grant	      Operational	Grant:	300	TL	per	child	per	month	
                                            combined	 with	price	cap 	                given	to	the	service	provider	for	5	years.	
                                                                                      Price	cap:	750	TL	 the	service	provider	agrees	
                                                                                      to	limit	the	maximum	price	to	750	TL	per	child	
                                                                                      per	month	under	this	contract	for	the	duration	
                                                                                      of	the	subsidy 	
                             Scenario	5	    Supply	Side	Investment	Grant	and	         Investment	Grant:	50,000	TL	given	to	the	
                                            Demand	Side	Grant	combined:		             service	provider	one	time	for	initial	
                                            One‐time	investment	grant	and	            investment.		
                                            monthly	voucher	to	households	              	
                                            combined	                                 Voucher	to	Household:	300	TL	per	child	per	
                                                                                      month,	targeting	households	in	bottom	40%	of	
                                                                                      income	percentile.		
	

5.	Data	and	Methodology	
The	 supply‐	 and	 demand‐side	 simulation	 model	 is	 built	 using	 data	 sets	 from	 households	 and	 child	 care	
providers	in	Turkey.	A	unique	data	set	collected	from	child	care	providers	in	2014	in	5	provinces	of	Turkey,	
allows	us	to	have	insights	into	the	microeconomics	of	running	a	child	care	center	in	Turkey,	and	hence	allows	
us	to	look	at	the	costs	and	prices	in	the	market	for	child	care.		Turkey	has	significant	supply‐side	constraints	
in	the	child	care	sector,	and	these	reflect	on	the	results	of	the	simulation	model.	The	initial	conditions	of	the	
child	care	market	matter	significantly	in	determining	the	outcomes	and	benefit	incidence	of	grants	distributed	
for	expanding	child	care	utilization.	This	section	first	describes	the	data	sets	that	were	used	for	the	simulations	
and	the	methodology	in	detail.			

5.1	Data	Used	for	the	Simulation	
In	order	to	understand	the	impact	of	different	kinds	of	subsidies	we	have	two	main	simulation	models	that	
interact	with	one	another	in	producing	the	results.	These	models	are	 i 	the	supply‐side	simulation	model	and	
 ii 	the	demand‐side	simulation	model.	Using	these	models	and	changing	the	parameters	for	the	subsidy	type	
and	the	level	of	the	subsidy	we	estimate	possible	benefits	of	each	scenario.	Below,	we	describe	the	data	used	
for	the	simulations	and	the	details	of	each	model.			

	
	
5.1.1	Supply‐Side	Simulation	Data	
	
For	the	supply‐side	model	we	use	the	data	that	were	collected	by	Development	Analytics	in	2014	for	the	World	
Bank	study	“Supply	and	Demand	for	Child	Care	Services	in	Turkey”	 World	Bank,	2015 	from	603	center‐based	
child	care	providers	in	5	provinces,	namely	Istanbul,	Gaziantep,	Denizli,	Eskişehir	and	Samsun.	The	data	set	
includes	a	wide	range	of	information	on	child	care	centers	such	as	their	set‐up	and	operational	costs	and	the	
prices	they	charge	per	child.		For	the	purposes	of	this	analysis,	we	only	make	use	of	a	sample	composed	of	the	
private	providers	in	the	data	set	making	up	a	total	of	226	providers.				This	uniquely	designed	survey	allows	
us	to	have	information	on	the	costs	and	prices	faced	by	private	providers	in	the	child	care	market	in	Turkey,	
and	 allows	 us	to	 model	 the	break‐even	 points	 and	 internal	rate	 of	 return	 on	investments	 in	 the	 child	 care	
sector.		Combining	this	information	with	a	model	on	the	investment	behavior	of	private	providers,	we	are	able	
to	 come	up	 with	 different	levels	 of	 investments	 and	 capacity	 increases	 with	different	 levels	 of	 the	subsidy	
  whether	through	the	investment	or	operational	grants	to	facilities .		

5.1.2	Demand‐Side	Data	
For	the	demand‐side	model	we	make	use	of	the	 Turkey	EU‐SILC	 Survey	of	Income	and	Living	Conditions 	
2012	data	set.	The	EU‐SILC	data	set	includes	a	wide	range	of	information	on	households	including	information	
on	children’s	enrollment	in	center‐based	child	care	and	labor	force	participation	of	household	members.	This	
data	set	is	used	in	order	to	understand	the	benefit	incidence	of	enrollments	as	a	result	of	the	capacity	increase	
that	occurs	in	the	supply‐side	model,	the	changes	in	enrollment	as	a	result	of	increased	affordability.	We	only	
make	use	of	the	part	of	the	data	set	collected	from	households	located	in	urban	areas	as	the	proposed	capacity	
expansions	are	likely	to	benefit	initially	‐	and	primarily	‐	the	urban	areas	in	the	country.		The	demand‐side	
data	 are	 used	 to	 model	 the	 behavior	 of	 the	 household	 given	 increased	 availability	 of	 child	 care	 in	 the	
neighborhood,	and	increased	affordability	of	child	care	given	the	operational	grant	 which	leads	to		reduced	
prices	in	the	market	through	a	pass‐through	assumption 	or	through	the	vouchers.			

5.2	Methodology:	Building	the	Simulation	Model	
In	the	 supply‐	and	demand‐side	 simulations,	using	 existing	data	we	 aim	to	 model	the	effects	 of	 an	outside	
shock	to	the	system.	In	our	case,	this	shock	could	be	child	care	centers	receiving	investment	or	operational	
grants	or	both	or	households	receiving	a	voucher.		There	are	multiple	options	which	could	be	adopted	in	a	
subsidy	policy	framework	and	we	investigate	in	our	simulation	models	combinations	of	these	policies	with	
different	levels	of	the	investment	and	operational	grants	and	vouchers.	The	scenarios	are	as	described	in	Table	
1.	

5.2.1	Supply‐Side	Simulation	
We	 build	 the	 supply‐side	 simulation	 model,	 using	 the	 supply‐side	 provider	 level	 survey	 collected	 in	 5	
provinces	where	we	have	detailed	information	on	the	setup	and	operational	cost	structure	and	prices	faced	
by	 child	 care	 providers.	 Before	 a	 shock	 is	 introduced	 to	 the	 system,	 each	 provider	 faces	 certain	 setup	
 investment 	 and	 operational	 costs	 and	 certain	 prices	 and	 enrollments.	 All	 of	 these	 data	 come	 from	 the	
empirical	data	set,	but	are	treated	in	the	model	as	hypothetical	cases	 as	if	investments	in	these	centers	have	
not	yet	been	made .	A	probability	of	investment	is	calculated	for	each	service	provider	in	the	baseline.		We	call	
them	hypothetical	cases	as	they	actually	exist	in	reality	‐	but	in	the	model	they	are	treated	as	probabilistic	
investments	–	such	that	a	service	provider	that	faces	lower	costs	and	better	prices	in	the	market	has	a	higher	
initial	likelihood	of	investment.		An	outside	shock	is	introduced	to	the	model	that	increases	the	likelihood	for	
investment	 for	 the	 child	 care	 centers.	 With	 these	 simulations	 our	 aim	 is	 to	 find	 out	 the	 “expected”	 added	
capacity	and	how	many	more	centers	will	be	established	when	there	are	investment	grants	or	operational	
grants	 of	varying	sizes 	and	to	see	which	ones	lead	to	a	higher	capacity	increase.		

Calculating	the	Net	Present	Value	and	the	Probability	to	Invest	
First,	the	net	present	value	for	each	private	child	care	center	in	the	data	is	calculated	in	order	to	find	out	their	
initial	probability	to	invest,	given	their	 i 	price	per	child,	 ii 	setup	cost	if	they	were	to	open	up	the	center	
now,	 iii 	monthly	variable	costs,	and	 iv 	total	number	of	children	enrolled.	Net	present	value	of	each	child	
care	center	is	calculated	for	a	period	of	10	years	by	also	taking	into	account	the	value	of	the	center	if	it	were	
to	be	sold	at	the	end	of	this	10‐year	period.		

	
	
The	equation	for	the	net	present	value	of	a	child	care	center	is	calculated	as	follows:	

	
            Net	Present	Value	       	 	Setup	Cost	                                                                                                    Eq		1	
                                                    	       	          ∗                               	          	   	      ∗ 12 ∗ 1        			
                                                                                                   1
                                       Terminal	Value .	    viii



Where:		

            Setup	cost	is	the	setup	cost	 e.g.	if	the	center	were	to	be	opened	up	now	what	the	setup	cost	would	be 	
             of	the	child	care	center	as	reported	by	each	respondent	in	the	survey.		
            Yearly	cash	flow	is	the	difference	between	yearly	revenues	collected	from	families	minus	the	variable	
             costs	 These	are	personnel	costs,	stationary	costs,	utility	costs	and	travel	costs .		
            The	discount	rate	r	is	assumed	to	be	equal	to	40	percent.ix	
            Cumulative	and	combined	tax	rate	taken	at	32	percent	in	Turkeyx.			

Secondly,	the	net	present	value	 NPV 	of	an	investment	is	mapped	onto	a	probability	of	investment	through	a	
functional	form	as	described	below			 See	Figure	2 .	This	non‐linear	functional	form	is	used	to	hypothetically	
describe	the	investment	behavior	of	child	care	centers.	With	increasing	values	of	NPV,	the	probability	to	invest	
increases	and	this	probability	ranges	between	0	and	1.		

              Figure	2.	Probability	to	invest	for	each	child	care	center	given	the	estimated	net	present	value	

            P invest 	 	                        ,       	
                                 	          ,




                                                                                                                                                   	
	

This	functional	form	shows	that	the	probability	to	invest	increases	with	increasing	values	of	the	net	present	
value.		 For	those	who	have	a	negative	net	present	value,	a	probability	of	0	is	directly	assigned	without	using	
the	functional	form .	

Calculating	the	Estimated	Capacity	Increase	Impact	of	the	Grants	
Impacts	of	investment	and	operational	grants	are	estimated	by	including	these	grants	in	the	net	present	value	
calculations	 and	 recalculating	 the	 net	 present	 values	 of	 each	 child	 care	 center	 after	 the	 grant	 shock.	 The	
operational	 grant	 reduces	 the	 operational	 costs	 faced	 by	 the	 service	 provider,	 and	 the	 investment	 grant	
reduces	the	burden	of	the	investment	 setup 	costs	of	the	service	provider	which	is	reflected	in	the	calculation	
of	the	net	present	value	‐and	from	there	‐	the	probability	to	invest.		

For	an	investment	grant	the	net	present	value	equation	becomes	as	follows:	

             Net	Present	Value          	 	Setup	Cost                                  	       	                                                       Eq		 2 	
                                                   	               	           ∗
                                                                                                           ∗ 12 ∗ 1   		
                                                    	                      	               	
                                                                                                                           Terminal	Value	
                                                                                   1

    	

For	an	operational	grant	without	a	price	cap	the	net	present	value	equation	becomes	as	follows:	
	
	
                       Net	Present	Value			          	 	Setup	Cost	                                                                        Eq		 3 	
                                         	   	                        	           ∗   	
                             ∗                   	            	               	       ∗       ∗
                       ∑
                                                          	       	
                             ∗                   	            	               	       ∗       ∗
                       ∑                                                                          	    	        			

    	

Operational	grants	are	assumed	to	be	given	for	a	period	of	five	years.	

For	an	operational	grant	with	a	price	cap	the	net	present	value	equation	is	the	same	as	above,	but	only	some	
of	the	schools	that	have	lower	initial	prices	opt	in	for	the	program.	For	those	child	care	providers	that	initially	
are	 able	 to	 charge	 high	 prices,	 it	 may	 not	 be	 favorable	 to	 lock	 themselves	 into	 the	 price	 cap.	 We	 assume	
therefore	that	a	sub‐group	of	child	care	centers	will	opt‐in	for	the	grant	 those	with	already	high	prices	will	
opt	out	of	this	program .	The	new	prices	are	then	calculated	as	follows	for	all	centers:	

    Price_new	 	Price_old	if	Price_old‐operational	grant*pass‐through                                 Price	cap	 Those	who	          Eq		 4 	
    opt‐out 	

    	

    Price_new	 	Price_old‐operational	grant*pass‐through	if	Price_old‐operational	grant*pass‐                                        Eq		 5 	
    through Price	cap	 Those	who	opt‐in 	
    	

It	is	assumed	that	after	5	years,	the	prices	go	back	to	what	they	were	before	the	price	cap	was	introduced.	For	
both	 of	 the	 operational	 grant	 scenarios	 a	 pass‐through	 rate	 is	 assumed.	 This	 lets	 the	 model	 distribute	 the	
benefit	to	the	households	by	leading	to	a	decrease	in	prices	 Pass	through	rate	is	assumed	to	be	0.5 .	

Following	the	net	present	value	recalculation,	the	probability	to	invest	is	also	recalculated	for	each	center	and	
for	each	grant	scenario.	Once	the	baseline	probability	to	invest	and	probability	to	invest	under	each	scenario	
are	all	calculated,	the	expected	capacity	for	each	center	is	then	calculated	as	follows:	

            E Capacity   Baseline	    	Probability	to	invest	in	Baseline*Total	capacity	of	the	center	                                 Eq		 6 	
                                                                          	

               E Capacity     Sc	X	   	Probability	to	invest	in	Sc.	X*Total	capacity	of	the	center	                                    Eq		 7 	
                                                                          	

                                                                                          	

These	 expected	 capacities	 are	 then	 summed	 up	 and	 the	 percent	 capacity	 increase	 achieved	 with	 Sc.	 X	 is	
calculated	with	the	following	equation:	

        %	Increase	in	total	capacitySc	X	 	 E Total	capacity Sc	X‐E Total	capacity                         Baseline   /	E Total	   		Eq		 8 	
                                              capacity Baseline		

    	

5.2.2		Demand‐Side	Simulation		
The	 next	 step	 is	 to	 tie	 the	 capacity	 increase	 coming	 from	 the	 supply‐side	 simulation	 to	 the	 demand‐side	
household	data	in	order	to	see	who	is	impacted	by	the	newly	created	capacity	and	enrollments.	The	capacity	
increase	found	in	the	supply‐side	simulation	is	used	as	the	“exogenous	shock”	in	the	demand‐side	simulations.		

Our	aim	in	each	scenario	is	to	find	out	how	much	capacity	is	estimated	to	expand,	how	many	new	children	are	
expected	to	enroll	in	each	scenario,	who	benefits	from	the	capacity	increases	and	price	reductions	and	the	
total	estimated	impact	on	mothers’	employment.	We	also	calculate	the			cost	implications	in	each	scenario	 net	
of	taxes	collected	as	a	result	of	the	intervention 	as	well	as	cost‐effectiveness	per	child	enrolled	and	per	woman	
employed	into	the	labor	market.		


	
	
The	impact	on	children’s	preschool	enrollment		
In	 the	 model,	 we	 can	 expect	 an	 increase	 in	 children’s	 enrollment	 from	 two	different	 channels:	 i 	 the	 first	
channel	works	through	the	expansion	of	capacity	and	hence	enrollments	 a	new	center	is	opened	in	the	child’s	
neighborhood	 and	 those	 most	 likely	 to	 enroll	 become	 beneficiaries	 of	 this	 newly	 created	 capacity;	 ii 	 the	
second	channel	works	through	affordability	 the	child	becomes	enrolled	because	now	it	is	more	affordable	for	
the	family	to	send	the	child	to	daycare .	The	scenarios	considered	may	contribute	to	enrollments	through	their	
impact	on	capacity	or	through	their	impact	on	affordability	for	households,	or	both.		

The	 investment	 grants,	 where	 they	 are	 applied,	 are	 assumed	 to	 have	 an	 impact	 on	 enrollments	 through	
capacity	increases	–	and	not	through	increased	affordability.	Hence,	it	is	assumed	in	the	model,	that	the	full	
benefit	of	the	investment	grant	will	be	captured	by	the	service	provider.	They	have	an	impact	on	enrollments	
only	through	new	capacity	created.xi		

For	operational	grants,	the	increase	in	enrollments	is	due	to	the	capacity	effect	as	well	as	the	affordability	
effect	 income	effect	at	the	household	level ,	as	we	assume	that	the	benefit	from	the	operational	grants	are	
split	between	the	service	provider	and	the	household.	For	vouchers,	the	effect	on	enrollments	is	through	the	
affordability	effect	 the	income	effect	at	the	household	level .	In	the	short	term,	we	assume	that	there	is	no	
capacity	impact	as	a	result	of	the	vouchers.xii				

             Table	2:	Summary	of	Enrollment	Effects	in	the	Model	under	Different	Subsidy	Schemes	
    	                                       Impact	on	Enrollments	through	          Impact	on	Enrollments	through	
                                            Impact	on	Capacity		                    Impact	on	Affordability	 Income	
                                                                                    Effect 	

    Investment	Grant		                                        	                                      	
     as	in	Scenario1 	
    Operational	Grant		                                       	                                      	
     as	in	Scenario	2A	and	2B 	
    Vouchers		                                                 	                                      	
     as	in	Scenario	3 	
	

The	estimated	expected	capacity	increase	due	to	the	investment	grants	and	operational	grants	coming	from	
the	supply‐side	simulation	is	incorporated	into	the	model.	In	order	to	achieve	this,	the	number	of	children	
aged	3‐5	who	are	currently	enrolled	in	preschool	or	daycare	in	the	EU	SILC	2012	dataset	is	multiplied	with	the	
estimated	capacity	increase	coming	from	the	supply‐side	simulation	for	each	scenario.	This	allows	us	to	find	
out	the	number	of	spots	that	will	be	available	for	the	children	who	are	not	currently	enrolled	in	the	SILC	data	
set.	

Once	the	new	capacity	is	calculated,	this	value	is	divided	by	the	total	number	of	children	attending	preschool	
in	Turkey	in	the	baseline.	Lastly,	this	value	is	used	as	the	percent	capacity	increase	and	it	is	multiplied	by	the	
number	of	children	attending	preschool	in	the	data	set.	This	again	allows	us	to	find	out	the	number	of	spots	
that	will	be	available	for	the	children	who	are	not	currently	enrolled	in	the	SILC	data	set.	

After	the	capacity	increase	amounts	in	SILC	are	all	determined,	the	number	of	new	spots	due	to	the	increased	
capacity	are	allocated	to	the	children	in	the	data	set	aged	3‐5,	based	on	their	propensity	to	attend	preschool.	
This	propensity	is	calculated	using	a	probit	model	which	uses	a	wide	range	of	independent	variables	to	predict	
a	child’s	propensity	to	attend	preschool.	The	probit	equation	is	as	follows:	

                             P attending	preschool	or	daycare         φ X’ 	                               Eq		 9 	
where	 the	 independent	 variables	 X	 are	 as	 follows:	 child’s	 age,	 mother’s	 level	 of	 education,	 mother’s	
employment	 status,	 father’s	 level	 of	 education,	 father’s	 employment	 status,	 per	 capita	 household	 income,	
household	size,	number	of	adults	in	the	household	aged	65 ,	number	of	children	in	the	household	aged	0‐6	
and	region	the	household	is	located	in.	


	
	
Using	this	equation,	the	probability	to	attend	is	calculated	for	all	children	whether	they	currently	attend	a	
center	 or	 not.	 The	 calculated	 capacity	 increase	 is	 allocated	 to	 the	 children	 starting	 from	 the	 child	 who	 is	
currently	not	attending	but	has	the	highest	 propensity	to	attend	child	care	among	the	non‐attenders	and	the	
allocation	stops	when	the	increased	capacity	is	filled.	This	exercise	allows	us	to	observe	who	is	more	likely	to	
benefit	from	a	capacity	increase	as	a	result	of	an	operational	grant	or	investment	grant.	

For	the	case	of	operational	grant	with	a	price	cap	a	slightly	different	exercise	needs	to	be	adopted.	In	the	price	
cap	scenario,	the	child	care	centers	in	the	supply‐side	model	with	the	highest	prices	keep	their	prices	and	do	
not	opt‐in	for	the	grant	since	it	will	not	be	profitable	for	them	to	do	so.	Hence,	we	need	to	incorporate	this	fact	
into	our	demand‐side	simulation.		We	try	to	achieve	this	by	assuming	that	children	who	do	not	currently	attend	
preschool	in	households	in	the	highest	income	quintile	will	not	benefit	from	the	capacity	increases	since	the	
school	their	families	would	prefer	would	not	opt‐in	for	operational	grants.xiii		

Overall	 to	 calculate	 the	 number	 of	 children	 enrolled	 due	 to	 capacity	 increase,	 individual	 weights	 of	 these	
children	who	are	newly	enrolled	are	summed	up,	using	the	equation	below:	
                                                                                                                                              	
                                    Number	of	children	enrolled	due	to	the	capacity	increaseSc	X	 	                             Eq		 10   	
                  %	   	    	   	    	 	∗     	   	      	      	       	   	   	
              ∑                                                                                   	   	 	   	   	

                                                                                                                      	     	


Operational	grants	also	have	a	positive	effect	through	increasing	affordability	by	decreasing	prices.	To	show	
this	 impact,	 the	 probability	 to	 attend	 preschool	 is	 calculated	 for	 the	 children	 i 	 P1‐when	 there	 is	 an	
operational	grant	and	children	are	allocated	the	new	capacity	and	 ii 	P2‐	when	there	is	an	operational	grant	
and	children	are	allocated	the	new	capacity	and	there	is	also	the	positive	income	shock.	These	probabilities	
are	 calculated	 using	 the	 probit	 equation	 described	 above.	 As	 a	 second	 step,	 expected	 number	 of	 children	
benefiting	 from	 affordability	 increases	 are	 calculated	 by	 multiplying	 the	 probabilities	 with	 weights	 of	 the	
children	and	adding	them	up	for	the	whole	population.	In	the	operational	grants,	the	benefit	of	the	subsidy	is	
shared	between	the	households	and	service	providers,	hence	there	is	an	increase	in	enrollments	due	to	both	
the	capacity	increase	and	the	affordability	increase	 the	income	effect .			

For	the	voucher	scenario,	the	main	impact	is	through	the	income	effect	introduced	by	the	voucher	–	hence	the	
increased	 enrollment	is	due	 to	increased	 affordability	 as	a	 result	 of	the	voucher.	 The	 probability	 to	attend	
preschool	is	calculated	for	the	children	using	the	 probit	equation	above	 i 	in	the	baseline	where	there	is	no	
voucher	and	 ii 	when	there	is	a	voucher	creating	a	positive	income	effect.	In	the	second	step	expected	number	
of	children	attending	preschool	in	the	baseline	and	when	there	is	an	income	effect	will	be	calculated.	Note	that	
there	is	no	capacity	impact	in	the	short	term	in	the	voucher	scenario,	since	the	benefit	is	fully	absorbed	by	the	
households.		

The	expected	number	of	children	attending	preschool	as	a	result	of	the	affordability	increases	is	calculated	
using	the	equation	below:	

        E Number	of	children	enrolled	due	to	affordability	increaseSc	X	                      	 P2‐P1 *individual	       Eq		 11 	
                                       weight	in	the	dataset	
In	 summary,	 for	 each	 scenario	 the	 number	 of	 children	 who	 will	 be	 enrolled	 due	 to	 the	 capacity	 impact	 is	
summed	up	with	the	predicted	number	of	children	who	will	be	enrolled	in	child	care	due	to	the	affordability	
increase	in	order	to	come	up	with	the	total	number	of	newly	enrolled	children.		

     Number	 of	 newly	 enrolled	 childrenSc	 X Number	 of	 children	 enrolled	 due	 to	 the	 capacity	                    Eq		 12 	
     increaseSc	X 	E Number	of	children	enrolled	due	to	affordability	increaseSc	X 	

		
5.2.3		Fiscal	Impact	and	Cost	Effectiveness	
Different	calculations	are	necessary	to	calculate	the	cost	of	the	investment,	operational	grants,	the	vouchers	
and	the	scenarios	where	municipalities	open	up	child	care	centers.		


	
	
For	investment	grants,	we	first	estimate	the	expected	number	of	new	child	care	centers	that	will	be	opened	up	
as	a	result	of	the	subsidy.	This	is	calculated	by	dividing	the	number	of	new	enrollments	by	the	average	size	of	
a	child	care	center	 in	our	case,	this	was	50	children	per	center	on	average .	The	expected	number	of	new	child	
care	centers	 countrywide ,	is	multiplied	with	the	level	of	the	investment	grant.	

        Cost	 	 Number	 of	 children	 enrolled	 due	 to	 the	 capacity	 increase/Average	 capacity	 of	 a	                               Eq		 13 	
           center *Investment	grant	
For	the	operational	grant,	when	there	is	no	price	cap,	all	the	schools	that	already	exist	are	assumed	to	opt‐in,	
hence	the	 cost	of	the	 grant	 will	 be	 equal	to	 the	 country	wide	 level	 of	 expected	 enrollment	multiplied	with	
yearly	value	of	the	operational	grant	and	summed	up	over	5	years.	

	

                                                     	           	                          	                                     Eq		 14 	
                                       	 	                           	                  	               ∗ 12			
                                       ∗   	                         	
               Total	cost                                                                                       	
                                                             1

For	 the	 operational	 grant	 with	 the	 price	 cap,	 first	 the	 country‐wide	 number	 of	 children	 enrolled	 from	 the	
bottom	80%	is	calculated	using	SILC.xiv	Then	the	estimated	number	of	children	who	will	be	newly	enrolled	is	
added	to	this	value	to	find	the	total	number	of	beneficiaries.	Similar	to	the	previous	step,	5	year	value	of	the	
operational	grant	is	calculated	to	find	the	total	cost.	
                                         	       	                            	                     	       	                     Eq		 15 	
                                             	           	                            	80%
                                                                                                                    ∗ 12			
                                         	       	                   	                          	
                                             ∗               	                    	
               Total	cost                                                                                                     	
                                                                         1
    	

The	cost	of	the	vouchers	is	calculated	by	first	adding	up	number	of	children	already	enrolled	from	the	bottom	
40%	with	the	expected	number	of	children	newly	enrolled	to	childcare	after	the	voucher	shock	is	received	and	
then	multiplying	this	value	with	the	value	of	the	voucher.	This	value	is	then	summed	up	for	a	5	year	period.		

	

                                        	        	                            	                     	       	                        Eq		 16 	
                                             	           	                            	40%
                                                                                                                    ∗ 12			
                                         	 	                         	                          	
                                          ∗  	                            	
               Total	cost                                                                                                 	
                                                                         1

	

Two	kinds	of	tax	revenue	are	calculated	for	each	scenario.	These	are	corporation	tax	revenues	and	income	
tax	revenues	from	newly	employed	staff	at	the	centers.		

               i 	Tax	revenues	obtained	from	the	newly	opening	centers:	This	is	in	the	form	of	income	and	
              corporation	taxes	making	a	cumulative	total	of	32%	of	the	profitsxv;	and		

               ii 	Tax	revenues	obtained	from	employee	contributions:	This	is	composed	of	the	women	working	in	
              child	care	centers	that	opened	up	as	a	result	of	the	grants.	Hence	as	a	lower	bound	estimate	for	tax	
              revenue	‐	all	the	women	employed	in	new	child	care	centers	are	assumed	to	be	receiving	the	
              minimum	wagexvi.		Net	present	value	of	tax	revenues	are	calculated	for	a	period	of	10	years.		

Net	cost	is	calculated	for	each	scenario	by	taking	the	difference	between	total	costs	and	total	tax	revenues.	
Finally,	the	cost	effectiveness	of	each	scenario	is	calculated	by	dividing	the	net	costs	of	each	scenario	with	the	
total	number	of	newly	generated	enrollments	through	the	capacity	and	increased	affordability	effects	of	the	
scenario	and	dividing	this	number	further	by	10	which	is	the	assumed	years	of	operation	for	these	centers.		



	
	
6.	Main	Findings	
The	results	of	the	supply‐	and	demand‐side	simulations	are	presented	in	this	section	when	the	methodology	
is	applied	to	the	case	of	Turkey	taking	into	consideration	the	 i 	impact	on	capacity	and	estimated	number	of	
new	centers	 ii 	impact	on	enrollments	which	are	derived	both	from	capacity	increase	as	well	as	affordability	
increase	 in	 the	 household	 and	 hence	 may	 be	 higher	 than	 the	 amount	 of	 capacity	 increased	 iii 	 benefit	
incidence	of	new	enrollments	and	grants	 %	of	children	in	the	bottom	40%	of	the	income	distribution	that	
benefit	from	the	expansion	and	households	in	the	bottom	40%	that	benefit	from	the	grants ,	 iv 	costs	and	
revenues	and	 v 	cost	effectiveness	in	terms	of	the	net	cost	of	the	policy	per	child	enrolled.					

6.1	Impact	on	capacity	and	estimated	number	of	new	centers			
Capacity	increase	is	maximized	in	the	scenario	that	combines	the	investment	grant	and	the	operational	grant	
 and	does	not	impose	a	price	cap .	This	scenario	 provided	under	Scenario	4A 	expands	existing	preschool	
capacity	by	30	percent.		The	estimated	number	of	newly	opened	centers	in	this	scenario	is	4,132	creating	space	
for	 206,608	 newly	 enrolled	 children	 additionally	 29,738	 children	 are	 expected	 to	 be	 enrolled	 due	 to	 an	
affordability	increase .	When	a	price	cap	is	introduced	to	these	scenarios	 Scenario	4B 	the	impact	on	capacity	
is	slightly	lower	though	still	higher	than	if	an	investment	grant	or	operational	grant	were	provided	alone.		

When	 an	 investment	 grant	 is	 provided	 alone	 Scenario	 1 ,	 there	 is	 a	 small	 increase	 in	 capacity,	 while	 the	
impact	on	capacity	of	only	providing	operational	grants	is	projected	to	be	higher	 Scenario	2A	and	2B .	With	
a	one‐time	investment	grant	and	without	operational	grants,	the	capacity	increase	is	estimated	to	be	about	6	
percent.		The	one‐time	investment	grant	does	not	create	enough	incentive	in	the	model	to	expand	capacity	for	
child	care	centers,	rather	the	operational	grants	seem	to	have	a	more	convincing	impact:	when	operational	
grants	–with	or	without	a	price	cap‐	are	provided	per	child	per	month	for	5	years,	the	impact	on	capacity	is	
estimated	to	be	17	percent	with	price	cap	and	24	percent	without	the	price	cap	 an	estimated	2,394	and	3,306	
new	centers	respectively .		

Where	an	operational	grant	is	introduced	with	a	price	cap	 Scenario	2B ,	the	capacity	increase	is	–	as	expected	
‐	smaller	compared	to	no	price	cap	scenarios.	In	the	supply	side	simulation	model,	when	an	operational	grant	
is	introduced	with	a	price	cap,	child	care	centers	that	charge	more	than	the	cap	do	not	find	it	profitable	to	opt	
in.	As	a	result,	capacity	increase	remains	smaller	compared	to	the	scenario	with	no	price	cap	where	every	
service	provider	would	have	the	incentive	to	opt‐in.	Hence	for	instance	in	the	scenario	when	an	operational	
grant	of	300	TL	is	provided	without	a	price	cap	a	capacity	increase	of	24	percent	is	expected	as	opposed	to	a	
capacity	increase	of	17	percent	when	the	same	grant	is	provided	but	with	a	price	cap	of	750	TL	per	month	per	
child.		

The	vouchers	‐	when	provided	alone	‐	are	not	expected	to	create	new	capacity	in	the	short	term	in	the	model.	
The	impact	of	the	vouchers	on	enrollments	are	built	into	the	model	through	their	impact	on	“affordability”	of	
child	care	for	the	household,	hence	they	work	through	the	demand‐side	simulation	and	are	projected	to	have	
no	impact	on	the	supply‐side	capacity	in	the	short	term.		

6.2		Impact	on	preschool	enrollment	
The	increase	in	the	enrollment	figures	come	from	the	increase	in	capacity	in	the	supply‐side	model	 which	is	
assumed	 to	 be	 taken	 up	 fully	 by	 new	 enrollments 	 as	 well	 as	 the	 increase	 in	 affordability	 of	 child	 care	 by	
households	in	the	demand‐side	model.	As	explained	in	the	methodology	section,	the	investment	grants	have	
an	impact	on	enrollments	only	through	their	impact	on	capacity,	whereas	the	vouchers	impact	enrollments	
through	their	impact	on	affordability	of	child	care	 hence	are	assumed	to	have	no	impact	on	capacity .	The	
operational	grants	have	an	impact	on	both	capacity	and	affordability	by	the	household	–the	benefit	derived	
from	the	grants	are	assumed	to	be	shared	by	the	child	care	centers	and	households	equally	and	enrollments	
increase	in	these	scenarios	both	through	the	capacity	increase	on	the	supply	side	and	the	affordability	increase	
on	the	demand	side	 and	hence	increased	enrollment	in	existing	capacity .	Number	of	newly	enrolled	children	
as	a	result	of	each	scenario	through	impact	from	these	two	channels	can	be	seen	in	Figure	3.		

The	highest	levels	of	new	enrollments	are	observed	in	the	set	of	scenarios	that	include	investment	grants	and	
operational	grants	together	 Scenario	4A	and	4B .	This	is	in	parallel	with	the	fact	that	these	scenarios	also	

	
	
create	the	highest	capacity	increases.	The	increase	in	enrollments	is	highest	when	there	is	no	price	cap.	Current	
enrollment	rate	increases	by	9.6	percentage	points	in	the	case	where	the	one‐time	investment	grant	is	50,000	
TL	and	the	operational	grant	is	300	TL	per	month	per	child.	A	total	of	236,346	children	are	expected	to	be	
enrolled	in	preschool,	the	majority	of	which	are	enrolled	through	the	capacity	increase	 206,608	children .	
When	a	price	cap	is	introduced	 Scenario	4B 	the	increase	in	enrollments	is	estimated	to	be	7.6	percentage	
points	in	this	scenario.		

	

    Figure	3.	Number	of	newly	enrolled	children	due	to	capacity	or	affordability	increase	


                                                         # of newly enrolled children
                     0                 50,000             100,000           150,000                  200,000               250,000

       Scenario 1
     Scenario 2A
      Scenario 2B
       Scenario 3
     Scenario 4A
      Scenario 4B
       Scenario 5

                                      # of newly enrolled children due to capacity increase
                                      # of newly enrolled children due to affordability increase
                                                                                                                                     	
    Source:	Authors’	calculations	using	SILC	2012	and	Supply	Side	Data	of	“Supply	and	Demand	for	Child	care	Services	in	Turkey”	

Providing	only	demand‐side	vouchers	to	families	 Scenario	3 	has	a	minimal	impact	on	enrollments.	Provision	
of	vouchers	to	the	bottom	40%	of	the	population	increases	preschool	enrollment	rate	by	only	0.9	percentage	
points.	As	a	result	of	this	scenario,	a	total	of	22,735	children	are	expected	to	be	enrolled	in	preschool,	all	of	
whom	 are	 enrolled	 due	 to	 an	 increase	 in	 affordability	 See	 Figure	 3 .	 This	 is	 due	 to	 our	 assumption	 that	
vouchers	do	not	have	a	supply‐side	impact,	hence	they	do	not	have	any	impact	on	capacity.		Because	the	main	
constraint	in	the	sector	is	on	the	supply	side	 a	capacity	constraint ,	the	demand‐side	stimulation	introduced	
by	these	transfers	to	the	household	do	not	address	the	main	constraint	in	the	market	and	are	ineffective	in	
terms	 of	 increasing	 enrollments.	 We	 also	 see	 that	 the	 voucher	 scenarios	 also	 happen	 to	 be	 the	 least	 cost‐
effective	way	of	expanding	enrollments	in	terms	of	money	spent	per	new	child	enrolled	 See	Section	5.5	for	
more	details .		

Overall	 affordability	 increase	 generates	 a	 smaller	 impact	 as	 opposed	 to	 the	 capacity	 increase.	 In	 every	
scenario,	the	number	of	children	enrolled	due	to	the	capacity	increase	is	almost	always	higher	compared	to	
the	number	of	children	enrolled	due	to	the	affordability	increase	 See	Annex	Table	A1 .	For	instance	in	the	
scenario	where	only	an	operational	grant	is	provided	and	there	is	no	price	cap,	the	number	of	children	enrolled	
due	to	the	capacity	increase	is	165,293		while	the	number	of	children	enrolled	due	to	the	affordability	increase	
is	estimated	at	29,289.	This	is	due	to	the	supply‐side	constraints	in	the	sector	–	and	signals	that	an	impact	on	
enrollments	in	the	sector	will	mainly	be	achieved	by	interventions	that	target	the	supply‐side	capacity	of	child	
care	in	the	country.		

6.3		Benefit	incidence	of	new	enrollments	and	grants			
The	distributional	impact	of	the	grants	across	income	groups	is	another	important	dimension	analyzed	by	the	
simulation.	 In	 each	 scenario,	 who	 benefits	 from	 the	 expanded	 capacity	 and	 who	 benefits	 from	 increased	
affordability	depends	very	much	on	whether	there	is	a	price	cap	attached	to	the	grants	and	whether	there	is	a	
targeted	voucher	system.				

	
	
In	the	scenarios	where	there	are	no	price	caps,	the	newly	created	capacity	accrues	regressively	and	benefits	
the	higher	income	quintiles	disproportionately.	In	other	words,	the	children	who	are	likely	to	be	enrolled	come	
from	families	in	the	top	quintiles	of	the	income	distribution.	For	instance,	in	the	scenarios	with	the	operational	
and	investment	grants	implemented	together	 scenario	4A 	without	the	price	cap,	30.3	percent	of	capacity	
generated	 is	 utilized	 by	 children	 in	 the	 bottom	 40%	 of	 the	 distribution.	 When	 there	 is	 a	 price	 cap	 in	 the	
scenarios	with	operational	grants,	the	utilization	of	new	capacity	becomes	more	equitable.	Looking	at	Scenario	
4B	 where	 the	 operational	 and	 investment	 grants	 are	 provided	 together,	 we	 find	 that	 with	 the	 price	 cap	
imposed	 at	 750	 TL	 per	 child,	 the	 new	 capacity	 generated	 accrues	 more	 to	 the	 poor–	 with	 39.9	 percent	 of	
capacity	being	utilized	by	children	in	the	bottom	40	%	of	the	income	distribution.	

The	vouchers	can	be	targeted	to	benefit	the	poorest	households	and	hence	they	have	appeal.	However,	when	
we	look	carefully	at	the	results,	because	the	impact	of	the	voucher	scheme	is	 too	small	on	enrollments,	the	
overall	impact	of	the	scheme	even	on	poor	households	is	estimated	to	be	limited.	In	the	voucher	scenario,	the	
enrollments	 increase	 by	 only	 1.9	 percent	 for	 the	 bottom	 40%,	 while	 overall	 enrollments	 increase	 by	 0.9	
percent.	The	benefit	incidence	of	the	grant	is	pro‐poor,	meaning	the	grant	would	be	received	only	by	the	low	
income	households	–	for	instance,	in	the	targeted	voucher	scheme,	44%	of	the	benefits	are	estimated	to	accrue	
to	households	in	the	bottom	20%	of	the	income	distribution,	which	is	the	best	scenario	in	terms	of	targeting	
when	 compared	 to	 the	 scenarios	 with	 the	 operational	 grants.	 However,	 because	 the	 enrollment	 impact	 is	
limited	under	this	scenario	 since	the	voucher	system	works	through	the	demand	side	and	through	improved	
affordability	of	existing	services	–	rather	than	by	increasing	capacity ,	the	overall	impact	on	the	poor	children	
is	very	limited.	We	find	that	the	enrollments	of	the	bottom	40	%	of	children	increase	more	 about	6	%	points	
in	Scenario	4B 	in	the	scenarios	with	the	investment	and	operational	grants	provided	together,	while	in	the	
voucher	scenario	providing	the	same	level	of	investment	grants	and	providing	the	vouchers	to	the	household	
the	enrollment	increase	for	the	bottom	40%	is	only	2.1	percent	 Scenario	5 .	This	is	a	very	interesting	and	
important	result	that	suggests	that	 targeting	the	poorest	households	through	a	demand	side	transfer	might	
not	always	be	the	most	pro‐poor	policy.	In	the	case	of	child	care	in	Turkey,	it	seems	that	these	households	do	
not	benefit	from	these	services,	not	because	they	are	not	affordable	to	them,	but	because	they	are	not	available	
to	them	–	hence	before	resolving	supply	side	capacity	issues	targeting	the	unaffordability	problem	through	a	
demand‐side	transfer	to	households	turns	out	to	be	an	ineffective	policy	for	expanding	access	to	services.					

	                                   	




	
	
    Figure	4.	Preschool	enrollment	rates	of	children	aged	3‐5	by	per	capita	income	quintile	

                                                      Scenario 1: Supply Side Investment Grant only                                                                Scenario 2A: Supply Side Operational Grant only




                                                                                                                                                          1
                                             1




                                                                                                                  Enrolment rate for Children aged 3-5
     Enrolment rate for Children aged 3-5




                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                             .8




                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                             .6




                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                          0
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                               1             2           3            4              5
                                                  1            2           3            4             5       	                                                                                                              	

                                                      Scenario 2B: Supply Side Operational Grant only                                                                    Scenario 3: Demand Side Grant only
                                                                      with Price Cap




                                                                                                                                                          1
                                             1




                                                                                                                   Enrolment rate for Children aged 3-5
      Enrolment rate for Children aged 3-5




                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                             .8




                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                             .6




                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                          0
                                             0




                                                  1                2           3            4             5                                                    1                 2           3            4              5



                                                           Scenario 4A: Supply Side Investment                                                                          Scenario 4B: Supply Side Investment
                                                             and Operational Grant combined                                                                         and Operational Grant combined with Price Cap
                                                                                                                                                          1
                                             1




                                                                                                                   Enrolment rate for Children aged 3-5
      Enrolment rate for Children aged 3-5




                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                             .8




                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                             .6




                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                          0
                                             0




                                                  1                2           3            4             5                                                    1                 2           3            4              5




	
	
                                                                                                                                                   	
                                                                    Scenario 5: Supply Side Investment Grant
                                                                       and Demand Side Grant combined




                                               1
       Enrolment rate for Children aged 3-5

                                               .8
                                               .6
                                               .4
                                               .2
                                               0




                                                            1                     2               3               4                5
                                                                                                                                               	




                                                                Baseline              Capacity increase               Affordability increase

    Figure	5.	Benefit	incidence	of	the	grants	and/or	vouchers	by	per	capita	income	quintile	

                                                                Scenario 1: Supply Side Investment Grant only                                                                                        Scenario 2A: Supply Side Operational Grant only




                                                                                                                                                                                       1,000
                                              1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                       800
                                              800




                                                                                                                                                       Total benefit (in million TL)
     Total benefit (in million TL)




                                                                                                                                                                                       600
                                              600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  427.6
                                                                                                                                                                                       400
                                              400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      311.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                             252.2        265.9
                                                                                                                                                                                       200




                                                                                                                                                                                               157.3
                                              200




                                                       0.0                  0.0            0.0             0.0               0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                1              2           3            4              5
                                                        1                    2              3               4                 5
                                                                                                                                          	                                                                                                                  	


                                                            Scenario 2B: Supply Side Operational Grant only                                                                                                Scenario 3: Demand Side Grant only
                                                                            with Price Cap
                                                                                                                                                                                       1,000
                                              1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                       800
                                                                                                                                                       Total benefit (in million TL)
                                              800
     Total benefit (in million TL)




                                                                                                                                                                                       600
                                              600




                                                                                                                                                                                                              413.7
                                                                                                                                                                                       400
                                              400




                                                                                                                                                                                               310.7
                                                                                                          309.6
                                                                           247.9          264.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       200
                                              200




                                                      151.1

                                                                                                                             0.0                                                                                           0.0          0.0            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                              0




                                                       1                    2               3              4                 5            	                                                      1              2           3           4              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	




	
	
                                                      Scenario 4A: Supply Side Investment                                                                              Scenario 4B: Supply Side Investment
                                                        and Operational Grant combined                                                                             and Operational Grant combined with Price Cap




                                                                                                                                                      1,000
                                     1,000




                                                                                                                                                      800
                                     800




                                                                                                                      Total benefit (in million TL)
    Total benefit (in million TL)




                                                                                                                                                      600
                                     600



                                                                                             434.2




                                                                                                                                                      400
                                     400




                                                                                 318.3                                                                                     291.4                   316.2
                                                         284.4       287.0                                                                                                             284.8

                                                                                                                                                              163.7




                                                                                                                                                      200
                                             165.7
                                     200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.0




                                                                                                                                                      0
                                     0




                                                                                                                                                               1            2           3           4              5
                                              1           2           3           4             5
                                                                                                          	                                                                                                              	

                                                     Scenario 5: Supply Side Investment Grant
                                                                                                                  	
                                                        and Demand Side Grant combined
                                     1,000
                                     800
     Total benefit (in million TL)
                                     600




                                                          417.1
                                     400




                                             317.0
                                     200




                                                                          0.0         0.0           0.0
                                     0




                                               1              2           3              4           5
                                                                                                              	




	
	

6.4	Cost	Effectiveness		
	
Implementing	 each	 scenario	 results	 in	 its	 own	 costs	 and	 potential	 tax	 revenues.	 In	 order	 to	 look	 at	 cost	
effectiveness,	we	first	consider	net	costs	of	each	scenario,	looking	at	costs	and	potential	tax	revenues	to	be	
generated.		While	the	costs	are	the	total	costs	of	the	investment	grants,	operational	grants,	or	vouchers,	the	
tax	revenues	are	collected	in	the	form	of	 i 	corporation	and	income	taxes	of	the	newly	established	centers	
and	 ii 	employee	taxes	of	the	employees	working	in	these	centers.	The	costs	are	calculated	as	the	total	cost	
of	the	one‐time	investment	grant	and	the	5	year	on‐going	cost	of	grants	and	vouchers	and	are	provided	in	
net	present	values.	The	costs	and	revenues	in	each	scenario	are	provided	in	Annex	Table	A1.		

Providing	operational	grants	for	5	years	in	addition	to	investment	grants	turns	out	to	be	the	most	costly	
alternative.	When	an	operational	grant	of	300	TL	is	provided	for	each	child	enrolled	in	the	centers	for	5	years	
without	a	price	cap	in	addition	to	a	50,000	TL	investment	grant,	the	total	cost	is	5.8	billion	TL	in	net	present	
value.			This	cost	which	is	the	highest	among	the	others	is	equivalent	to	about	0.30	percent	of	Turkey’s	2015	
GDP.xvii		

While	costs	are	higher	in	general	when	operational	grants	are	provided,	revenues	are	also	higher	since	more	
centers	are	established	under	these	scenarios	‐	leading	to	the	collection	of	more	corporation	and	income	
taxes.	In	fact,	the	scenario	that	provides	operational	grants	of	300		TL	without	a	price	cap	and	an	investment	
grant	of	50,000	TL	generates	the	highest	amount	of	revenues	with	1.9	billion	TL.	In	comparison,	the	lowest	
amount	of	revenues	is	generated	when	vouchers	are	provided	alone.	In	fact	no	revenue	is	generated	from	
providing	vouchers	for	5	years	since	vouchers	do	not	lead	to	the	establishment	of	new	centers.	

One	of	the	policies	presented	here	are	“net	revenue	generating”	policy	options.	According	to	the	simulation	
model,	when	the	investment	grants	are	applied	on	their	own	–	the	net	cost	of	the	program	ends	up	being	
negative,	meaning	that	the	tax	revenue	from	corporation	taxes	and	income	taxes	from	employees	in	these	
centers	‐over	the	10	year	period	for	which	these	centers	are	expected	to	operate‐,	exceed	the	initial	set	up	
grants	provided	to	these	centers.	For	instance,	providing	a	50,000	TL	investment	grant	to	these	centers	is	
estimated	to	cost	39	million	TL	initially,	and	generate	353	million	TL	in	tax	revenues	in	the	10	year	period	
making	the	total	net	cost	‐314	million	TL	for	this	investment.			The	main	assumption	here	is	that	the	child	
care	centers	would	truthfully	report	profits	and	that	the	employees	would	be	 formally	employed	at	these	
centers.		As	long	as	these	requirements	are	tracked	and	enforced,	 net	positive	revenues	are	expected	to	be	
generated	with	this	kind	of	an	investment	subsidy.		

In	 comparison,	 scenarios	 with	 only	 operational	 grants	 and	 operational	 grants	 provided	 together	 with	
investment	grants	end	up	having	the	highest	net	cost.	When	300	TL	operational	grant	without	a	price	cap	is	
provided	together	with	a	50,000	TL	investment	grant	net	cost	is	4.0	billion	TL.	But	it	is	useful	to	remember	
that	these	are	also	the	scenarios	that	generate	the	highest	changes	in	the	capacity	and	enrollment	rates	for	
children.	In	order	to	assess	the	cost‐effectiveness	‐and	therefore	value	for	money‐	of	each	scenario,	we	have	
plotted	the	percentage	point	increase	in	enrollments	as	a	result	of	the	policy	against	the	per	child	net	cost	of	
implementing	each	policy	in	Figure	6.	

According	to	this	analysis,	a	typology	of	scenarios	come	up	when	the	model	is	applied	to	the	Turkish	case:		

        Revenue	 generating	 scenario	 Scenario	 1	 –	 Investment	 Grant	 Scenario :	 The	 investment	 grant	
         scenarios	are	expected	to	be	revenue	generating	within	the	10	year	spectrum.	They	have	little	impact	
         on	enrollments	and	hence	are	not	advised	to	be	applied	on	their	own	if	the	intention	is	to	expand	
         services	and	increase	enrollments	–	though	if	they	are	provided	on	their	own	they	are	likely	to	have	
         a	positive	impact	on	the	budget	in	the	medium	term.			
        Least	Cost	Effective	scenario:	 Scenario	3	–	Only	voucher	scenario :	The	scenario	that	uses	vouchers	
         only	without	an	investment	support,	is	the	most	expensive	scenario	in	the	analysis	in	terms	of	per	
         child	enrolled.	This	is	because	incentivizing	a	household	to	use	these	services	using	the	demand‐side	
         vouchers	only	–	when	availability	of	services	is	low	–	is	difficult	hence	the	vouchers	do	not	address	
         the	most	binding	problems	in	the	child	care	sector	in	the	country.		
Most	Cost	Effective	scenarios	 Scenarios	2A,	4A	and	4B	–	Investment	and	Operational	Grants	with	or	without	
Price	Cap	and	only	operational	grant	without	price	cap :	The	most	cost	effective	scenarios	in	terms	of	budget	
spent	 per	 child	 enrolled	 as	 a	 result	 of	 these	 policies,	 are	 represented	 by	 Scenarios	 2	 and	 4	 where	 the	
operational	and	investment	grants	are	provided	together.			As	discussed	in	section	5.3	when	a	price	cap	is	
introduced	the	benefit	incidence	accrues	more	to	the	poor	households.	Hence	Scenario	4B	where	operational	
grants	are	provided	together	with	investment	grants	and	with	a	price	cap	is	the	most	cost‐effective	and	pro‐
poor	 scenario	 in	 terms	 of	 benefit	 incidence.	 	 Overall,	 these	 are	 the	 most	 cost	 effective	 and	 hence	 most	
recommended	 scenarios	 in	 the	 simulation	 –	 whereby	 the	 twin	 goals	 of	 attaining	 higher	 capacity	 and	
enrollments	are	also	matched	with	a	concern	for	lower	costs	per	child	and	a	pro‐poor	distribution.	

                                                          	

    Figure	6.	Cost	effectiveness	

                                                                       12
                                                                                     Most cost effective
       Increase in enrollment rate (percentage point)




                                                                                       Scenario 4A
                                                                       10

                                                                                          Scenario 2A
                                                                                    Scenario 4B
                                                                       8


                                                                                        Scenario 2B
                                                                       6


                                                                       4
                                                                                           Scenario 5
                                                        Revenue generating
                                                            Scenario 1                                                              Least cost effective
                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                    Scenario 3


                                                                       0
         -2,000                                               -1,000        0     1,000      2,000       3,000      4,000       5,000    6,000      7,000
                                                                                Net annual cost per newly enrolled child (TL)
                                                                                                                                                            	

    Source:	Authors’	calculations	using	SILC	2012	and	Supply	Side	Data	of	“Supply	and	Demand	for	Child	care	Services	in	
    Turkey”	


7.	Conclusions	
The	mechanism	for	the	delivery	of	a	child	care	subsidy	matters	for	results.	The	initial	conditions	of	the	child	
care	market,	not	only	determine	the	marginal	benefit	incidence	of	additional	supply,	but	also	have	an	impact	
on	the	cost	effectiveness	of	targeted	subsidy	measures.	This	paper	has	demonstrated	a	practical	financing	
model	for	child	care	using	empirical	data	from	Turkey’s	child	care	sector,	and	applicable	to	other	countries.		
Combining	the	supply‐side	investment	incentives	of	firms	given	a	supply‐side	subsidy	and	the	demand‐side	
incentives	of	households	in	the	face	of	more	available	supply	and	reduced	prices,	the	model	has	predicted	
the	 capacity	 enhancement,	 benefit	 incidence	 and	 distribution	 of	 new	 capacity	 as	 well	 as	 the	 incidence	 of	
public	money	spent	on	households	by	welfare	quintile.	By	considering	the	cost	of	each	measure	and	the	new	
enrollments	induced	by	each	scenario,	the	paper	has	come	up	with	a	methodology	for	predicting	the	most	
cost‐effective	 policy	 measure	 for	 the	 country	 for	 expanding	 child	 care	 through	 public	 subsidies	 through	
supply‐side	investment	or	operational	grants	or	demand‐side	vouchers	that	target	households.	The	paper	
has	 shown	 that	 the	 mechanisms	 for	 the	 transfer	 alone	 make	 a	 difference	 in	 the	 model	 in	 how	 pro‐poor	


	
delivery	 of	 services	 is	 	 ‐	 and	 simply	 targeting	 “poor	 households”	 may	 not	 be	 the	 most	 pro‐poor	 way	 of	
expanding	services	or	subsidizing	child	care.					




	
Annex	
	

Table	A1.	Summary	of	the	results	under	each	scenario	
    		          Scenario	Type			                                       		          Scenario	1		                Scenario	2A	                 Scenario	2B	                  Scenario	3	                Scenario	4A	                  Scenario	4B	                   Scenario	5	
                	
    		          	                                               		                Supply	Side	               Supply	Side	                  Supply	Side	                  Demand	Side	               Supply	Side	                 Supply	Side	                   Supply	Side	
                                                                                  Investment	                Operational	                  Operational	                  Grant	only:		              Investment	                  Investment	and	                Investment	
                                                                                  Grant	only:	               Grant	only:	                  Grant	only	                   Vouchers	to	               and	                         Operational	                   Grant	and	
                                                                                  One‐time	                  Monthly	per	                  with	Price	                   households	                Operational	                 Grant	                         Vouchers	
                                                                                  investment	                student		                     Cap:	Monthly	                 per	child	                 Grant	                       Combined	with	                 Combined:		
                                                                                  grant	to	child	            operational	                  per	student		                 enrolled	                  combined:		                  Price	Cap:		                   One‐time	
                                                                                  care	centers.		            grant	 no	price	              operational	                                             One‐time	                    One‐time	                      investment	
                                                                                                             cap 	                         grant	 with	                                             investment	                  investment	                    grant	and	
                                                                                                                                           price	cap 	                                              grant	and	                   grant	and	                     monthly	
                                                                                                                                                                                                    monthly	per	                 monthly	per	                   voucher	to	
                                                                                                                                                                                                    child	                       child	                         households	
                                                                                                                                                                                                    operational	                 operational	                   combined	
                                                                                                                                                                                                    grant	                       grant	combined	
                                                                                                                                                                                                    combined	 no	                 with	price	
                                                                                                                                                                                                    price	cap 	                  cap 	
    Grant	      Investment	grant	level		                        		                																						     																													 																												 																									 																		             																					          																			
    levels		    	                                                                 50,000	₺ 		                ‐			₺ 		                      ‐			₺ 		                     ‐			₺ 		                  50,000	₺ 		                    50,000	₺ 		                    50,000	₺ 		
                  TL	‐	one	time	grant 	
    		          Operational	grant	level		                       		                																										 																									     																								      																									 																								      																											    																												
                	                                                                 ‐			₺ 		                   300	₺ 		                      300	₺ 		                      ‐			₺ 		                  300	₺ 		                      300	₺ 		                       ‐			₺ 		
                  TL	per	month	per	child 	
    		          Voucher	level		                                 		                																										 																													 																												 																					       																											 																														 																								
                	                                                                 ‐			₺ 		                   ‐			₺ 		                      ‐			₺ 		                     300	₺ 		                    ‐			₺ 		                    ‐			₺ 		                       300	₺ 		
                  TL	per	month	per	child 	
    		          Price	cap		                                     		                	‐		                       	‐		                          																								      	‐		                       	‐		                         																											    	‐		
                	                                                                                                                          750	₺ 		                                                                              750	₺ 		
                  TL	per	month	per	child 	
    Results		   %	capacity	increase	                            A	                6	                         24	                           17	                           0	                         30	                          24	                            6	
                                                                	
    		          #	of	newly	enrolled	children	due	to	capacity	   B	                39,145	                    165,293	                      119,688	                      0	                         206,608	                     166,974	                       39,145	
                increase	
    		          #	of	new	centers		                              C	 	B	/	50	       783	                       3,306	                        2,394	                        0	                         4,132	                       3,339	                         783	
                                                                 B/100	for	Sc.	
                                                                1 	
    		          #	of	newly	enrolled	children	due	to	            D	                0	                         29,289	                       20,371	                       22,735	                    29,738	                      19,430	                        25,442	
                affordability		increase	
    		          	                                               	                 39,145	                    194,581	                      140,060	                      22,735	                    236,346	                     186,404	                       64,586	
                Total	number	of	newly	enrolled	children	        E	 	B D	


	
    		       	                                            	                 1.6	          7.9	     5.7	     0.9	     9.6	      7.6	      2.6	
             	                                            	
             Increase	in	enrollment	rate	 percentage	     F	 	E	/	 Total	
             point 	                                      number	of	
                                                          children	aged	
                                                          3‐5 		
                                                          	
    		       Increase	in	enrollment	rate	of	the	bottom	   G		               0.0	          4.1	     3.6	     1.9	     6.0	      6.2	      2.1	
             40%	 percentage	points 	
             	
    		       %	of	the	newly	enrolled	children	from	       H	                0.0	          25.2	    30.8	    100.0	   30.3	     39.9	     39.4	
             bottom	40%	                                  	
                                                          	
    		       Total	benefit	accruing	to	households	        I	                0	            1,414	   973	     724	     1,490	    1,056	    734	
              million	TL 	                                	
                                                          	
    		       %	of	the	benefit	going	to	bottom	40%	        J	                									.	   29	      41	      100	     30	       43	       100	
                                                          	
                                                          	
    		       %	of	the	benefit	going	to	bottom	20%	        K	                									.	   11	      16	      43	      11	       16	       43	
                                                          	
                                                          	
    		       Total	cost	 million	TL 	                     L	                39	           5,353	   3,612	   1,292	   5,832	    4,081	    1,619	
                                                          	
    		       Total	number	of	new	personnel	needed	        M	                2,349	        9,918	   7,181	   0	       12,396	   10,018	   2,349	
                                                          	
                                                          	
    		       Total	tax	revenue	from	newly	employed	       N	                20	           84	      61	      0	       105	      85	       20	
             women	in	centers	 TL 	                       	
                                                          	
    		       Total	tax	revenue	from	corporation		and	     O	                333	          1,407	   1,019	   0	       1,759	    1,422	    333	
             income	tax	 32%	of	profits 	                 	
                                                          	
    		       Total	tax	revenue	 million	TL 	              P	 	N	 	O	        353	          1,492	   1,080	   0	       1,864	    1,507	    353	
                                                          	
    		       Total	Net	Cost	 million	TL 	                 Q		 	 L	‐	P	 	    ‐314	         3,861	   2,532	   1,292	   3,968	    2,574	    1,266	
                                                          	
    		       Net	annual	cost	per	newly	enrolled	child	    R	 	 Q	/	         ‐803	         1,985	   1,808	   5,683	   1,679	    1,381	    1,960	
              TL 	                                        E /10	


         	



	
	


References	
	

Aran,	M.	A.,	Munoz‐Boudet,	A.	M,	and	Aktakke,	N.	“Can	Regulations	Make	it	More	Difficult	to	Serve	the	Poor?	The	Case	
of	Child	Care	Services	in	Istanbul,	Turkey”	Journal	of	Human	Development	and	Capabilities	 forthcoming .			

Amarante,	 Verónica,	 Rodrigo	 Arim,	 Gioia	 De	 Melo,	 and	 Andrea	 Vigorito.	 "Family	 allowances	 and	 child	 school	
attendance:	an	ex‐ante	evaluation	of	alternative	schemes	in	Uruguay."	In	Child	Welfare	in	Developing	Countries,	pp.	
211‐245.	Springer	New	York,	2010.	

Apps,	Patricia,	Jan	Kabátek,	Ray	Rees,	and	Arthur	van	Soest.	"Labor	supply	heterogeneity	and	demand	for	child	care	of	
mothers	with	young	children."	Empirical	Economics	 2016 :	1‐37.	

Bourguignon,	François,	Francisco	HG	Ferreira,	and	Phillippe	G.	Leite.	"Conditional	cash	transfers,	schooling,	and	child	
labour:	micro‐simulating	Brazil's	Bolsa	Escola	program."	The	World	Bank	Economic	Review	17.2	 2003 :	229‐254.	

Del	 Boca,	 Daniela,	 and	 Daniela	 Vuri.	 "The	 mismatch	 between	 employment	 and	 child	 care	 in	 Italy:	 the	 impact	 of	
rationing."	Journal	of	Population	Economics	20.4	 2007 :	805‐832.	

İlkkaracan,	İpek,	Kijong	Kim,	and	Tolga	Kaya.	"The	Impact	of	Public	Investment	in	Social	Care	Services	on	Employment,	
Gender	Equality,	and	Poverty:	The	Turkish	Case."	Research	Project	Report,	Levy	Economics	Institute	of	Bard	College.	
August	 2015 .	

Kornstad,	Tom,	and	Thor	O.	Thoresen.	"Effects	of	family	policy	reforms	in	Norway:	Results	from	a	joint	labour	supply	
and	childcare	choice	microsimulation	analysis."	Fiscal	Studies	27.3	 2006 :	339‐371.	

Leite,	 Phillippe	 G.,	 Ambar	 Narayan,	 and	 Emmanuel	 Skoufias.	 "How	 do	 ex	 ante	 simulations	 compare	 with	 ex	 post	
evaluations?	evidence	from	the	impact	of	conditional	cash	transfer	programs."	Evidence	from	the	Impact	of	Conditional	
Cash	Transfer	Programs	 June	1,	2011 .	World	Bank	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	Series,	Vol	 2011 .	

Vanleenhove,	 Pieter.	 "Full	 childcare	 coverage:	 higher	 maternal	 labour	 supply	 and	 childcare	 usage?."	 EUROMOD	
Working	Paper	No.	EM	19/13.	Available	at	SSRN	2381527	 2013 .	

Calderon,	Gabriela.	The	Effects	of	Child	Care	Provision	in	Mexico.	Banco	de	Mexico	Working	Papers	2014‐07.	Banco	de	
Mexico,	 2014.	 Available	 at:	 http://www.banxico.org.mx/publicaciones‐y‐discursos/publicaciones/documentos‐de‐
investigacion/banxico/%7B0AFBA0F8‐0973‐907E‐9ED4‐5AC6E445E064%7D.pdf	

Mateo	Díaz,	Mercedes,	and	Lourdes	Rodriguez	Chamussy.	Childcare	and	women's	labour	participation:	evidence	for	
Latin	America	and	the	Caribbean.	Inter‐American	Development	Bank,	2013.	

Staab,	 Silke,	 and	 Roberto	 Gerhard.	 "Childcare	 Service	 Expansion	 in	 Chile	 and	 Mexico."	 Gender	 and	 Development	
Programme	Paper	no:10.	United	Nations	Research	Institute	for	Social	Development,	2010.	

OECD.	 Encouraging	 Quality	 in	 Early	 Childhood	 Education	 and	 Care.	 OECD	 policy	 note.	 OECD,	 2012.	 Available	 from	
http://www.oecd.org/education/school/49143900.pdf.	

Warner,	 Mildred	 E.,	 and	 Raymond	 HJM	 Gradus.	 "The	 consequences	 of	 implementing	 a	 child	 care	 voucher	 scheme:	
Evidence	from	Australia,	the	Netherlands	and	the	USA."	Social	Policy	&	Administration	45.5	 2011 :	569‐592.	

World	Bank.	2015.	Supply	and	demand	for	child	care	services	in	Turkey:	a	mixed	methods	study.	Washington,	D.C.:	
World	 Bank	 Group.	 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/09/24997835/supply‐demand‐child‐care‐
services‐turkey‐mixed‐methods‐study	


	                                       	
Endnotes	
	
                                                               	
																																																																
	

i	Rate	for	Turkey	is	from	the	Ministry	of	Education’s	National	Education	Statistics	2015/16,	gross	enrollment	rate	for	

3‐5	year	olds.	Rates	for	OECD	and	the	EU	are	from	World	Bank,	World	Development	Indicators	 gross	enrollment	ratio,	
pre‐primary,	both	sexes	 % 	
ii	World	Bank	2015.	Supply	and	Demand	for	Child	Care	Services	in	Turkey	
iii	World	Bank	2015.	Supply	and	Demand	for	Child	Care	Services	in	Turkey	
iv	World	Bank	2015.	Supply	and	Demand	for	Child	Care	Services	in	Turkey	
v	 World	 Bank,	 World	 Development	 Indicators.	 Percentage	 of	 enrollment	 in	 pre‐primary	 education	 in	 private	

institutions	 % 	
vi	Rate	for	Turkey	is	obtained	from	Turkish	Statistical	Institute’s	website,	it	is	the	annual	figure	for	2014	for	women	

15	years	old	and	older.	Rates	for	OECD	and	EU	are	obtained	from	World	Development	Indicators	of	World	Bank,	they	
are	for	women	15	years	old	and	older	and	they	are	national	estimates.	
vii	Note	that	these	providers	can	also	be	municipalities	or	creches	within	working	places.	As	long	as	they	are	regulated	

and	conform	to	certain	standards,	they	can	be	eligible	for	this	funding.		

viii	The	terminal	value	is	calculated	using	the	EBITDA	      Earnings	Before	Interest,	Taxes,	Depreciation	and	Amortization 	
Multiple.	 The	 final	 year’s	 profits	 is	 multiplied	 by	 a	 constant,	 in	 our	 model	 this	 value	 is	 set	 at	 10.5	 	 	 	 following	
international	      benchmarking.	         	   See	      source:	    BAIRD	        2015.	     Education	        Services	         Report.	
http://content.rwbaird.com/RWB/sectors/PDF/TechnologyServices/education‐services‐report.pdf	
ix	Assumption	here	is	that	above	the	risk	free	interest	rate	there	needs	to	be	about	a	30%	premium.			
x	This	is	assumed	to	be	32%	of	profits	based	on	tax	rates	in	Turkey;	calculated	by	first	taking	20%	of	the	profit	as	

corporate	tax	and	then	taking	15%	of	the	remaining	profit	as	income	tax.	The	level	of	cumulative	taxes	on	profits	
would	vary	by	country.		
xi	This	also	holds	for	the	scenarios	for	the	municipalities	opening	up	crèches	as	well.	These	scenarios	 Scenario	1 	also	

only	have	an	impact	on	enrollments	through	increased	capacity.		

xii	In	other	words,	the	full	benefit	of	the	voucher	is	captured	by	the	households	that	receive	them	 without	an	increase	
in	prices 	and	the	full	effect	of	an	investment	grant	is	captured	by	the	service	providers	that	receive	them	 without	a	
reduction	in	prices .	These	simplified	assumptions	allow	us	to	run	the	model	smoothly,	although	variations	of	these	
scenarios	can	be	applied.	For	the	purposes	of	this	simple	model,	we	propose	to	stick	to	these	definitions.		
xiii	This	assumption	is	reasonable	due	to	the	information	gathered	in	the	demand	side	survey	in	2014	for	the	World	

Bank	study	Supply	and	Demand	for	Child	care	Services	in	Turkey.	According	to	the	data,	mothers	living	in	households	
with	per	capita	income	greater	than	821	TL	 the	minimum	per	capita	monthly	income	for	the	9th	decile	according	to	
SILC	2012	dataset 	or	1012.59	TL	in	2014	values,	have	a	willingness	to	pay	of	780	TL	on	average.	Hence	with	any	price	
cap	lower	than	this	value,	our	assumption	is	reasonable.	 In	order	to	find	the	2014	nominal	value	of	the	2011	per	capita	
income	value,	we	used	December	2011	TUFE	index	of	200.85	and	December	2014	TUFE	value	of	247.72	obtained	from	
Turkish	Central	Bank’s	website. 			
xiv	Due	to	the	assumption	that	top	2	deciles	will	opt	out	of	the	program	since	their	willingness	to	pay	is	higher.		
xv	Cumulative	tax	is	calculated	as:	20	percent	of	profits	as	corporate	taxes	and	15%	of	the	remainder	 80	percent	of	

revenue 	as	income	taxes.	
xvi	The	tax	collected	by	the	government	for	each	woman	is	calculated	by	adding	up	the	taxes	on	the	minimum	wage,	

making	up	a	total	of	98.98	TL	as	posted	by	the	Ministry	of	Labour	and	Social	Security	for	the	first	6	months	of	2016.	
Using	 the	 information	 related	 to	 minimum	 wage	 in	 The	 Ministry	 of	 Labor	 and	 Social	 Security’s	 website.	
http://www.csgb.gov.tr/Contents/Istatistikler/AsgariUcret	
xvii	    Turkey’s	    2015	      GDP	      is	   1,953,561	     million	   TL	     in	    nominal	    terms.	      Source:	
http://www.tuik.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id 21510	




	
