                                                     WPS7955


 Policy Research Working Paper                      7955




Social Learning about Environmental Innovations
            Experimental Analysis of Adoption Timing

                                Julian C. Jamison
                                  David Owens
                                  Glenn Woroch




 Development Economics Vice Presidency
 Development Policy Department
 January 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7955


  Abstract
  Laboratory experiments were conducted to investigate how                           When they did adopt, the subjects gave proportionately
  private and public information affect the selection of an inno-                    more weight to their private signals than to the actions of
  vation and the timing of adoption. The results shed light on                       their peers, implying they do not ‘herd’ on the latter. Nev-
  the behavioral anomaly called the “energy-efficiency gap” in                       ertheless, when the subjects observed their peers’ decisions,
  which consumers and firms delay adoption of cost-effective                         they did accelerate the timing of their adoption despite
  energy and environmental innovations. The subjects chose                           not necessarily imitating their peers. This result occurred
  between competing innovations with freedom to select the                           even when the payoffs were statistically independent, as
  timing of their adoption, relying on private signals and pos-                      if observing prior adoptions exerted ‘peer pressure’ on
  sibly observation of their peers. When deciding whether to                         the subjects to act. The experimental results suggest that
  make an irreversible choice between safe and risky technolo-                       rapid dissemination of information about peer actions
  gies, roughly half the subjects delayed adoption beyond the                        can speed up the diffusion of environmental innovations
  time indicated by equilibrium behavior—confirming the                              and improve selection among competing technologies.
  behavioral anomaly found for environmental innovations.



  This paper is a product of the Development Policy Department, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at jjamison@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
        Social Learning about Environmental Innovations:
              Experimental Analysis of Adoption Timing∗
                Julian Jamison†             David Owens‡              Glenn Woroch§




      Keywords: social learning, herding, endogenous timing, behavioral economic
      policy, diﬀusion of technology, environmental innovations
      JEL codes: Q55, C91, D83, O33


   ∗ Financial support for this research was provided by France Telecom Research & Development, LLC. We

thank the participants of the conferences at: the French Economic Association (Lyon, France), the Florida
State Conference on Experimental Game Theory, the Industrial Organization Workshop (Lecce, Italy), CEDEX
(Nottingham, UK), and the European School of Management and Technology (Berlin, Germany). Lastly, we are
grateful to Anita Sonawane, Ryan Fackler and Tasmia Rahman for their research assistance.
   † Global Insights Initiative, The World Bank, Washington, DC 20552
   ‡ Department of Economics, Haverford College, 370 Lancaster Ave, Haverford, PA 19041
   § Corresponding Author: Department of Economics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, 510-642-

4308, woroch@berkeley.edu
1       Introduction
An empirical regularity known as the “energy eﬃciency gap”1 has puzzled natural resource
economists for many years. Evidence shows that ﬁrms and consumers routinely fail to adopt
new products and processes that conserve energy and/or reduce emissions even when they appear
cost eﬃcient relative to existing technologies. In particular, once commercially available, energy-
eﬃcient innovations tend not to be adopted with the speed warranted by their cost savings and
resource beneﬁts. Among various market failures, a key reason that has been given for this
delay is that decision makers succumb to behavioral anomalies, deviations from rationality.2
Among the policies that have been devised to close this gap, and the many more that have been
proposed, are mechanisms for counteracting the consequences of these anomalies.
     We conduct a series of laboratory experiments designed to gain a deeper understanding of
the timing of adoption of innovations that improve upon the status quo. The design attempts
to isolate how private and social information aﬀect the pace of diﬀusion of superior innovations.
     In each one of our treatments, subjects can opt for the status quo technology, or they can
adopt a “safe” technology that has a higher payoﬀ with certainty. We oﬀer a third option of
a risky technology that may pay oﬀ more than the status quo and the safe technologies, or it
may be worse than both of these alternatives. An example of this type of decision confronts
consumers while considering the purchase of a new car: they can keep their conventional gasoline-
powered vehicle, choose one using gas-electric hybrid technology which now has well established
performance record, or take a chance on an unproven technology such as a vehicle powered by
a hydrogen fuel cell. A second example would be the choice of a light bulb, with the traditional
incandescent bulb being the status quo technology, a compact ﬂorescent bulb the safe alternative,
and an LED bulb the risky alternative in terms of payback.3
     Unlike most prior experiments involving observational learning, our subjects choose the
timing of adoption as well as which of two innovations to select. In the vehicle purchase example,
for instance, the consumer may prefer to wait until more information is available on the hydrogen
fuel cell-powered car becomes public. In our treatments, the cost of delay arises naturally
because postponing adoption amounts to remaining with the status quo and earning a lower
return than the safe option. In each round of the experiments, subjects who remain undecided
about which innovation to select receive a private signal that is correlated with the true return
of the risky innovation. In this way we maintain, ex ante, parity in the amount of private and
public information when subjects choose to delay their adoption decisions.
     Our three experimental treatments are designed to assess how subjects balance private and
public information in reaching their adoption decisions. The ﬁrst treatment serves as a baseline
in which subjects do not observe peers’ actions. In the second treatment, subjects observe prior
decisions made by members of their group but individual payoﬀs are statistically independent
and, hence, observation conveys no useful information. The third treatment also allows for
observation of prior actions, but those actions now are informative since the payoﬀ of the risky
    1 See, e.g., Allcott and Greenstone [2012] and Jaﬀe and Stavins [1994].
    2 See Shogren and Taylor [2008].
    3 See Menanteau and Lefebvre [2000]




                                                        2
innovation is perfectly correlated across members of each group.
   To generate hypotheses about adoption timing, we attempt to characterize Bayesian Nash
Equilibrium (“BNE”) strategies in the non-cooperative games underlying the three treatments.
We ﬁnd that a risk-neutral expected-payoﬀ maximizer in the ﬁrst two treatments should adopt at
her ﬁrst opportunity, choosing the innovation that is favored by her ﬁrst private signal. BNE is
less conclusive for the third, ‘common-values’ treatment, but we show that immediate adoption
by all players is not an equilibrium, as the opportunity to delay and observe others’ adoption
decisions is too valuable.
   The results from out experiments conﬁrm that subjects tend to delay adoption of either one
of the superior technologies —contrary to theoretical predictions of optimizing behavior but
consistent with the energy-eﬃciency gap. This adoption pattern is robust across treatments
and suggests the presence of a behavioral anomaly. For instance, subjects may follow a “status
quo bias” in which they persist with the default status quo payoﬀ despite the availability of a
superior technology.
   A plausible alternative explanation for this delay is that subjects seek to take advantage
of social learning. In fact, the experimental results conﬁrm that, on average, the speed and
accuracy of adoption improve when subjects can observe their peers’ actions. While this result
is not surprising when observation conveys payoﬀ-relevant information, it is unexpected that
mere observation also promotes faster, more proﬁtable decisions even when the true underlying
values are statistically independent. It appears that the opportunity to observe colleagues
decisions exerts “peer pressure” on subjects, driving them to reach their own decisions more
quickly.
   Turning to the accuracy of adoption decisions, we ﬁnd that subjects do better than random-
izing between the two innovations, i.e., they pay attention to private and/or public information.
On average, subjects show a slight preference for the safe innovation over the risky one, con-
sistent with risk aversion. We do ﬁnd that when payoﬀs are correlated delays beyond the ﬁrst
round are rewarded with improved accuracy in the selection of an innovation.
   While the lab results show our subjects take into account both kinds of information, their
actions conﬁrm that they place greater weight on their private signals. To see this, we classify
an innovation as “popular” when members of the peer group choose it more often than the
other innovation. We classify as “leading” the innovation that is favored by the history of a
subject’s private signals. The experiments conﬁrm that subjects invariably adopt the innovation
that is both the leading and the popular one. However, if one innovation is popular but the
other is leading, then the leading innovation is chosen more often; again, subjects tend to follow
their private signals —a pattern that occurred in both experimental treatments having public
observation.
   We draw out some of the implications of our experimental results for policies aimed at
accelerating the adoption of cost-eﬀective innovations to save energy and preserve the environ-
ment. Indeed, many policy recommendations have been put forward with the aim of closing the
energy-eﬃciency gap. Among the policy proposals that have been put forward, some employ
the standard economic instruments —such as taxes and subsidies —aimed at erecting monetary



                                                3
incentives to spur ﬁrms and consumers to adopt cost-eﬀective technologies. Other proposals,
however, target the behavioral anomalies which are seen to be impediments to adoption. Some
of the proposals of this type are what have come to be known as social “nudges.”4 Rather
than adjusting ﬁnancial rewards, these proposals attempt to tailor the information on which
adoption decisions are made. A good example of a nudge in our setting is to provide the deci-
sion maker with feedback about the history of their personal payoﬀs and information, or about
prior decisions made by their peers. Our results suggest that information that is statistically
irrelevant can have signiﬁcant eﬀect on the speed and quality of adoption decisions, and that
policy makers can exploit this fact with little additional administrative cost.
     The next section positions our paper in the literature on theoretical and laboratory experi-
ments involving technology adoption with social learning, especially as it applies to adoption of
energy and environmental innovations. Section 3 then describes our laboratory protocol and the
three experimental treatments. Section 4 analyzes equilibrium in the game that underlies each
treatment. We report the experimental results in Section 5, comparing the treatments against
one another and against our theoretical predictions. A ﬁnal section summarizes our conclusions
and suggests implications of our results for policy interventions that may work to accelerate
adoption of innovations that save energy and protect the environment.


2      Related Literature
We contribute to the rapidly growing body of behavioral research on social learning games and
experiments. As with many related papers, our methodology has its roots in the pioneering work
of Banerjee [1992] and Bikchandani, Hirschleifer, and Welch [1992] (“BBHW” for short). In these
papers, agents make one-time binary investment decisions in a pre-determined order, each one
informed by a single private signal plus the observation of all prior choices. While this structure
generates valuable insights into adoption behavior (e.g., herding), the assumption of endogenous
decision-timing is uncharacteristic of many real-world observational learning environments.
     Our experimental treatments preserve much of the structure of the BBHW game in that
subjects can choose either a safe or a risky innovation, and they may be able to observe the
actions of their peers. Now, however, we allow agents to choose when to make their adoption
decisions. We believe that discretion over the timing of adoption is essential to many real-world
applications, and to the diﬀusion of environmental innovations in particular. While subjects
start out with the same opportunities to acquire information, the amount of private and social
learning that is possible depends on the timing of their decisions.


2.1      Theoretical background
Many empirical papers study innovation diﬀusion, including the diﬀusion of energy saving tech-
nologies. Given their advantage in isolating the eﬀects of diﬀerent factors, it is surprising
comparatively few laboratory experiments have been conducted to test related hypotheses. In-
deed, it is not always clear how to model the more realistic, and necessarily more complex,
    4 Olander   and Thogersen [2014]


                                                4
environment facing a potential adoption. Following BBHW, a series of papers appeared that
relaxed the assumption that agents made their decisions in a pre-determined order. In Chamley
and Gale [1994] and Chamley [2004] agents choose when to make a binary investment decision
in a discrete-time model. They ﬁnd that the delays in adoption are directly related to the length
of a period and inversely related to the number of players.
   Zhang [1997] also considers a binary investment game with endogenous timing but with
continuous time. In equilibrium, agents initially delay their actions in order to learn from
others, invest rapidly thereafter. More recently, Levin and Peck [2008] construct an endogenous
timing game which adds a second signal about the common value of an investment’s return,
                                                              alim¨
plus a signal about the agent’s cost of investing. Murto and V¨   aki [2011] conduct a similar
study with an irreversible investment in an endogenous, discrete timing game involving both
private and observational information. They ﬁnd that observational learning delays decisions in
equilibrium, a conclusion consistent with the energy-eﬃciency gap and with our experimental
results.


2.2    Energy and environmental technology adoption literature
Considering the critical energy and environmental issues involved, and despite evidence conﬁrm-
ing an energy-eﬃciency gap, little empirical research has been conducted on the timing of this
kind of adoption.
   Several observational studies have looked at the determinants of consumers’ decisions to in-
stall solar photovoltaic panels to supplement or replace electricity provided over the grid. Studies
that have investigated peer learning in this decision are particularly relevant for this paper. For
instance, Bollinger and Gillingham [2012] ﬁnd that social learning played an important role in
the diﬀusion of solar photovoltaic (SPV) panels among California residents. Installation of each
additional SPV increased likelihood of SPV adoption by 0.78 percentage point in the respective
zip codes. Similar learning spillovers are also observed in other settings.
   Similar trends are also observed in the commercial context of environmental technology adop-
tion. Popp [2006] examines plant-level data from coal-ﬁred electric power plans combined with
patent data on N OX and SO2 pollution control technologies to ﬁnd that increased availability
of knowledge (particularly regarding technology advances abroad) does lead to higher prob-
ability of adopting newer post-combustion technologies. However, the same does not hold for
more established combustion modiﬁcation technologies, indicating that such default technologies
experience adoption delays possibly due to anticipation of further technological advancements.
   Among the most popular research strategies have been ﬁeld experiments in residential elec-
tricity markets. Fischer [2008], Ayres, Raseman, and Shih [2012], Costa and Kahn [2013], and
Jessoe and Rapson [2014] are among the many studies that examine how information provision
can modify residential consumption of electricity. Collectively these studies conﬁrm the presence
of behavioral anomalies among this important class of consumers, and also the eﬀectiveness of
information dissemination to counteract the eﬀects of those anomalies. Aside from the ﬁeld
studies of adoption behavior, comparatively little has been done in the way for laboratory ex-
perimentation, where information can be carefully controlled. Our paper attempts to ﬁll this


                                                 5
void with respect to the energy-eﬃciency gap.


2.3    Experimental tests
Several papers have tested models of herding behavior in the laboratory. Among the ﬁrst was
Anderson and Holt [1997] who, like many that followed, attempt to replicate the decision problem
described by BBHW. They ﬁnd evidence the predicted uniformity of behavior, including on the
“wrong” investment, consistent with Bayesian updating. As will become clear, our experiments
extend Anderson and Holt [1997] stochastic structure, allowing decision timing to be endogenous.
¸ elen and Kariv [2004a] were the ﬁrst to distinguish between herd behavior and information
C
cascades in a laboratory setting.
   A few early laboratory experiments did allow for endogenous timing but in a strategic setting
that diﬀered from BBHW, e.g., Baik, Cherry, Kroll, and Shogren [1999]. Sgroi [2003] was the
ﬁrst to adapt the BBHW structure to permit subjects to select the timing of their actions. The
results of these experiments showed that, while herding behavior still occurred, subjects tended
to delay their adoption in an apparent attempt to learn from their peers’ private signals.
   ¸ elen and Hyndman [2012] also conduct endogenous timing experiments but deviate from
   C
the basic BBHW framework. Their experimental treatments explore how the noisiness of the
signal aﬀects decision-timing. They also depart from BBHW by allowing selection of the safe
investment to be reversible. Drehmann, Oechssler, and Roider [2007] conduct online experi-
ments in which subjects chose the timing of their investments. In contrast with the articles
implementing the structure of BBHW, their online subjects rely on private signals to a much
greater extent. They are more likely than their counterparts in laboratory studies to obey their
private information when following their peers is more proﬁtable.
   More recently, Ivanov, Levin, and Peck [2013] implement laboratory experiments of the two-
period, two-signal game structure developed in Levin and Peck [2008]. They are especially
interested in the implications of group size as it alters the information content contained in
the observation of peers. They ﬁnd that subjects do not take full advantage of the information
supplied by others’ actions. Unlike them, our treatments are restricted to a ﬁxed group size (six)
but allow for more than two periods (eight). We do ﬁnd, like Ivanov, Levin, and Peck [2013] and
others, evidence of subjects attaching a disproportionate weight to private information compared
with public observational information —a pattern that is repeated in many experiments using
the BBHW model with exogenous timing.
                                                                                       acker
   Merging 13 experimental datasets each of which implemented the BBHW framework, Weizs¨
[2010] ﬁnds that subjects deviate from choice that would be optimal leading up to a decision.
In particular, he ﬁnds that in a majority of cases subjects follow their private signal when an
alternative would earn them higher payoﬀs. We similarly assess subjects earnings, and ﬁnd that
they learn too little from observation of others.
   Our study employs discrete time with a ﬁnite horizon, where a ﬁnite number of agents have a
choice between two innovations and a third option, the status quo, which delays the choice. The
diﬀerence in payoﬀs between the safe innovation and the status quo option determines the cost of
delay. The underlying tension, as in actual decisions regarding, e.g., pollution reduction, involves


                                                 6
incremental improvements in standard technologies versus waiting longer to learn more about
the potential costs and beneﬁts of an attractive but unproven alternative green technologies.


3     Experimental Design and Procedures
All of our experiments were conducted using the Experimental Social Science Laboratory, or
“Xlab,” at the University of California, Berkeley. The Xlab primarily recruits undergraduate
students as subjects, supplemented with graduate students and university staﬀ members.
    The experiments themselves were conducted on laptop personal computers using the Zurich
Toolbox for Reanimate Economic Experiments (“z-Tree”) program (Fischbacher [2007]). Work-
stations were separated from one another with physical partitions to prevent subjects from
looking at one another’s screens and to discourage conversation. Apart from the introductory
period when subjects could ask clarifying questions, no oral communication was allowed.
   Subjects participated in just one experimental session and, hence, in just one of the three
treatments. In two of the treatments, subjects were randomly assigned to groups of six. In
those cases, members of a group observed actions of others through the z-Tree interface, re-
maining unaware of the identity of their peers. Groups were randomly reassigned for each of
the 15 decision problems, making it diﬃcult for subjects to learn about behavior speciﬁc to any
individual.
    Subjects were given monetary incentives for their participation in the experiments. Subjects
earned “tokens” which were exchanged for dollars at a rate announced at the beginning of each
experimental session. When a session ended, tokens were added up for each subject and checks
were issued to subjects in sealed envelopes. The average payout per subject per session was
$23.33 and the typical session lasted about one hour.
    Our sessions included a total of 227 subjects in 13 experimental sessions, for an average of
17.5 subjects per session. At the beginning of each session, subjects received written instructions
and ten minutes to read them, after which the instructions were read aloud by a researcher.
Before beginning the experiment, subjects took a simple quiz that tested their understanding of
the instructions, and were not allowed to proceed until they answered each question correctly.5
Each session consisted of 16 repetitions of a decision problem. The ﬁrst decision problem was
unpaid practice and the results were discarded, leaving data for 15 decision problems per subject.
    A copy of the instructions that subjects received for one of the experimental sessions is
reproduced in the Appendix. Note that while we use the language of ‘technology adoption’ and
‘innovation’ in this paper to describe the decision problems facing subjects, neutral language
was used in the verbal and written instructions during the experimental sessions.


3.1    Payoﬀs, Probabilities and Information
In each decision problem, subjects choose to adopt one of three alternatives: A, B , and C .
Subjects begin each decision problem with technology A by default, and remain with A until
   5 The quiz was introduced after the ﬁrst three sessions. No diﬀerence in experimental outcomes was found

before and after adding the quiz.



                                                    7
they make the irreversible decision to adopt “innovation” B or C . A is inferior in expected
payoﬀ to B and C , but remaining with A allows subjects to postpone their adoption decision
at least one more period. Thus, A can be interpreted as an inferior status quo technology that
an agent may maintain while she accumulates information on the relative merits of the two
innovations.
     Each decision problem consists of an eight-round “decision sequence.” Each technology has
a per-round payoﬀ that accrues to a subject who has chosen that technology. The status quo
technology A pays 1 token per round and the innovation B pays 2 tokens per round. The payoﬀ
to innovation C is stochastic, paying 0 or 4 tokens per round, each with equal likelihood. The
per-round value of C , once realized, remains constant for the entire decision sequence. Subjects
can earn the most if they choose innovation C when it takes a high value (4), and innovation
B when C takes a low value (0). The earlier in the decision sequence that a subject makes this
choice, the greater the total number of tokens she earns.
     Subjects receive an informative but noisy private signal about the realized value of innovation
C before they make their decision for round 1. Each subject who chooses technology A in round
1, and thus declines to adopt innovation B or C , remains “active”, and will receive further
information about innovation C in subsequent rounds. Thus, innovation B can be interpreted
as a guaranteed improvement over status quo technology A, while C is a risky innovation. It
may be superior to both A and B , but it may also be worthless.
     Active subjects — those who have yet to adopt innovation B or C — begin each round
of a decision problem by observing a private signal. Draws of the signal are independent and
identically distributed across rounds. They are informative of the true value of innovation C .
                                                                                           1
If the value of C is 0, the subject receives a signal of “H ” with a probability of        3   and “L”
                        2
with a probability of   3.   If innovation C ’s value is 4, then each signal is “H ” with probability
2                               1
3   and “L” with probability    3.   Applying Bayes Rule, the conditional probability that C pays
                                                            2
0 and 4 tokens given that the “L” signal is observed is     3   and 1
                                                                    3 , respectively, absent any other
information.
     By design, subjects incur an opportunity cost of delay equal to one token per round since
postponing adoption to the next period generates one token per round under status quo A
compared to two tokens per round if they chose alternative B instead. The beneﬁt of delay is
the possibility to make a “better” choice between B and C after drawing an additional private
signal and, depending on the treatment, observing another round of decisions by peers. The
cost of delay is captured in the opportunity cost as opposed to imposing an arbitrary discount
factor on subjects’ payoﬀ streams as is done by other experimental studies.


3.2     The Three Treatments
Treatments diﬀer in two dimensions: the opportunity to observe the actions of other subjects,
and the correlation of payoﬀs across subjects in a group. The observability of actions and com-
monality of payoﬀs were nested across treatments to identify the inﬂuence of each characteristic
on adoption decisions. The three treatments are summarized in Table 1. In the baseline treat-
ment P subjects only observe their private signals of the payoﬀ to C which is independently


                                                   8
drawn for that subject. As there is no social interaction in this treatment, there can be no social
learning.
    In all three treatments, all subjects draw at random a private signal of the payoﬀ to innovation
C . A “P” indicates that only private signals inform the subjects. In some treatments, beginning
in the second round and continuing through the eighth and ﬁnal round, active subjects observe
the choices made by other members of their group in the previous round prior to making their
own decision. When observation of others’ actions is allowed, we label the treatment with an
“O.” This feature allows for the possibility of social learning as subjects can learn about their
peers’ private signals by observing the resulting actions.
    The second characteristic of treatments is whether the payoﬀs to innovation C are indepen-
dent across subjects or they are perfectly correlated among members of the same group. A
“C” stands for common value (or perfect correlation) of these payoﬀs and we refer to such a
treatment as “common value.” When the C payoﬀs are statistically independent across group
members, we refer to this as the case of “private values” but do not use separate label for the
treatments. The experimental instructions inform subjects whether they are participating in a
private or common value treatment, and subjects must demonstrate their understanding of the
experiment by achieving a perfect score on a short quiz before proceeding.


                             Table 1: Characteristics of the Treatments
                           Treatment       Payoﬀs        Observation of Peers

                                P          Private               No
                               PO          Private               Yes
                               CO         Common                 Yes


    For instance, Treatment P O allows subjects to observe the decisions of each member of their
six-person peer group, but these decisions have no statistical bearing on their own decisions.
Thus, any diﬀerences in behavior between treatments P and P O cannot be explained by Bayesian
updating. On the other hand, Treatment CO represents the case when there is an informational
externality. In that treatment social learning is possible because subjects can update their beliefs
about the payoﬀ of innovation C by observing the choices of other members of the group.


4     Theory
This section characterizes optimal behavior for risk-neutral expected-utility maximizers in each
treatment. Such subjects will select the innovation and the timing of the adoption that max-
imizes their expected payoﬀ. Let h and l represent the number of private draws of H and
                                                         t−1
L, respectively, seen by a subject through round t, and Nj   as the number of subjects that
                                                         t−1    t−1
have adopted technology j as of round t − 1.6 Vj (h, t, NB   , NC   ) denotes the per-round ex-
   6 Subjects observe the N t−1 other subjects had chosen technology j ∈ {A, B, C } before making their own
                           j
choice in round t.




                                                     9
pected value of technology j ∈ {A, B, C } earned by a subject in round t based on all available
information.7
   The total expected proﬁt from technology j over the remainder of the decision problem if
technology j is chosen in round t is πj (h, t) = Vj (h, t) × (9 − t). Finally, let X ∗ (h, t) be a subject’s
optimal choice in round t given h, that is, j ∈ X ∗ (h, t) if πj ≥ πk for all k ∈ {A, B, C }.
   For treatments P and P O, the solution is an optimal decision rule that maps their informa-
tion sets into a probability distribution over the three technologies. In treatment CO, subjects’
optimal actions may also depend on the adoption decisions of others, rendering subjects’ op-
timal actions interdependent. As a consequence, we must look for equilibrium noncooperative
strategies for a subject.


4.1       Treatments P and P O
As treatments P and P O are theoretically equivalent, we can characterize optimal decisions for
both simultaneously. As decisions are independent, VC depends only on h and l. Using Bayes’
                                                                                                    2h           2h−l
Rule, the likelihood that the payoﬀ to alternative C equals 4 is: P4 (h, t) =                    2h +2t−h
                                                                                                            =   2h−l +1
                                                                                                                        .
Importantly, P4 (h, t), and thus VC (h, t), depends only on the diﬀerence (h − l). πC (h, t) =
VC (h, t) × (9 − t) and πB (h, t) = 2 × (9 − t). The computation of πA (h, t) is more complex,
requiring the computation of πX ∗ (h, t + 1) and πX ∗ (h + 1, t + 1):


             πA (h, t) = 1 + [PH × πX ∗ (h + 1, t + 1) + (1 − PH ) × πX ∗ (h, t + 1)] × (8 − t),                     (1)

   where PH (h, t) represents the probability that the next private signal will be H :

                                                        2        1
                                          PH (h, t) =     × P 4 + × P0 .                                             (2)
                                                        3        3
   As the opportunity to delay adoption complicates early decisions, we begin our analysis at
the end with Round 8, where a proﬁt-maximizer need not consider remaining with A. Subjects
remaining in Round 8 should adopt C for h > 4, B for h < 4, and either for h = 4. Because
delay is costly, this also reveals that proﬁt-maximizing subjects should adopt C if h ≥ 4 and B
if l ≥ 4 in any round. As a consequence, such subjects should adopt immediately for all (h, l)
in Round 7.
   (h = 3, t = 6) is the only circumstance in the last three rounds where we must consider the
possibility of retaining technology A. However, πB (3, 6) = πC (3, 6) = 2 × (9 − 6) = 6, while
         1                                8−6
πA = 1 + 2 πC (4, 7) + 1
                       2 × πB (3, 7) = 1 + 2
                                                         2
                                                         3   ×4+2 =       17
                                                                           3   < 6, so the additional information
                                               ∗
is not worth waiting for, and thus X (3, 6) = {B, C }, ruling out technology A when h ≥ 3 or
l ≥ 3 for any t, etc. The end result of this backwards-induction process is displayed in Table 2.
   Table 2 characterizes the entire decision space.8 C ∈ X ∗ (h, t) if h ≥ l and B ∈ X ∗ (h, t) if
h ≤ l, except for (h, t) = (1, 2) or (2, 4), where X ∗ (h, t) = A. Subjects get the highest payoﬀ
from adopting the technology suggested by their private information (C if h > l, B if h < l)
in any round of the experiment. When private information suggests indiﬀerence (h = l) early
  7 For                       t−1    t−1                      t−1    t−1               t−1    t−1
          example, VA (h, t, NB   , NC   ) = 1 and VB (h, t, NB   , NC   ) = 2∀(h, t, NB   , NC   ).
  8 See   the Appendix for the calculations behind the predictions in Table 2.


                                                             10
                       Table 2: Optimal Decisions for Treatments P and P O
                 t (Round)     h : A ∈ X ∗ (h, t)    h : B ∈ X ∗ (h, t)    h : C ∈ X ∗ (h, t)

                      8                                    0, 1, 2, 3, 4      4, 5, 6, 7, 8
                      7                                     0, 1, 2, 3          4, 5, 6, 7
                      6                                     0, 1, 2, 3          3, 4, 5, 6
                      5                                      0, 1, 2             3, 4, 5

                      4                 2                      0, 1               3, 4
                      3                                        0, 1               2, 3
                      2                 1                       0                   2
                      1                                         0                   1



in the experimental decision sequence (rounds 2 and 4), subjects are best served by delaying,
and adopting according to their next signal. By round 6, however, not enough rounds remain in
which subjects could reap the beneﬁts of the newly acquired information, and adopting either
B or C immediately maximizes expected payoﬀs when h = l = 3.
    Importantly, backwards-induction yields a unique Bayesian Nash equilibrium (“BNE”) of
‘immediate adoption’ for Treatments P and P O, in which subjects adopt innovation B following
a private signal of L and innovation C following a private signal of H in Round 1. The ex ante
                                                    2
expected payoﬀ of this strategy is (0.5 × 2 + 0.5 × 3 × 4) × (9 − 1) = 563 ≈ 18.67. A complete
characterization of the optimal decision rule calls for X ∗ to include B if h ≤ l and C if h ≥ l,
except X ∗ (1, 2) = X ∗ (2, 4) = A.


4.2     Treatment CO
The characterization of optimal behavior in treatment CO is complicated by observational
learning. Delaying adoption is potentially more attractive in this treatment because delay
reveals not only private signals, but also the information of others. Subjects adopting in earlier
rounds eﬀectively confer an informational externality on later adopters.
    We begin by testing whether immediate adoption can occur in BNE, as it does in treatments
P and P O. Following any such strategy again yields πC (1, 1) ≈ 21.33 and πB (0, 1) = 16, while
deviating and choosing A eﬀectively reveals six additional private-signal equivalents. The payoﬀ
to this deviation is more complicated than Equation 1, as the six additional pieces of infor-
mation yield seven information sets in the next round, rather than two. Equation 3 calculates
the distribution of H signals among the additional private-signal equivalents, Dt ,9 under the
maintained assumption that all subjects adopt in round t.

                                                  Dt !
                          P r(ha = i) =                       i
                                                           × PH × (1 − PH )(Dt −i)                         (3)
                                            i! × (Dt − i)!
   9 D = 7 − N t−1 − N t−1 , equivalent to the 6 − N t−1 − N t−1 colleagues that are yet to adopt, plus one for
      t         B        B                           B        B
the additional private signal that will accompany the selection of A.




                                                      11
   Equation 4 uses the probability distribution derived from Equation 3 to calculate the ex-
pected proﬁt of choosing technology A, where the optimal choice in the next round, X ∗ (t + 1) ∈
{A, B, C } depends on the number of eﬀective H draws:


                                           Dt
                        πA (h, t) = 1 +         P r(ha = i) × πX ∗ (t + 1, h + i)                          (4)
                                          i=0


   In the ‘immediate adoption’ strategy proﬁle, deviating by choosing technology A in Round
1 yields one more private signal and the decision of ﬁve colleagues, or D1 = 6. For example,
following a private draw of L in round t = 1, a subject adopts technology B at t = 2 for ha ≤ 3,
and technology C for h > 3:


                               3                          6
                                                                                    2i
      πA (0, 1) = 1 +   2×         P r(ha = i) + 4 ×          P r(ha = i) ×                 × 7 ≈ 16.57,
                             i=0                       i=4
                                                                              2i   + 27−i

      πB (0, 1) = 2 × 8 = 16                                                                               (5)

   As πA (0, 1) > πB (0, 1) according to this strategy proﬁle, “honest” adoption in the ﬁrst
round can not occur in equilibrium in treatment CO. Further, for the same strategy proﬁle,
21.73 = πA (1, 1) > πC (1, 1) = 21.33. Thus, in treatment CO, there can be no equilibrium
in which all subjects adopt with certainty in the ﬁrst round. The information revealed in
the decisions of others would be too valuable for subjects to proﬁtably follow such a strategy.
Note that this argument does indeed show that there is no BNE (not simply perfect Bayesian
equilibrium, or “PBE”) in which all agents adopt immediately, because in that case a unilateral
deviation would be proﬁtable.
   In any symmetric equilibrium, therefore, all subjects must delay adoption with at least some
positive probability. For those who do reach t = 2, the calculations above along with those
detailed previously for treatments P and P O imply that any agent whose current information
(own signals as well as implied signals from observations of B or C from t = 1) is asymmetric
will have a dominant strategy to adopt the suggested technology. Any agents whose combined
information is symmetric at that point may be willing in equilibrium to delay yet another round.


4.3    Implications
We do not expect our experimental subjects to play exactly according to the formal equilibrium
strategies. This is due to noise (and other errors), ‘behavioral’ factors (discussed further later),
and modeling simpliﬁcations such as risk neutrality. Nevertheless, we can draw a few robust
qualitative conclusions from the theory in order to help guide the interpretation of the results.
   For treatments P and P O, the ﬁrst implication is that average behavior should be the same
in both cases. Any divergence must be due either to misunderstanding the rules (which we tried
to avoid to the extent possible); to some nonstandard component of utility; or to something
like ‘meta-learning’ about how to play the game. The second robust implication is that players


                                                     12
should adopt one of the new technologies very quickly. Note for instance that any positive degree
of risk-aversion will break indiﬀerence in expected payoﬀ values: at t = 2, if h = l = 1, there
will be a strict preference for B over C since it is less uncertain.
    For treatment CO the main implication is that, relative to treatments P and P O, delay
should occur and the average time of adoption will be later. This follows whatever the nature of
the exact mixed equilibrium in the former case, and it is robust to the addition of risk aversion.
Indeed, other than the threshold case mentioned in the previous paragraph, risk aversion will
tend to delay adoption since by waiting more uncertainty is resolved. However, this eﬀect is the
same across treatments and does not change the relative prediction of later adoption. Finally,
as subjects can always choose to simply ignore the observed behavior of others (and therefore
optimally adopt immediately), payoﬀs should be weakly larger in treatment CO as compared
to the other two.


5     Experimental Results
Our laboratory experiments were designed to explore how subjects balance the competing goals
of speed and accuracy, and how that trade oﬀ depends on their private signals and observations
of peers’ adoption decisions. This section assesses the data generated by the experiments using
several empirical techniques.
    Looking ﬁrst at the choice between the two innovations, we say that a subject is accurate if
she adopts the innovation that would deliver the highest ex post payoﬀ in the decision sequence.
Speciﬁcally, innovation B is the accurate choice in a decision sequence when πC = 0, while
innovation C is accurate when πC = 4. Note that at any round of the decision sequence, the
private signals drawn by a subject may nonetheless point to the innovation with the lower payoﬀ.
Turning next to adoption timing, the speed of decision making is measured by the number of
rounds that a subject stays with A before choosing either B or C .
    We begin by reporting simple summary statistics to compare the experimental treatments.
We then employ the statistical techniques of survival analysis to analyze the timing of adoptions.
Initially, we make non-parametric comparisons of adoption timing of pairs of treatments. Next,
we estimate Cox proportional hazard models which relate adoption timing to the history of a
subject’s private signals and, when observable, the prior adoptions made by her peers. The
estimated coeﬃcients provide a means to quantify the diﬀerences among the various treatments
as well as to assess the inﬂuence of private and public information. To allow distinct patterns
of adoption for the safe and risky innovations, we estimate a competing risks model and relate
the timing of adoption of B and C to the time-varying covariates.
    Finally, the complexity of the decision problems stemming from diﬀerent sources of infor-
mation led us to consider whether behavioral rules could better explain the experimental data
than BNE strategies. We propose nine behavioral rules of thumb that map private and public
information into adoption decisions. Each of the rules is a reasonable response to the available
information, but they are not necessarily optimal. Based on subjects’ adoption decisions, we
attribute one of the nine behavioral rules to each subject. After calculating the average payoﬀ



                                                 13
corresponding to each rule, we rank order the rules in terms of average payoﬀ.


5.1     Accuracy of Decisions
Table 3 provides an initial assessment of the accuracy of adoption decisions by comparing sum-
mary statistics across the three treatments. Each decision sequence amounts to a single obser-
vation, and so there are 15 observations per subject.


                         Table 3: Summary Statistics of Decision Accuracy
                                  Adopted      Adopted        Accurate         Avg. Round Of
           Treatment      Obs.     B (%)        C(%)        Adoption (%)         Adoption
               P          525       51.8         48.2           59.4                 2.17
                                                                                    (0.20)
               PO          900       56.0         44.0            64.7               2.06
                                                                                    (0.10)
               CO          720       52.6         47.4            61.5               1.91
                                                                                    (0.10)
           Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by subject.




   Participants show a slight preference for the safe alternative, B , as if subjects were on average
averse to the risk of innovation C . Adoption is signiﬁcantly less accurate in treatment P (p =
0.023), suggesting that the ability to observe peers and the correlation of payoﬀs in Treatments
P O and CO, respectively, guide subjects toward the superior alternative. More speciﬁcally,
examining the contingency tables relating subjects’ choice between B and C conditional on the
true value of C , we found they were particularly accurate in identifying case of C = 0 and
choosing B in both of those two treatments.
   As evidenced by the average number of rounds before an innovation was chosen, subjects
adopted more quickly in the common value treatment, i.e., CO.10 At ﬁrst glance, it appears
that the observation of peers results in faster and more accurate adoptions, whether values are
perfectly correlated or statistically independent. We now turn to a more formal analysis that
takes account of diﬀerence in adoption timing over all rounds of the decision sequence.


5.2     Survival Analysis of Adoption Timing
We want to be able to compare statistically the time pattern of adoption in our experimental
data, and for this purpose we employ the statistical technique of “survival analysis” or what is
also called “duration analysis.” These techniques are speciﬁcally designed to model the timing
of “events” which in our context is the adoption of an energy-environmental innovation. In
economics survival analysis most often appears in the ﬁeld of labor economics.11 It is perfectly
suited, for example, to modeling the duration of unemployment spells and their determinants.
Survival analysis was used to statistically model the timing of adoption of energy-eﬃcient build-
ing codes by Nelson [2012] and of solar panels by Islam and Meade [2013].
  10 The diﬀerence is signiﬁcant at the 1% level when the standard errors are not clustered. When they are

clustered, the signiﬁcance level is better than p = 0.15 for one sided tests relative to Treatments P and P O.
  11 See, e.g., Heckman and Singer [1984]




                                                     14
    Since survival analysis was designed to perform statistical analysis on the timing of an event,
it is well-suited to analyzing the adoption times generated by our experiments.12 In our case,
the event is the adoption of an innovation, and so the dependent variable becomes the round in
which subjects adopt either B or C .13
    We begin by plotting the empirical hazard functions observed for each treatment. Figure
1 overlays the Kaplan-Meier non-parametric hazard functions for all three treatments after
they have been smoothed for easier comparison. A rising hazard function indicates that the
propensity to adopt one of the two alternatives increases from one round to the next, while a
falling hazard indicates a decreasing propensity.14


                         Figure 1: Smoothed Hazard Function by Treatment
               .9
               .8
               .7
               .6
               .5
               .4




                    0                 2                  4                   6                  8
                                                    analysis time

                                          Treatment P                Treatment PO
                                          Treatment CO




    It is clear that the baseline Treatment P results in uniformly slower adoption than the other
two treatments. The deviation between Treatments P and P O is especially surprising. By
design, observation of others’ actions in Treatment P O conveys no information about subjects’
expected payoﬀs; all relevant information is contained in their individual private signals. The
fact that its hazard rate increases steadily over rounds indicates that postponing adoption leads
to increased propensity to adopt. It appears that the observation of actions of other members
of the group prompts subjects to act when they would otherwise procrastinate.
   12 To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst application of survival analysis to the results of endogenous timing

experiments.
   13 Event data are often censored because the experiment ends or because subjects leave the study. With

negligible exceptions (i.e., 8 out of 2,145 decision sequences), our subjects made an adoption sometime during
the eight-round decision sequence.
   14 In other words, the longer the subject delays making a decision, the less likely she will adopt in the next

period. In labor economics such “duration dependence” arises when the longer a person is unemployed, the less
likely they will re-enter the workforce in the near future.



                                                       15
5.2.1      Cox Proportional Hazard Models

Pair-wise comparisons of adoption timing is likely to be aﬀected by the private signals and
observation of peers’ decisions. To control for the two factors, we ﬁt time-varying covariates
to the observed hazard rates. Speciﬁcally, we estimate Cox proportional hazard models that
speciﬁes the hazard rate to be proportional to a baseline non-parametric hazard, where the
proportionality factor is linear in the included covariates. Two time-varying covariates are of
primary interest: (i) the number of B s and C s adopted by each subject’s peer group prior to the
current round, NB and NC , and (ii) the absolute diﬀerence in the number of H s and Ls drawn
by each subject including the current round, |h − l|. Since at this point we do not distinguish
which of the two innovations is adopted, B or C , it should not matter the absolute number of
H s and Ls that are drawn.
   Table 4 contains the results of estimating Cox proportional hazard models with various
combinations of covariates on the entire sample of all three treatments. Dummy indicators of
the treatments were sometimes included in which case Treatment P was taken as the excluded
category.


                    Table 4: Cox Proportional Hazard Models with Covariates
 Model                        1              2                 3           4†             5                 6
 Treatment P O              0.132                           -0.332
                          (0.060)**                       (0.073)***
 Treatment CO               0.239                            -0190
                         (0.061)***                       (0.073)***
 NB                                        0.135             0.130        0.129
                                        (0.036)***        (0.036)***   (0.036)***
 NC                                        0.124             0.114        0.112
                                        (0.039)***        (0.039)***   (0.039)***
 |h − l|                                   0.304             0.312        0.316         0.305          0.308
                                        (0.034)***        (0.034)***   (0.034)***    (0.034)***     (0.034)***
 NB + NC                                                                                0.130
                                                                                     (0.033)***
 |NB − NC |                                                                                            0.029
                                                                                                      (0.030)
 N                          4,293          3,701            3,701        3,701          3,701          3,701
 Pseudo R2                  0.001          0.004            0.005        0.005          0.004          0.004
 Log Likelihood           -14,236.4      -12,521.9        -12,511.1    -10,816.6      -12,521.9      -12,528.9
 Log Like at zero         -14,244.8      -12,575.3        -12,575.3    -10,871.7      -12,575.3      -12,575.3
 Key: ∗ = signiﬁcant at 10%, ∗∗ = signiﬁcant at 5%, ∗ ∗ ∗ = signiﬁcant at 1%. † = Stratiﬁed by treatment.
 Standard errors are clustered by subject.




   The positive coeﬃcients on the two treatment dummies in Model 1 conﬁrm that the obser-
vation of prior adoptions accelerates adoption regardless of whether or not they are informative.
The larger coeﬃcient on Treatment CO dummy compared to that for Treatment P O is consis-
tent with the comparison of hazard rates in Figure 1.
   Models 2 through 6 include some combination of the private and public information variables.


                                                     16
All estimated coeﬃcients are positive and, with one exception, statistically signiﬁcant. The sizes
of the coeﬃcients on the time-varying covariates are robust across speciﬁcations. We conclude
that observation of peers’ prior choices induces subjects to make an adoption decision sooner
(without regard to which of the two innovations was chosen). As a generalization, the results
conﬁrm that subjects tend to adopt more quickly as observations of B s and C s increase and as
the absolute diﬀerence between draws of H s and Ls increases. Note that the positive coeﬃcients
on NB and NC are about the same size within each model, and across the models. Also, the
coeﬃcients on the variable |h − l| are more than twice as large as those on the variables NB
and NC . This is our ﬁrst evidence that subjects are relatively more responsive to their private
signals when deciding when to adopt compared to the observation of peers’ prior actions.
    Table 4 also reports coeﬃcients when the estimated hazard model was stratiﬁed by treatment:
Model 4 allows the baseline hazard to vary across the three treatments. Compared to when a
common baseline hazard is assumed, coeﬃcients do not diﬀer much.
    Model 5 includes the total number of prior adoptions of both types, NB + NC , replacing
the variations with the number of the two innovations separately, NB and NC . The coeﬃcient
on the sum is again positive and signiﬁcant, and close is size to the coeﬃcients on the separate
variables.
    Finally, we check whether subjects might be spurred on by an imbalance of the prior adop-
tions between to the two innovations. Model 6 includes the absolute diﬀerence in the adoptions
of B s and C s as of the prior period, i.e., |NB − NC |. The coeﬃcient on this variable was
not signiﬁcant indicating that the cumulative number of adoptions, not the innovations chosen,
determine the speed of adoption.

5.2.2    Competing Risks Analysis

Up to this point, our survival analysis did not make any distinction as to which of the two
innovations subjects adopted. It is possible, however, that there could be diﬀerences in timing
of adoption between the two innovations if only because the payoﬀ of B is certain while the
payoﬀ of C is risky. We allow for such diﬀerences by estimating a “competing risks” model
of adoption timing. A typical application of this model occurs in medical studies in which
individuals can die from two or more causes, such as from a heart attack or from some type of
cancer.15 In this medical application, as in our experiments, each of the two possible events is
irreversible. In our case, once a subject adopts either B or C , she cannot make a change for the
remainder of the decision sequence. Consequently, when one of the two events occurs, the other
event can no longer be observed for that subject. Estimation of the timing of adoption of B
taking the adoption of C as a competing risk, relates the covariates to this speciﬁc event rather
than to the event of adoption of either innovation. This approach allows us to disentangle the
causes for adoption of B and C .
    Figure 2 plots the Cumulative Incidence Functions (“CIF”) for adoption of B and C sep-
arately, for each of the three treatments. The CIF gives the portion of all subjects that have
  15 A typical example of competing risks found in labor economics occurs when workers leave unemployment for

one of several reasons, as when they return to work with their previous employer, take a job with a new employer
or drop out of the workforce entirely.


                                                      17
                                        Figure 2: Cumulative Incidence of B and C by Treatment




                          .6       .5
               Cumulative Incidence
             .2    .3     .1.4




                                        0             2               4             6                8
                                                                    Round

                                                 Treatment P, Tech B          Treatment P, Tech C
                                                 Treatment PO, Tech B         Treatment PO, Tech C
                                                 Treatment CO, Tech B         Treatment CO, Tech C




adopted an innovation at some time up to and including a round of the decision sequence. Solid
curves are used for CIFs for adoption of B while the dashed curves are used for C . Consistent
with Figure 1, the timing of adoption is similar under Treatments P O and CO, and which diﬀer
from the baseline Treatment P . Under Treatment P , adoption of both technologies is greater
in the ﬁrst round, but the other two treatments catch up quickly. Despite equality in expected
payoﬀ, technology B is adopted more frequently than technology C for all three treatments,
i.e., solid CIF is below the dashed CIF in Figure 2. Subjects apparently delay their adoption
of C as they gather additional information of both kinds. Note, however, that the adoption of
B would also be delayed as this information is gathered, and yet it occurs sooner as if the risk
associated with adoption of C prolongs deliberation.
   We next estimate a parametric model similar speciﬁcation to the Cox proportional hazard
model in the presence of a competing risk. The results are presented in Table 5. Models were run
for both B and for C with the other alternative acting as a competing risk. Two speciﬁcations
are included in the table, one of which excludes Treatment P (because no recording of prior
adoptions in that case) and one which includes ﬁxed eﬀects for the other two treatments. Both
speciﬁcations include the cumulative number of prior adoptions of B and C , NB and NC , as
well as the relative diﬀerence in private signals, h − l. Note that now we do not take the absolute
value of the diﬀerence in signals as the measure of private information since the number of each
type of signal should matter.
   The coeﬃcients are very precisely estimated and have the expected signs. For instance, ob-
servation of prior adoptions of B s, NB , leads to more rapid adoption of B . Similarly, observation
of prior adoptions of C s, NC , accelerate adoption of C . But note the cross eﬀects in Table 5:


                                                                   18
observation of prior C s (B s) also accelerates the adoption of B (C ). The cross eﬀects, however,
are smaller than the direct eﬀects.
   Also, as expected, the speed of adoption of B (C ) is directly increasing in the draws of Ls
(H s). The parametric model allows us to compare the relative impacts of these factors on speed
of adoption of the two alternatives. In particular, the observation of prior adoptions of C has a
greater impact on adoption of C (about 0.62) whereas the counterpart eﬀect of prior adoptions
of B on the adoption of B is smaller (about 0.50). The net number of signals has about the same
impact on adoption of B and C , though opposite in sign (i.e., +0.58 and -0.56, respectively).


                  Table 5: Competing Risks Models of Adoption of B and C
            Event of Interest     Adoption of B            Adoption of C
            Competing Risk        Adoption of C            Adoption of B
            NB                   0.488       0.505        0.350       0.381
                              (0.025)*** (0.024)*** (0.026)*** (0.025)***
            NC                   0.280       0.313        0.615       0.623
                              (0.029)*** (0.029)*** (0.025)*** (0.025)***
            h−l                 -0.569       -0.556       0.583       0.581
                              (0.020)***    (0.020)    (0.023)*** (0.023)***
            Treatment
            Fixed Eﬀects          No          Yes          No          Yes
            N                    5,685       6,209        5,685       6,209
            loglikelihood     -10,812.89   -12,200.1   -10,088.01 -11,185.61
            Key: ∗ = signiﬁcant at 10%, ∗∗ = signiﬁcant at 5%, ∗ ∗ ∗ = signiﬁcant at 1%.
            Standard errors are clustered by subject.




5.3    The Speed-Accuracy Tradeoﬀ
We have seen how the two types of information aﬀect the speed and accuracy of subjects’ adop-
tion decisions in diﬀerent ways. For instance, observation of peers’ decisions and correlation of
group payoﬀs accelerate adoption in Treatments P O and CO, respectively. This was quantiﬁed,
among other ways, in the last column of Table 3. We might expect, therefore, that adoption
accuracy under Treatment P would be superior because in that case subjects draw more private
signals; in fact, subjects are less accurate in that treatment than under the other two as shown
in the ﬁfth column of Table 3. In this section we summarize using a single measure how subjects
trade oﬀ between speed and accuracy of their adoption decisions.
   Table 6 is an initial attempt to capture both speed and accuracy of subjects decisions in
each of the three treatments. To begin with, note the third column oﬀers an alternative measure
of accuracy as the average number of rounds that subjects earn the highest payoﬀ possible —
itself a measure of combined speed and accuracy of adoption decisions. Again, subjects perform
worst in Treatment P spending fewer rounds receiving the high-payoﬀ innovation (p = 0.052).
The diﬀerence in this performance measure for Treatments P O and CO is not statistically
signiﬁcant. As before this is surprising to the extent that Treatment P O provides subjects with
only irrelevant, potentially confusing, information relative to Treatment P .

                                                  19
   The remaining portion of Table 6 groups subjects by the round in which they adopted,
and reports the average payoﬀ of each group of subjects. For all three treatments, the average
payoﬀ earned by subjects who adopted in Round 2 was higher than the average payoﬀ to a
subject that chose to adopt in a diﬀerent round. Delay pays oﬀ: empirically, subjects do better
when they do not adopt in Round 1 as prescribed by the Bayesian Nash Equilibrium. In fact,
the diﬀerence in average proﬁts between ﬁrst- and second-round adopters is not necessarily
statistically signiﬁcant at the usual 5% level.16 Nevertheless, subjects who adopt in Round 3 or
later earn signiﬁcantly less than those who adopt in Round 2.17


                           Table 6: Tradeoﬀ Between Speed and Accuracy
                            Avg No of              Average Payoﬀ by Round of Adoption
                           High-Payoﬀ

 Treatment        Obs.        Rounds          Round 1           Round 2   Round 3        Round 4       Round ≥ 5
     P            525           4.06           17.59             17.95     15.76          15.39          10.63
                               (0.22)          (0.83)            (1.31)    (0.86)         (0.86)         (0.82)
        PO         900          4.49           17.52             18.14     15.66          16.02          12.36
                               (0.14)          (0.59)            (0.58)    (0.69)         (0.84)         (1.37)
        CO         720          4.27           16.96             18.43     16.49          17.10          12.53
                               (0.12)          (0.61)            (0.61)    (0.72)         (0.95)         (1.61)
 Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by subject.




   Apparently, it pays to delay long enough to observe the ﬁrst round of peers’ adoptions (and
to draw a second private signal as well) but beyond that average payoﬀs tend to suﬀer. This
regularity, which holds across all treatments, compels us to examine adoption rules that, while
not necessarily BNE strategies, generate high proﬁts in our experimental settings.

5.3.1    Evaluating Behavioral Adoption Rules

The diﬀerent types of information available to subjects in our experiments, and the complex in-
centives that aﬀect their adoption decisions, make theoretical predictions diﬃcult. As described
in Section 4, in Treatments P and P O, the Bayesian Nash equilibrium has subjects adopt in
the ﬁrst round, choosing C if their private signal is H , and B if it is L. Equilibrium analysis of
Treatment CO indicates that subjects have an incentive to delay at least one round to observe
the actions of others. Since, as we saw in the previous section, subjects tend to delay in all
treatments, we now consider simple behavioral rules that may underlie the observed adoption
decisions, and compare the payoﬀs under each rule for the three treatments.
   We propose 9 plausible behavioral rules that subjects might follow, and calculate the average
proﬁts earned by those who obey each rule. The nine rules exhaust all strategies for adopting B
or C in the ﬁrst three rounds that are ‘rationalizable,’ in the sense that subjects do not adopt an
  16 Treatment CO comes closest to signiﬁcant diﬀerence, with those adopting in the second round out-earning

their ﬁrst-round counterparts by 1.47 tokens (p = 0.09, robust).
  17 The majority of pairwise comparisons between Round 2 average payoﬀs and payoﬀs to adoptions in other

rounds are statistically diﬀerent at the 5% level.



                                                     20
alternative that is neither Leading (“L”) nor Popular (“P”), if one of them exists.18 We denote
by L1 a strategy in which a subject adopts the leading innovation in the ﬁrst round which is
also the BNE for Treatments P and P O. An example of another rule is L2 − P 2 − L3 which
has the subject adopting the leading alternative in round 2, breaking ties if neither alternative
is leading at round 2 by choosing the popular strategy, and choosing the leading alternative in
round 3 if neither alternative is popular in round 2. The symbol “R” indicates that a subject
randomizes between the adoption of B and C when their other adoption criteria fails to force a
decision. Thus, the rule L2 − P 2 − R2 means that a subject adopts the leading alternative in
round 2, breaks ties by adopting the popular alternative, and picks one or the other if there is
no popular or leading alternative.


                           Table 7: Average Payoﬀ Under Behavioral Rules
                      Treatment P          Treatment PO             Treatment CO
                       L1    19.2            L1       19.3         L2-P2-R2    31.7
                            (0.80)                   (0.54)                   (0.88)
                      L2-L3  17.7         L2-P2-L3    19.2         P2-P3-L3    31.6
                            (1.08)                   (0.56)                   (1.07)
                       L3    16.5         L2-P2-R2    19.2         L2-P2-L3    31.2
                            (1.15)                   (0.56)                   (0.82)
                                            L2-L3     18.2         P2-L2-R2    31.1
                                                     (0.53)                   (1.00)
                                          P2-P3-L3    17.7        P2-L2-P3-L3  31.0
                                                     (0.60)                   (0.95)
                                         P2-L2-P3-L3  17.7            L1       30.9
                                                     (0.61)                   (1.00)
                                          P2-L2-R2    17.6           L2-L3     30.4
                                                     (0.62)                   (0.76)
                                             L3       16.4           P3-L3     28.3
                                                     (0.66)                   (0.96)
                                            P3-L3     16.0            L3       28.1
                                                     (0.72)                   (0.89)




    Table 7 reports the average proﬁts of subjects, averaged across decision sequences, who
behaved consistently with the selected strategies, in rank order of average payoﬀs for each
treatment.19 No strategy dominates the others across all treatments, but regularities do emerge
from Table 7. It turns out that L1, the unique BNE strategy in Treatments P and P O, is the
high-payoﬀ rule in those two treatments. Rule L2 − P 2 − R2 generates the highest average
payoﬀ for Treatments CO, suggesting that private and public information generate roughly the
same payoﬀs. More generally, when payoﬀs are correlated, it was worth while to wait until the
second round and observe one’s peers along with a second private signal.


6     Policy Options and Conclusions
We design an experiment that captures three elements inherent in the decision to adopt environ-
mental innovations: (i) uncertainty about net beneﬁts of the new technologies, (ii) observation of
 18 We deﬁne ‘Leading’ and ‘Popular’ technologies as in previous sections. There are fewer strategies listed for

Rounds 1 and 3, as there is always a Leading innovation, so less tie-breaking is required.
 19 Only three of the nine behavioral rules are possible under Treatment P .




                                                      21
private information and of others actions, and (iii) freedom to choose the timing of the adoption.
We ﬁnd that subjects routinely departed from rationality, often adopt a new technology later
than was optimal given available information. This pattern corroborates the real-world delay
that lies at the heart of the “energy-eﬃciency gap” discussed in the Introduction, and leads us
to explore the features of our experimental manipulations that aﬀect the speed of adoption.
    Analyzing the experimental data using parametric and nonparametric models, we conclude
that, when choosing between the safe and risky innovation, subjects place greater weight on
their private signals compared to observation of prior adoptions by their peers. Observation of
prior decisions does, nevertheless, tend to accelerate adoption, all else equal. This pattern is
consistent with ﬁeld evidence regarding adoption of environmental innovations. For instance,
Bollinger and Gillingham [2012] ﬁnds that observation of installations of photovoltaic solar
panels by households in the same geographic area tends to accelerate adoption by other nearby
households.
    One interpretation of this ﬁnding is that peers’ actions convey their private information about
the new technology. However, we also found in our experiments that adoption is hastened even
when payoﬀs of adoptions are statistically independent, in which case peers’ adoption decisions
do not contain any useful information. In fact, prior adoptions not only accelerate adoption by
laggards, but they do so regardless of what innovation is chosen by peers. Prior adoptions spur
the laggards to act, but do not cause them to imitate the early movers. If, as we would suspect,
subjects are slow to adopt due to some form of status quo bias, we are seeing that observation
of actions of any sort by their peers overcome their inertia.
    Reducing, or removing, this inertia is central to policies that aim to promote adoption of new
technologies that conserve energy or protect the environment. Rather than inducing adoption
through monetary incentives —such as through the use of taxes, subsidies or price controls
—evidence points to informational strategies to promote these adoptions.20 An immediate
recommendation emerging from our results is to focus on the volume of adoption, especially the
total counts of adoptions by whomever the decision makers perceive as their peer group, e.g.,
households located in the same neighborhood, or other ﬁrms in the same industry.21
    These results may have practical implications for the real-world adoption of environmental
innovations — for both decision makers who must not only select among competing technologies
but also choose the timing of the adoption, and for policy makers who wish to inﬂuence those
decisions. Speciﬁcally, our experiments aﬃrm the delay that lies at the heart of the energy
eﬃciency gap discussed in the introduction, and could enlighten policies that aim to hasten the
adoption of a superior alternative.
    The diﬀusion of energy conservation technologies has received considerable attention re-
cently. Numerous ﬁeld studies have been conducted that quantify how ﬁnancial and informa-
tional programs aﬀect residential energy usage. For instance, Delmas, Fischlein, and Asensio
[2013] conduct a meta analysis of 156 ﬁeld trials of electricity conservation program for resi-
  20 See,e.g., Fischer [2008] and Olander and Thogersen [2014]
  21 While we do not test how subjects might respond diﬀerently to others inside or outside of a reference group,
ﬁeld studies conﬁrm its importance is conﬁrmed by the ﬁeld studies and also by laboratory experiments. See
Viscusi, Phillips, and Kroll [2011].




                                                       22
dential consumers. They found that programs that supplied consumers with information about
usage of electricity by their peers resulted in an average reduction of 11.5% in electricity use, a
signiﬁcantly larger reduction than the average of 7.4% registered by all methods including the
provision of information about consumers’ prior personal usage or oﬀering monetary incentives
for usage reduction. Few of these studies, however, focus on the speed with which consumers
respond to the programs.
    Our results are consistent with the ﬁndings of these ﬁeld experiments in that the timing of
adoption of our subjects is inﬂuenced by the decisions of others. It could be that in both the
laboratory and the ﬁeld the typical decision maker is relatively certain as to which innovation
to pursue but their uncertainty as to when to take action results in delay. An additional
source of information — even when the feedback provides no useful information — can spur an
agent to take action without necessarily steering them toward a particular option. Setting aside
concerns about privacy, policy makers could accelerate adoption by collecting and disseminating
individual adoption decisions to prospective adopters, or by oﬀering subsidies to early adopters.22
Our ﬁndings suggest that policy makers ought to favor the use of information dissemination
relative to the recently popular use of “nudges” which leverage cognitive biases. The concept
of choice architecture falls somewhere in between: the context of a decision, including both
information and framing (such as the source of the information), can positively aﬀect outcomes
as we have observed here.
    As has been often noted, e.g., Rogers [1962], lead adopters can be instrumental in promoting
diﬀusion of new technology. Jaﬀe and Stavins [1994] observe that “if the act of adopting a new
technology is, itself, a source of useful information for others, then the act of adoption creates
a positive externality by providing information to others for which the adopter is unlikely to
be compensated. This (positive) externality is another form of market failure [slowing down
adoption].” The policy question becomes how to internalize this positive externality that early
adopters confer on procrastinators. One way to encourage early adoption is to oﬀer a subsidy
that is declining over time and which is independent of the innovation that is adopted — so as
not to bias technology choice, but rather to encourage adopters to use their private signals. To
an extent, this approach was adopted with the federal solar panel tax credit plan.23 From the
time it began in 2006 and running through 2019, residential adopters of solar panels could/can
claim a 30% credit oﬀ their tax bill. The credit drops exogenously to 26% in 2020 and then to
22% in 2021, at which time the program ends. Adopters are given an incentive to move sooner
rather than later, and this could be seen as a reward for motivating other households to adopt
sooner than they otherwise would.24
    We need to add that, while early adoption of an innovation may advance the date when it
begins to pay dividends, delaying the decision generates additional information on the relative
merits of the competing innovations. Indeed, our experiments show that the highest average
payoﬀs are earned by subjects who adopt an innovation in the second round, and not in the
  22 The 2006 California Solar Initiative had this eﬀect since it oﬀered rebates to residents that declined over

time as cumulative installations reached certain thresholds. See Bollinger and Gillingham [2012].
  23 See https://energy.gov/savings/residential-renewable-energy-tax-credit.
  24 To the extent that costs of solar panel systems fall over time, the present value of the marginal incentive is

steeper than would appear from the credit percentages.


                                                        23
ﬁrst as is prescribed by the risk-neutral equilibrium. Further, subjects who select in the ﬁrst or
second round the innovation that is favored by private signal(s) earn the highest average payoﬀs,
compared to subjects who follow other plausible behavioral rules of thumb which specify wait-
and-see strategies. The importance of timing, as well as the tradeoﬀs involved for both market
actors and policy makers, are particularly relevant for certain environmental innovations, e.g.,
with potentially limited infrastructure in place, such as the choice between a hybrid and a
hydrogen fuel cell vehicle. Hence, programs that disseminate the adoption decisions of peers
may not only encourage earlier movement away from ineﬃcient legacy technologies but also have
the added bonus of improving the choices of later movers regarding innovative new technologies.




                                               24
References
Hunt Allcott and Michael Greenstone. Is there an energy eﬃciency gap? Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 26(1):3–28, February 2012.

Lisa R. Anderson and Charles A. Holt. Information cascades in the laboratory. American
  Economic Review, 87(5):847–862, 1997.

Ian Ayres, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih. Evidence from two large ﬁeld experiments that
  peer comparison feedback can reduce residential energy usage. Journal of Law, Economics,
  and Organization, page ews020, 2012.

Kyung Hwan Baik, Todd L. Cherry, Stephan Kroll, and Jason F. Shogren. Endogenous timing
  in a gaming tournament. Theory and Decision, 47:1–21, 1999.

Abhijit Banerjee. A simple model of herd behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3):
  797–817, 1992.

Sushil Bikchandani, David Hirschleifer, and Ivo Welch. A theory of fads, fashion, custom and
  cultural change as informational cascade. Journal of Political Economy, 100(5):992–1026,
  1992.

Bryan Bollinger and Kenneth Gillingham. Peer eﬀects in the diﬀusion of solar photovoltaic
  panels. Marketing Science, 31(6):900–912, 2012.

  ga¸
Bo˘      ¸ elen and Kyle Hyndman. An experiment of social learning with endogenous timing.
    chan C
  Review of Economic Design, 16(2-3):251–268, 2012.

  ga¸
Bo˘      ¸ elen and Shachar Kariv. Distinguishing informational cascades from herd behavior
    chan C
  in the laboratory. American Economic Review, 94(3):484–497, 2004a.

Christopher Chamley. Delays and equilibria with large and small information in social learning.
  European Economics Review, 48(3):477–501, June 2004.

Christopher Chamley and Douglas Gale. Information revelation and strategic delay in a model
  of investment. Econometrica, 62(5):1065–1085, September 1994.

Dora L. Costa and Matthew E. Kahn. Energy conservation nudges and environmentalist ide-
  ology: Evidence from a randomized residential electricity ﬁeld experiment. Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 11(3):680–702, 2013.

Magali A. Delmas, Miriam Fischlein, and Omar I. Asensio. Information strategies and energy
  conservation behavior: A meta-analysis of experimental studies from 1975 to 2012. Energy
  Policy, 61:729–739, 2013.

Mathias Drehmann, Jorg Oechssler, and Andreas Roider. Herding with and without payoﬀ
  externalities – an internet experiment. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 25
  (2):391–415, April 2007.


                                              25
Urs Fischbacher. z-tree: Zurich toolbox for ready-made economic experiments. Experimental
  Economics, 10(2):171–178, June 2007.

Corinna Fischer. Feedback on household electricity consumption: a tool for saving energy?
  Energy eﬃciency, 1(1):79–104, 2008.

James J. Heckman and Burton Singer. Econometric duration analysis. Journal of Econometrics,
  24(1-2):63–132, 1984.

Towhidul Islam and Nigel Meade. The impact of attribute preferences on adoption timing: The
  case of photo-voltaic (pv) solar cells for household electricity generation. Energy Policy, 55:
  521–530, 2013.

Asen Ivanov, Dan Levin, and James Peck. Behavioral biases in endogenous-timing herding
  games: an experimental study. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 87:25–34,
  2013.

Adam B. Jaﬀe and Robert N. Stavins. The energy paradox and the diﬀusion of conservation
  technology. Resource and Energy Economics, 16(2):91–122, 1994.

Katrina Jessoe and David Rapson. Knowledge is (less) power: Experimental evidence from
  residential energy use. The American Economic Review, 104(4):1417–1438, 2014.

John D. Kalbﬂeisch and Ross L. Prentice. The statistical analysis of failure time data. John
  Wiley & Sons, 1980.

Dan Levin and James Peck. Investment dynamics with common and private values. Journal of
  Economic Theory, 143(1):114–139, 2008.

Philippe Menanteau and Herve Lefebvre. Competing technologies and the diﬀusion of innova-
  tions: the emergence of energy-eﬃcient lamps in the residential sector. Research policy, 29
  (3):375–389, 2000.

                       alim¨
Pauli Murto and Juuso V¨   aki. Learning and information aggregation in an exit game. The
  Review of Economic Studies, page rdr007, 2011.

Hal T. Nelson. Lost opportunities: Modeling commercial building energy code adoption in the
  united states. Energy policy, 49:182–191, 2012.

Folke Olander and John Thogersen. Informing versus nudging in environmental policy. Journal
  of Consumer Policy, 37(3):341–356, 2014.

David Popp. International innovation and diﬀusion of air pollution control technologies: the
  eﬀects of noX and so2 regulation in the u.s., japan, and germany. Journal of Environmental
  Economics and Management, 51(1):46–71, 2006.

Everett Rogers. The diﬀusion of innovations. Free Press, New York, 1962.




                                               26
Daniel Sgroi. The right choice at the right time: A herding experiment in endogenous time.
  Experimental Economics, 6:159–180, 2003.

Jason F. Shogren and Laura O. Taylor. On behavioral-environmental economics. Review of
  Environmental Economics and Policy, 2(1):26–44, 2008.

W. Kip Viscusi, Owen R. Phillips, and Stephan Kroll. Risky investment decisions: How are
  individuals inﬂuenced by their groups? Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 43(2):81–106, 2011.

           acker. Do we follow others when we should? a simple test of rational expectations.
Georg Weizs¨
  The American Economic Review, 100(5):2340–2360, December 2010.

Jianbo Zhang. Strategic delay and the onset of investment cascades. Rand Journal of Economics,
  28(1):188–205, Spring 1997.




                                             27
A   Instructions for Laboratory Subjects

     Experimental Instructions: [treatment CO]
     Welcome to this experiment on decision making and thank you for being here. You will
     be compensated for your participation in the experiment, though the exact amount you
     will receive will depend on the choices you and others make and on random chance (as
     explained below). Please pay careful attention to these instructions, as a significant
     amount of money is at stake.

     Information about the choices that you make during the experiment will be kept strictly
     confidential. Your name will appear only on the payment-receipt form and will not be
     linked to any specific choices you make. You will not be asked to reveal your identity or
     the content of your decisions to anyone else (either the experimenter or other
     participants) at any time during or after the experiment. In order to maintain privacy and
     confidentiality, please do not speak to anyone during the experiment and please do not
     discuss your choices with anyone even after the conclusion of the experiment.

     The experiment will consist of a series of 16 problems, the first of which will be a
     practice problem for which you will not be paid. Each problem is called a Decision
     Sequence and is made up of 8 rounds. During each Decision Sequence, you will decide if
     and when to move between three alternative courses of action: options A, B, and C. You
     will begin each Decision Sequence following the default option, A. During round 1 of 8,
     you will be asked to choose one of three options: to remain with option A, to switch to B,
     or to switch to C. As long as you remain with A, you will be given the same three
     options during each subsequent round in the sequence. After you switch to B or C, you
     will no longer have the opportunity to move between options. You will remain with
     either B or C (depending on which one you selected) each subsequent round until the end
     of the sequence. For example, you may choose to remain in option A for the first three
     rounds, and then switch to option C in round 4. You must then remain in option C for the
     rest of that Decision Sequence.

     At the beginning of each sequence, you will be placed into a group with 5 other
     participants that are in the lab with you. Group assignments will be made randomly and
     will change at the end of each sequence. At the beginning of each round, you will be told
     how many of your group members were following each alternative (A, B, and C) as of
     the end of the previous round.

     There is a payoff associated with following each option. For each round that you follow
     option A, you will receive 1 token. For each round that you follow B, you will receive 2
     tokens. The payoff for C in each decision sequence is the same for all members of your
     group and will be randomly determined at the beginning of each decision sequence; it
     will remain the same until the end of that decision sequence. The payoff for C will either
     take a value of 0 tokens per round or 4 tokens per round, both being equally likely. You
     will not be told if your group’s payoff for C is 0 or 4 in any given decision sequence, but
     at the beginning of each round you will be shown the result of a coin flip that will help
     you determine what the payoff for C is. If the payoff for C is 0, the coin flip will result in
     an H with 1/3 probability and an L with 2/3 probability. If the payoff for C is 4, the coin


                                                    1


                                               28
flip will result in an H with 2/3 probability and an L with 1/3 probability. The payoff for
C will be the same for each member of your group in each decision sequence, but the
coin flips themselves are generated randomly for each group member individually, and
therefore may or may not be the same. Figure 1, below, illustrates the payoffs.

 Option A = 1 token per round
 Option B = 2 tokens per round
 Option C = either 0 or 4 tokens per round. Each is equally likely.

                                      Coin Flips:

                  If C = 0                                If C = 4
                                                             = 2/3 chance
                    = 1/3 chance

                                                            = 1/3 chance
                    = 2/3 chance




Figure 1. Payoffs for Options A, B, and C.

Your payoffs for the 8 rounds in a sequence will be tallied at the end of the sequence.
For example, if you decided to remain with option A for the first 4 rounds and then
switched to option B, you would receive 4*1 + 4*2=12 tokens. Your tokens from all 15
Decision Sequences will be added at the end of the experiment and converted to U.S.
dollars (the exchange rate is: 12 tokens = $1), and you will be given a check for that
amount.

The payoff for option C can be 4 or 0 tokens. For example, if you remain with option A
for the first two rounds and switch to option C in the third round, your payoff will be
2*1+6*4=26 if the payoff for option C turns out to be 4, and your payoff will be
2*1+6*0=2 if the payoff for C turns out to be 0. Note that the true value of the payoff for
C will remain the same (either 0 or 4) for all 8 rounds of the Decision Sequence.

For each round that you remain with option A, you will view a flip of the coin that will
help you determine the payoff for option C. For example, if you choose option A during
rounds 1, 2 and 3, you will see four flips of the coin (at the beginning of rounds 1-4).

After all 8 rounds of a Decision Sequence, you will be told how many tokens you
accumulated in that sequence. Then a new sequence will begin and you will go through
the same process again. Remember that payoff for C is independently chosen for each
sequence, so the value of C’s payoff in previous sequences is not an indication of what it
will be in future sequences. After all 15 Decision Sequences, your tokens from all
sequences will be added together, converted to dollars, and given to you in the form of a
check.



                                             2


                                        29
Computer Program Description
To make your decisions you will use the computer in front of you. Right now, you can
see an initial waiting screen. The program will be activated when the instructions are
finished.

Once the program is activated, you will be given a short quiz and go through a practice
decision sequence to make certain that you correctly understand how the experiment will
work. After you have completed the quiz and the practice sequence, the experiment will
begin. At that time, a new window will pop up and replace the initial waiting window.
The new window will resemble the one shown below. The upper-left of the screen
informs you that you are in the first of 15 Decision Sequences. The upper-right of the
screen shows how much time you have remaining to make your decision. You will have a
total of 20 seconds to make your decision, after which the computer will choose option A
for you. The center of the screen will inform you that you are in round 1 and tell you the
result of a coin flip that will help you determine the payoff for option C. The screen
below shows that the first flip of the coin resulted in an H. Finally, you are asked for your
decision. You may choose option A, option B or option C by placing the cursor on the
corresponding button and left-clicking.




                                              3


                                         30
If you choose option B or C in the round 1, you remain with that option for the remainder
of the rounds of the Decision Sequence. In this case, you will again see the waiting screen
that is in front of you now, which will remain until the other participants are finished with
the first Decision Sequence.

If you choose option A in the round 1, you will see a similar screen as the second round
begins. Notice that the upper-left of the screen shows that you are still in the first decision
sequence. As shown in the upper-right, you will again have 20 seconds to make your
decision, after which the computer will select option A for you. The screen will inform
you that you are in the round 2. It will also show the options chosen by other members of
your group in the previous round. Below, the screen shows that 6 group members chose
A, while no group members chose B or C. Just underneath, the screen shows the result of
a new coin flip. The screen shown below indicates that the coin flips for rounds 1 and 2
resulted in an H and an L. Notice that you are shown the results of the coin flips for both
round 1 and round 2.




                                               4


                                          31
If you choose option B or C in round 2, you remain in that option and are therefore
shown the waiting screen. If you choose option A in round 2, you will be told the result
of an additional coin flip and be asked to make another decision.

This process will repeat itself until you choose option B or option C, or until you
complete round 8. After the Decision Sequence is over, you see the feedback screen. The
feedback screen shows you the payoff for C, 0, and your profit for the round, 1 token.




You have a maximum of 20 seconds to observe the feedback screen from the first
Decision Sequence. You may click the OK button in the lower right corner of the screen
when you are ready to proceed to the next Decision Sequence. After 20 seconds, you will
proceed automatically.

Then, the new Decision Sequence will start, and the computer will again randomly place
you into a group with 5 other participants, randomly select a coin, show more information
and ask for a new decision.




                                            5


                                       32
After the last round is finished, a final screen will pop up, informing you of your total
earnings for this experiment.

                                         Rules

Please do not talk with anyone during the experiment. We ask everyone to remain silent
until the end of the last round.

Your participation in the experiment and any information about your earnings will be
used solely for research purposes. Your name and association to your decisions will be
kept strictly confidential. Your payment receipt and participation form will be the only
places in which your name is recorded.

                                       Questions

Any clarification questions should be asked at this time. Please raise your hand and wait
for an instructor to come to your desk.




3




                                            6


                                       33
B      Survival Analysis
B.1        Non-Parametric Comparison of Adoption Timing
Survival analysis summarizes the timing of an event using its hazard function, or equivalently, its
corresponding survival function. There are several ways to test statistically the equality of two
survival functions. A standard non-parametric test of equality of two survival functions is the
“log-rank test.”25 Table 8 reports the signiﬁcance levels of the log-rank test for each pair of the
three treatments. The ﬁgures in the table are the Chi-squared statistics of a non-parametric test
of the equality of two estimated survival functions over all 8 rounds of each decision sequence.


                      Table 8: Log-Rank Tests of Equality of Survival Functions
                                        P        PO          CO
                                P
                                PO    4.31∗∗
                                CO 13.94∗∗∗ 5.30∗∗
                                  Signiﬁcance: ∗ = 10%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ ∗ ∗ = 1%.




     Consistent with a visual comparison of the hazard plots in Figure 1, the tests reject that
survival under Treatment P is statistically the same as survival under each of the other two
treatments. The tests also reject that timing under treatments P O and CO are the same —
aﬃrming that the existence of common values speeds up the pace of adoption.


B.2        Cox Proportional Hazard Models of Adoption Timing
The log-rank test imposes no parametric restriction on the three survival functions. In this
section, we again test for diﬀerences in timing under the three treatments but now using the
popular Cox proportional hazard model. The Cox model assumes that the observed hazard
is proportional to a base hazard rate. We take the base hazard rate to be the hazard under
Treatment P , and estimate the proportionality of the hazards of the other two treatments
relative to this baseline. The results of this estimation are found in Table 9. The coeﬃcient β
in the table determines the factor of proportionality, eβ , relative to the hazard for Treatment
P.
     The fact that both estimated coeﬃcients are positive conﬁrms that the adoption rate is faster
under Treatments P O and CO than under Treatment P . The coeﬃcients are all statistically
signiﬁcant at the usual 5% level. As observed earlier, adoption occurs much faster when out-
comes are perfectly correlated compared to when they are statistically independent. Indeed, the
coeﬃcients on the treatments involving a common payoﬀ are roughly twice as large a those with
independent payoﬀs, indicating that common values accelerates adoption.




 25 This   test is also known as the “Mantel-Haenszel test.” See Kalbﬂeisch and Prentice [1980].


                                                       34
Table 9: Cox Proportional Hazard Models Relative to the Baseline Treatment, P
Treatment Coef. Std. Err.       z   P > |z | lower 95% CI upper 95% CI
PO           0.131    0.059    2.20   0.028        0.014            0.249
CO           0.239    0.061    3.91   0.000        0.119            0.359




                                     35
