                                                  WPS7934


Policy Research Working Paper                    7934




    Can Grants to Consortia Spur Innovation
      and Science-Industry Collaboration?
        Regression-Discontinuity Evidence from Poland

                                 Miriam Bruhn
                                David McKenzie




Development Research Group
Finance and Private Sector Development Team
January 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7934


  Abstract
 This paper uses a regression discontinuity design to study the                     completed by almost 60 percentage points. The results also
 effect of Poland’s In-Tech program on innovation activities.                       show that the program leads to more science-industry col-
 The analysis focuses on a component of the program that                            laboration, and increases the probability of applying for a
 provides grants to projects that are carried out by consortia                      patent related to the proposed project, as well as the prob-
 of firms and research entities. Data from a 2016 follow-up                         ability of publishing a research paper related to the project.
 survey of applicants to the 2012 and 2013 calls for propos-                        The analysis also finds early effects on commercialization
 als show that In-Tech largely funds projects that would not                        of products related to the proposed project, although these
 otherwise get funded by other agencies or by the consortia                         products currently still make up a small share of firm’s sales.
 themselves, increasing the probability of a project being




  This paper is a product of the Finance and Private Sector Development Team, Development Research Group. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at mbruhn@worldbank.org and dmckenzie@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
            Can Grants to Consortia Spur Innovation and Science-Industry Collaboration?
                                            Regression-Discontinuity Evidence from Poland1
                                                                Miriam Bruhn, World Bank
                                                               David McKenzie, World Bank




Keywords: R&D, innovation, science-industry collaboration, regression discontinuity design
JEL codes: O31, O38, H25




                                                            
1
  We thank Matias Cattaneo for helpful feedback on regression discontinuity designs; Aidan Coville and Ana Cusolito
for helpful peer review comments; Aleksandra Klupa for research assistance; Maciej Drozd, Thomas Haven, Natasha
Kapil and Siddharth Sharma for guidance and support from the World Bank side; and Emilia Nasilowska and the team
at NCBiR for their insights on the Innotech program.
1. Introduction

Efforts to foster collaboration between science and industry have long been a part of innovation
policy efforts in many countries (Cunningham and Gök, 2012). Firms stand to benefit from
accessing the specialized infrastructure and expertise available in universities, while researchers
gain access to practical problems that can provide greater relevance for their research, to industrial
capabilities for manufacture, and to assistance in commercializing their ideas to take them to
market. These collaborations are becoming increasingly important for the innovation process, in
part because many new inventions are directly rooted in science, such as biotechnology,
information technology, and new materials (OECD 2002, Albuquerque et al 2015). Yet there are
several barriers that inhibit collaboration, including financing constraints, information
asymmetries which prevent researchers and firms interacting, and transaction costs in negotiating
collaboration agreements. Government subsidies may provide an incentive to seek out these
connections and may foster increased interaction between firms and scientific units.

While such policies have been used for some time in the U.S., Western Europe, and Japan, they
are now also becoming common in middle and high income countries that are attempting to close
the gap with the most developed countries through innovation. For example, Mexico’s National
Council for Science and Technology (CONACYT) operates a program, the Programa de Estímulos
a la Innovación (PEI), which gives innovation subsidies to either private firms or firms that
collaborate with universities or public research centers.2 In 2013, the program funded 703 projects
with a median grant size of USD160,000. About half of these projects went to firms that
collaborated with at least two universities or research institutes. Similarly, Malaysia’s science fund
gives preference to applications that show links with firms; and Colombia’s Colciencias is also
attempting to generate more linkages between industry and research.

However, despite the increasing popularity of such policies, there is currently little empirical
evidence on the causal effects of R&D subsidies for science-industry consortia (Cunningham and
Gök, 2012). Scandura (2016) investigates the impact of public funding for university-industry
R&D projects in the UK using propensity score matching based on firm characteristics. She finds
positive effects of the program on firms’ R&D expenditure and share of R&D employment.

                                                            
2
 More information about this program is available on CONACYT’s website
http://www.conacyt.gob.mx/index.php/fondos-y-apoyos/programa-de-estimulos-a-la-innovacion.

                                                               2
 
However, she does not investigate the effect of the program on collaboration. Also, although the
matching technique produces a comparison group of firms with similar observable characteristics,
the results could potentially be driven by differences in unobservable characteristics. Lööf and
Broström (2008) use a similar matching technique to estimate the impact of university
collaboration on innovation in Sweden. They find that large manufacturing firms that do
collaborate with universities have higher innovation sales (share of sales from new or improved
products) and a greater number of patent applications, with again the same concerns about
selection on unobservables.

This paper adds to this literature by studying the effect of the In-Tech program in Poland on
science-industry collaboration, research and innovation, and product commercialization. The In-
Tech program provides grants to consortia of research entities and firms for proposed research
projects. Applications receive a score based on peer reviewer ratings and those with a score above
a threshold are offered funding. Based on this funding rule, we use a regression discontinuity (RD)
design to estimate the effects of receiving In-Tech funding for applicants to the 2012 and 2013
calls for proposals. We use data from In-Tech application forms to show that applicants above and
below the cutoff have similar characteristics, suggesting that the RD approach is valid.

Follow-up information on projects and consortia outcomes comes from a 2016 survey of 400
applicants both above and below the funding cutoff that was specifically designed to measure the
impact of In-Tech. The consortium leaders in our sample have a mean of 100 and median of 28
research employees and a mean of 140 and median of 41 technical and administrative staff
members. Most projects are in a field of engineering, with the largest field being electrical,
mechanical, or materials engineering.

Our findings show that receiving In-Tech funding increases the probability of a project being
completed by almost 60 percentage points (from about 20% completed to close to 80% completed).
The survey responses regarding collaboration reveal that most consortia had already collaborated
before applying to the program (about 85 percent of applications). However, the impact estimates
show a 14 to 18 percentage point increase in the likelihood of a new collaboration taking place
within the consortia since applying. We also examine whether In-Tech funding crowds out
collaboration with entities outside the consortia and do not find this to be the case, suggesting that
In-Tech led to more science-industry collaboration overall.

                                                  3
 
Looking at innovation outputs, we find that receiving In-Tech funding increases the probability
that the consortium applied for a patent related to their proposed project (from about 15% to 60%)
and there is no effect on applying for a patent for another project. Similarly, members of a
consortium that received In-Tech funding are more likely to publish a paper related to their
proposed project, with no significant effect on publications related to other projects. We do not
find an effect on other measures of innovation, such as having developed a new industrial design,
new prototype, new products, or new process during the past five years. The lack of impact on
these measures may be due to the fact that about 80% of consortia in our sample report doing at
least one of these activities, so the baseline level of innovation is quite high.

Finally, for commercialization, we find that receiving In-Tech funding leads to about a 20
percentage points higher probability of a product related to the proposed project being ready for
sale or currently being sold in Poland. However, these products currently only account for about
1% of firm sales, which may be the case since our follow-up period is relatively short, covering
only 3 to 4 post-funding years.

Although there is relatively little literature on the effectiveness of research grants to foster industry-
science collaborations, our paper is related to a broader literature that has studied the effects of
grants to firms, or to researchers separately. The early literature on R&D subsidies to firms
typically relied on panel estimation, instrumental variables (IV) techniques or propensity score
matching to estimate these effects and may be subject to estimation bias.3 More recent papers use
regression discontinuity designs and find that government policies to promote R&D by firms have
increased patent applications by these firms in Italy (Bronzini and Piselli 2016), the UK
(Dechezleprêtre el at 2015), and the US (Howell 2015). The studies for the UK and US also find
positive effects of R&D policies on firm sales (the paper for Italy focuses on patents only).

A related literature examines the impact of National Science Foundation (NSF) or National
Institute of Health (NIH) grants to researchers in the US on publications and patents. Two earlier
studies using OLS and IV estimation find no or only small effects (Arora and Gambardella 2005
and Jacob and Lefgren 2011). A more recent study also using IV estimation concludes that a $10
million boost in NIH funding leads to an 18% increase in the number of patents citing the funded

                                                            
3
 See Zúñiga-Vicente el al, 2014, for a summary of this literature, as well as Hall and Maffioli (2008), Czarnitzki,
Hanel, Rosa (2011), Cappelen, Raknerud, and Rybalka (2012), and Jaffe and Le (2015).

                                                               4
 
research (Azoulay et al 2015). In a similar vein, Ganguli (forthcoming) studies a large-scale grant
program for scientists in the former Soviet Union, funded by financier George Soros, and finds
that the grants more than doubled researcher publications.

Branstetter and Sakakibara (2002) and Sakakibara and Branstetter (2003) measure the impact of
government-sponsored company-to-company cooperative R&D projects in Japan and the US using
matched control groups of firms. They find that participating in these consortia leads to a higher
number of patents. Other papers have used matching techniques or structural models to estimate
the effect of EU sponsored research joint ventures, some of which include collaborations between
firms and universities. These studies tend to find a positive association between participating in a
research joint venture and firm productivity and profitability (see for example, Benfratello and
Sembenelli 2002 and Barajas, Huergo, and Moreno 2012), but they do not distinguish between
joint ventures that include universities and those that did not.

Our findings are thus in line with previous findings regarding the positive impact of R&D subsidies
on publications, patents and commercialization. To our knowledge, ours is the first paper to
analyze data from a survey that was specifically conducted to measure the impact of the subsidy
program.4 These data allow us to consider a broader range of outcomes than previous studies, and,
in particular, to document the positive effect of Poland’s In-Tech program on science-industry
collaboration, thus adding a new finding to the literature.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the In-Tech program and its
application process and scoring. Section 3 discusses the RD design and follow-up survey. Section
4 presents the results and Section 5 concludes.

2. The In-Tech Program

Poland’s National Center for Research and Development (NCBiR) is a government entity whose
programs account for around 40 percent of the national research and development budget. One of
the programs it offers is Innotech, which is designed to support research entities and businesses in




                                                            
4
 Previous studies typically rely on balance sheet data and firm surveys conducted by the country’s statistical agency.
They obtain information on publications or patents by matching researcher names or firm names to databases of
publications and patent applications. 

                                                               5
 
carrying out innovative projects in scientific and industrial areas. Innotech has two program tracks,
In-Tech and Hi-Tech. Our focus is on In-Tech, the larger of the two program tracks.5

In-Tech has three main objectives. The first is to increase the number of developed and
implemented innovative technologies in Poland, the second is to increase funding spent by
companies on research and development projects that can benefit the economy, and the third is to
strengthen collaboration between the scientific community and firms. The goal is to take ideas
from the research stage through to commercialization. Beneficiaries can receive funding for two
phases: a research phase of up to 24 months, and an implementation phase of up to 12 months.6
They could apply for both research and implementation, or for the research phase only.

The program provides funding for each project of up to 10 million PLN (approximately USD2.9
million), with a median grant size of 2.3 million PLN (approximately USD660,000).7 Funding can
be used to support research expenses during the research phase, including payroll, scientific
equipment, research services, operating costs and overheads; and in addition during the
implementation phase can also cover costs associated with getting a product ready for market,
including advisory services, legal fees, administrative fees, market research, compliance
certification with national or international standards, and activities involved with obtaining
industrial property rights. Recipients are given the grants, but the program does not provide any
additional capacity building activities such as mentoring, training, connections to angel investors
and Venture Capital funds, etc. Up to 100% financing of research institutions for research tasks is
provided, while firms receiving funding are expected to contribute between 10 and 35 percent of
the costs depending on firm size and type of expenditure.

Public funding for these projects is potentially justified as addressing several market failures. The
first is a standard failure in the credit markets for financing risky innovation – where asymmetric
information and the risk of failure make banks reluctant to lend for research and development
activities. Second, if innovation has spillover benefits for other firms due to copying or building
on research findings, then the social benefits may exceed the private benefits leading firms to
                                                            
5
   The Hi-Tech program is designed for businesses in advanced technology areas, and funded 60 firms over two funding
cycles.
6
   Beneficiaries could receive funding for up to 36 months if they applied only for the research phase, and have the
possibility of extending the implementation phase to 12 months if they can provide sufficient justification.  
7
   The Polish Zloty has fluctuated between 3 and 4 PLN to the USD over the period 2011-2016. We use 3.5 for these
conversions to provide an approximate sense of the USD value during the lifetime of the program.

                                                               6
 
underinvest. A third market failure is a coordination failure between industry and research units.
Advanced technological research can require costly equipment and experts that may be beyond the
reach of many firms. Universities and other research units have this equipment (typically publicly
financed) and research experts, but may not have the right links to firms or knowledge of market
needs. While the program does not directly provide match-making services, the funds may
incentivize industry and research units to come together in order to be able to apply for funding.

2.1 Application Process

The program was established in November 2011, and was advertised in national newspapers as
well as through the website of NCBiR. Applicants could apply as a scientific consortium consisting
of at least one research unit and at least one enterprise, or otherwise as an enterprise or as a center
for industry and science. There were two annual calls for proposals, with a one month period to
apply online, the first in April 2012, and the second in July 2013. There was no restriction on the
sectors in which firms could be operating, so long as the proposal was for developing and
implementing innovative technologies. Applications are detailed, with information about the
qualifications and prior experience of the applicants, the proposed research tasks, how the partners
in a consortia will work together, the possibilities for commercialization, and a detailed budget.

The two calls attracted 968 applications, of which 808 were from consortia, 158 from enterprises,
and 2 from scientific units. It funded 164 of these, with 159 of those funded coming from consortia,
and only 5 applications from enterprises being funded. As a result, our impact evaluation focuses
only on consortia, since there are too few applications from enterprises funded to allow estimation
of the impact of receiving In-Tech funding on that group.

2.2 Scoring

Proposals were sent to three peer reviewers, who were typically Polish experts in the area of the
application. A World Bank process evaluation noted that many of these experts had limited
industrial expertise and business background, leading to the potential favoring of the scientific
value of the projects over their commercial value. These reviewers were asked to grade each
proposal on eight criteria, each of which they would score on a 5 point scale, for a maximum score
of 40. Proposals were scored on i) the scientific value of the project; ii) the level of innovation of
the product that the project would result in; iii) the previous achievements and experience of the


                                                  7
 
project team; iv) the extent to which they have the necessary material and human resources to
implement the project; v) the degree of cooperation between scientific units and industry; vi) the
expected economic results; vii) the commercialization potential; and viii) the extent to which
enterprises are contributing their own funds towards the project. Reviewers were also asked to
verify the proposed budgets and discuss the extent to which the costs proposed were justified.

The scores from these peer reviewers were then averaged to give an overall score for the
application. Applications were ranked on this score, and a cutoff point was set separately for each
call for proposals, determined by the available budget for that funding round. This resulted in
cutoff scores of 32 for the first call for proposals and 30.5 for the second. In addition to exceeding
this threshold, to get funded applicants had to also achieve minimum scores of at least 2 or 3 out
of 5 on most of the score sub-components. NCBiR program managers would then negotiate
budgets with those selected if reviewers had identified queries on budget items. Applicants were
provided with their scores and had the right to appeal. We use the initial score which does not
reflect any revisions from these appeals, and has the advantage of not being influenced by
endogenous applicant responses to their scores.

This review process took 5 to 7 months, after which successful applicants signed funding
agreements. Successful applicants for the first round received their funding starting in December
2012, while those in the second round received this funding starting February 2014. Eligible costs
for the project could be incurred from the day of application, and refunded once the project was
selected and a financing agreement signed. As a result, some of the second round projects could
still be ongoing at the time of our study, although in practice we show the majority had been
completed.




                                                  8
 
3. Regression Discontinuity Design and Survey

This scoring process has several features that make it suitable for use in regression discontinuity
analysis. The score is a clear cutoff used to decide funding, and the cutoff score is unknown to
peer reviewers and determined by funding availability. There is not a sharp discontinuity at the
threshold for two reasons. First, there were two consortia applications that received scores at or
above the threshold which were not funded – one withdrew their application and decided not to
sign a funding agreement, and one was rejected to avoid a risk of double-funding. Second, 14 of
the 159 funded applications had initial scores below the cutoff, and were approved following
appeals on the original scores.

We combine the two rounds for analysis by subtracting the round-specific cutoff scores. Figure 1
then plots the proportion of applications with each score receiving funding, showing a large jump
at the standardized cutoff point of zero.8 The size of the jump is between 0.68 and 0.82 depending
on the bandwidth and whether a local linear or local mean is fit, and is always highly significant.

3.1 Manipulation Tests

We conducted two different manipulation tests to check for potential sorting around the cutoff.
These tests estimate the density of scores on each side of the cutoff and then check whether there
is a jump in these densities at the cutoff, which would suggest that the scores may have been
manipulated. The first test, the McCrary test, gives an estimated log difference in the density
functions at the cutoff of 0.382 (standard error 0.191). The second test uses the rddensity command
in Stata and gives an estimated difference of -0.236 in the density at the cutoff (p-value 0.813).
While the McCrary test suggests that there is an upward jump in the density at the cutoff, the
rddensity test does not show a significant difference in the density at the cutoff and in fact the sign
of the coefficient here suggests a downward jump. We believe that the difference in results is due
to the different procedures for smoothing the discrete score variable used in both approaches.

As a further check, we plot the distributions of scores on each side of the cutoff in Figure 2. The
distributions look very similar on both sides of the cutoff.9 Also, based on program information
we have no reason to believe that scores could be manipulated around the cutoff since judges did
                                                            
8
 For scores that were not integers, we rounded down to the nearest integer when plotting Figure 1.
9
 Most scores have integer values or a 0.5 decimal point, but there are some values with 0.17, 0.33, 0.67 and 0.83
decimal points, which account for the short bars in Figure 2. 

                                                               9
 
not know the cutoff at the time of scoring applications. Overall, we thus conclude that a regression
discontinuity approach is valid for estimating the impact of In-Tech.

3.2 Estimation and Bandwidth Selection

We estimate the average treatment effect of receiving In-Tech funding for firms with scores at the
cutoff using the bias-corrected inference procedure of Calonico et al. (2014a), implemented with
the Stata rdrobust package of Calonico et al. (2014b). This procedure estimates the sharp
regression discontinuity (sharp-RD) treatment effect by using kernel-based local polynomials
within a specified bandwidth or neighborhood (h) on either side of the score cutoff. Since the
discontinuity in our case is fuzzy, not sharp, the treatment effect we estimate is the ratio of the
sharp-RD estimate from local regression of the outcome of interest on the score, to the sharp-RD
estimate from local regression of funding outcome on the score. Robust bias-corrected p-values
are then obtained which account for the bias involved in estimating the optimal h to use.

The choice of bandwidth or neighborhood in which to do the RD estimation is the most important
task in carrying out estimation in practice, since empirical results can at times be sensitive to which
observations are used in the analysis (Cattaneo and Vazquez-Bare, 2016). We use the Calonico et
al. (2014a) optimal mean-squared error bandwidth selection procedure with a uniform kernel for
local linear estimation on the few variables available for the full sample from the application data
(grant size, technical field, whether they applied for both the research and implementation phase,
and whether the leader of the consortia is an enterprise or research institute). This gives optimal
bandwidths between 5.0 and 8.9. Coupled with power calculations which showed that relatively
wide bandwidths are necessary to have sufficient statistical power, this led us to choose a
bandwidth of 8 points on either side of the cutoff for our main specifications, and for surveying.10
This results in keeping 158 out of 159 of the funded applications, and 301 out of 596 of the non-
funded applications (51%), for a total sample size of 459 projects. These 459 projects had further
information manually coded from their application forms, and were the target sample for a follow-
up survey (described below).



                                                            
10
  These calculations and bandwidth for surveying were done when we were operating under the belief that the cutoff
for funding for the second round for proposals was a score of 30. We later learned that it was 30.5, and use the corrected
cutoff in our analysis, dropping six projects from the second funding round that had scores of 22.

                                                               10
 
We then also consider three additional specifications for robustness. The first is to do further
bandwidth selection for local linear estimation of the treatment effect on each outcome variable
that we collect within this interval of 8 points on either side of the cutoff. This will give a different
optimal bandwidth for each outcome considered, and may give a smaller bandwidth than we would
have chosen had data first been collected on the full sample before choosing the bandwidth. It has
the advantage of potentially further reducing bias, but, by taking a smaller bandwidth than 8 points,
will have less statistical power. Second, we consider local mean estimation with the optimally
chosen bandwidth within the 8 point interval. This will typically choose an even smaller bandwidth
than that chosen for the local linear estimation, and then just compare means on either side of the
cutoff within this small bandwidth. Thirdly, we go back to the 8-point bandwidth, and add a set of
controls for key application data variables that may be correlated with the outcomes of interest
(call for proposals round, whether the leader of the consortia is an enterprise or not, the number of
partners in the consortium, whether they applied for just the research phase or also the
implementation phase, whether the proposal noted a plan to export, and the number of research
employees at the consortia leader). We are interested in whether the magnitude of the estimated
treatment effects is similar across specifications, even if the p-values lose significance when
smaller bandwidths and smaller samples are used.

3.3 Approach to Multiple Hypothesis Testing

We examine the impact of receiving In-Tech funding on a number of different outcome variables.
We use two approaches to deal with multiple hypothesis testing. The first is to group the outcomes
into domains or families (e.g. collaboration, research, commercialization), and then examine the
impact on an aggregate standardized index measure within each domain. Following Katz et al.
(2007) we create these aggregates as the average z-score (obtained by subtracting the mean of each
variable and dividing it by its standard deviation). This approach is useful for answering questions
like “Did In-Tech have a significant effect in the collaboration domain on average?” A second
approach is to construct sharpened q-values following Anderson (2008) and Benjamini et al.
(2006). This process uses a two-stage procedure to control the false discovery rate when reporting
results for specific outcomes. This is useful for answering questions like “After accounting for
multiple hypothesis testing, did In-Tech funding have a significant impact on the likelihood that
members of a consortia collaborated together on a research and development project?”


                                                   11
 
3.4 Placebo Tests and Applicant Characteristics

We use data from In-Tech application forms to examine whether applicants on each side of the
cutoff have similar characteristics. Table 1 shows averages of these characteristics for funded and
non-funded proposals, as well as RD estimates for the difference in these characteristics at the
cutoff, using the different bandwidths discussed above.

The averages show that the characteristics of funded and non-funded projects are very similar.
About 25% of projects applied only for the research phase (as opposed to research and
implementation), which lowers the average project duration across all projects to 32 months
instead of the 36 months that are the standard for research plus implementation. The majority
(54%) had two consortium partners, with 33% having three partners and only 13% having four or
more partners. In slightly less than half of the consortia the leader was an enterprise, as opposed
to an R&D institute, scientific unit or a public university. About 26% of leaders were based in
Warsaw and they had on average 73 to 99 research employees and close to 140 technical and
administrative staff. The first partner had about 140 research employees on average. Close to 80
percent of project managers had experience abroad.

Leaders had received on average 50 million PLN (US$14 million) in research funds from the
government budget for science during the last three years before the In-Tech application. The
requested grant size for the In-Tech project was about 2.5 million PLN (US$714,000) on average.
For about half of the projects, the application forms stated that they plan to develop a new product
or process as opposed to improving an existing product or process. About 14% of projects had the
aim of improving a business process. Finally, 44% projects had plans to sell their innovation on
the export market.

The RD coefficients in Table 1 show a statistically significant difference in project characteristics
at the cutoff for only two variables. First, the specification with bandwidth 8 suggests that project
leaders above the cutoff are more likely to be based in Warsaw. Second, both the specifications
with bandwidth 8 and with the local linear optimal bandwidth suggest that projects above the cutoff
are more likely to develop a new product or process vs. improve an existing product or process.
However, both of these characteristics do not show a statistically significant difference in the
specification with the local mean optimal bandwidth. Also, since we are looking at differences for
16 characteristics, we can expect a couple of them to be statistically significant due to chance. To

                                                 12
 
account for multiple hypothesis testing we calculate sharpened two-stage q-values as suggested in
Benjamini et al. (2006). The results do not show any statistically significant differences in project
characteristics at the cutoff. In fact, all sharpened q-values are above 0.7 (i.e. the probability that
the observed differences are due to chance is 70% or greater – for the specifications with bandwidth
8 and the local mean optimal bandwidth this probability is 100% for all variables).

Appendix Table 1 replicates Table 1 keeping only the applicants that we are using in our impact
analysis, i.e. the applicants who replied to the follow-up survey described in the next subsection.
The results are very similar to those in Table 1. We find only a handful of statistically significant
differences in applicant characteristics at the cutoff and none of the sharpened q-values are
statistically significant at conventional levels (the lowest sharpened q-value is 0.452).

To further describe the projects in our sample, Appendix Table 2 shows the distribution of projects
across fields of science and technology. The majority of projects are in either electrical,
mechanical, or materials engineering. The distribution of projects looks similar across funded and
non-funded projects, but funded projects are more likely to be in material or mechanical
engineering and less likely to be in electrical engineering.

3.5 Survey Design, Timing, and Attrition

In collaboration with NCBiR staff, we designed a follow-up survey questionnaire of In-Tech
applicants. The survey asked specifically about the project that was the focus of their In-Tech
application, and asked whether this project had been started, whether it had been completed, and
the different outputs. It also asked about forms of collaboration, research and development, and
commercialization activities for other projects. The survey was administered by an independent
survey firm, GfK. It took place between June and September 2016. This timing corresponds to
over four years since application and approximately 3.5 years since funding was given for those
in the first call for proposals; and three years since application and approximately 2.5 years since
funding was given in the second call for proposals. As such, all projects under the first round
should be completed, while those under the second funding round should have completed the
research phase, but some may still be in the implementation phase.

The sample frame for the survey was all projects with scores within the selected bandwidth of 8
points on either side of the funding cutoff. For each project, an attempt was made to interview the


                                                  13
 
leader of the consortia, and the main partner. When there were two or more partners in the
consortia, the main partner was defined as the one who received the highest budget share among
all partners to the project. We therefore receive up to two responses per project. We aggregate
these responses up to the project level for analysis. Some of the questions are specific to either the
enterprise or the research partner, while other questions are asked of both. Where a question is
asked of both, and the responses differ, we follow a rule of defining an outcome as having had
occurred if at least one of the two parties says it has occurred. For example, if one of the two parties
in the consortium says a patent was obtained, we code this as there having been a patent obtained
for the project.

Table 2 shows the survey response rates by respondent type and funding status, and tests whether
there is a significant difference in response rates at the discontinuity. Overall, responses were
received for 87.1 percent of projects, including 93.7 percent of funded projects and 83.7 percent
of non-funded projects. The difference in response rates at the discontinuity ranges from 0.5 to 6.4
percentage points, and is not statistically significant under any of our four specifications.
Examining responses by respondent type, we see that leaders had higher response rates than
partners, and enterprises higher response rates than research institutions, but that there was no
significant difference in the response rates at the discontinuity for any of the respondent types.
Coupled with the analysis in Appendix Table 1 which showed applicant characteristics also seem
similar for the sample responding to the survey, this leads us to treat attrition as missing-at-random
in our analysis.

4. Results

We begin with examining the question of additionality, that is, whether the In-Tech funding causes
projects to be started and completed that would not otherwise be undertaken, or whether In-Tech
funding merely crowds-out other funding sources. We then examine impacts on the three main
objective domains for the Innotech program: collaboration, research and innovation, and
commercialization.




                                                  14
 
4.1 Impact on Additionality

Table 3 examines the additionality impacts of In-Tech funding. In addition to considering both
rounds pooled together, we also examine outcomes by funding round to see whether there are large
differences in project completion rates due to the difference in time since funding was received.

We first consider whether the project received any public money, whether from NCBiR or another
funding agency. One hundred percent of funded projects should answer yes to this question,
although in practice a couple of projects that the administrative data say were funded say they did
not receive public funding in the survey. Projects which do not receive In-Tech funding are seen
to be unlikely to receive other public funding. At the discontinuity the difference in the likelihood
of funding is 75 percentage points, which is statistically significant and robust to bandwidth choice
and specification. This is illustrated graphically in the left panel of Figure 3, which shows a clear
jump at the funding threshold. In-Tech is thus mostly funding projects that would otherwise not
get funded by another program or agency.

We next examine whether the proposed project on the application was started, and whether it was
completed. Projects not funded through In-Tech may be started by applicants using internal or
external funding sources. We find that 99 percent of the projects funded by In-Tech were started,
compared to only 39 percent of those not funded, with a statistically significant gap of 53 to 59
percentage points at the discontinuity. The impact at the discontinuity on starting is similar for
both calls for proposals. Projects funded under the first call for proposals are more likely to have
been completed by the time of the survey than those funded under the second call (90 percent
versus 76 percent). However, since those not-funded are also less likely to have been completed
by the time of the survey if they were from the second call, the treatment impact is only slightly
smaller for the second round at 50 percent, compared to 57 percent for the first round. That is,
around the scoring cutoff, slightly more than half of all projects funded by In-Tech would not have
been started and would not have been completed had their scores been slightly lower and they had
not been funded This is illustrated graphically in the right panel of Figure 3. Since the impact on
completion is similar across funding rounds, we continue to pool funding rounds for the remainder
of the analysis. Finally, our aggregate summary index of additionality outcomes is large, positive,
and statistically significant, showing a 1.2 standard deviation increase.



                                                 15
 
When asked the main reason for not completing the research, the modal answer of those not funded
was that they lacked funding (80%). In contrast, for those which received funding, the main reasons
for not completing the project were either that the research idea did not work in practice (32%),
that implementation was not economically feasible even though the technical results had been
promising (15%), and collaboration problems (15%).

4.2 Impact on Collaboration

Table 4 examines whether In-Tech funding has induced more collaboration between enterprises
and researchers within a consortium. In most cases the leader and partner had collaborated before
applying to the program: 87 percent of funded applications were to consortia in which this was the
case, with no significant difference in this prior involvement at the funding threshold. The median
length of time for this prior collaboration is 6 years. Those funded almost all collaborate together
within their consortia after applying, at least working on the In-Tech project. This results a
statistically significant 8 to 20 percentage point increase in the likelihood of collaboration taking
place within the consortia since applying, and a 14 to 18 percentage point increase in the likelihood
of a new collaboration taking place between the leader and partner, which is statistically significant
at the 10 percent level over the full 8-point range, and at the 5 percent level with narrower
bandwidths.

The two top panels in Figure 4 illustrate graphically this impact on collaboration, and where the
sensitivity in bandwidth choice is coming from. We see that the likelihood of any collaboration
within the consortia taking place since applying is increasing with score below the cutoff if we use
the full 8 point range, but appears flat or even decreasing if we were to consider only half this
bandwidth. Hence the estimated impact is larger for the optimal bandwidth methods that consider
narrower ranges. We see this is less of an issue for new collaborations, but the issue here is that
many of the consortia with scores 4 points or more above the cutoff had been collaborating already,
so that there was no possibility of their collaboration being new.

The next six rows of Table 4 consider in greater depth the nature of this collaboration. The most
common form of collaboration is for research and development, and receiving In-Tech funding
increases the likelihood of this type of collaboration by a statistically significant 22 to 27
percentage points at the cut-off in three out of four specifications. The increase is even larger when
local linear estimation is done using the optimal bandwidth. The bottom left panel of Figure 4

                                                 16
 
shows why – when looking in a very narrow bandwidth, the linear fit would actually be downward
sloping to the left of the cutoff, rather than upward sloping as estimated with the full data. We see
positive, but not statistically significant, impacts for other forms of collaboration such as
prototyping, technological consulting, and research publications, with the estimated effect sizes
between 2 and 7.7 percentage points using our preferred specification with the full 8-point
bandwidth.

When asked the main reason they did not collaborate with their leader or partner since applying
for the In-Tech program, the main reason given is a lack of funding for the project. Receiving In-
Tech funding results in a significant 11.9 percentage point reduction in the likelihood that parties
did not collaborate due to a lack of funding.

The survey also asks whether the leader and first partner have collaborated together since applying
on other projects, and whether they currently work together. There is no significant impact on
either outcome, indicating that the specific collaboration for the In-Tech project has not led to
further collaboration outside of the project.

Fifty-four percent of the sample have only two parties in their consortium. Those with two or more
partners were also asked about collaboration with the second major partner in the consortium. We
see that, similar to the first partner, this second partner was typically an entity that was already
collaborating with others in the consortium prior to applying. There is a positive, but small and
statistically insignificant impact on the likelihood that they collaborate since applying, with the
sample small for this analysis.

Finally our overall summary index of collaboration between the leader and principal partner shows
that In-Tech funded resulted in a 0.2 to 0.3 standard deviation increase in collaboration, which is
statistically significant at the 1 percent level for three out of four specifications, and at the 10
percent level for the local linear estimation with the smaller optimal bandwidth. The bottom right
panel of Figure 4 shows this increase graphically.

We then turn in Table 5 to examining research-industry collaborations outside of the consortia that
had applied for In-Tech. Our interest here is in seeing whether the In-Tech collaboration crowded
out other types of collaboration that might have occurred, or conversely, whether the experience



                                                 17
 
of collaboration between research and industry through the In-Tech project spurred additional such
collaborations.

Most applicants are also involved in other collaborations apart from the one for which they applied
for In-Tech. The first row shows a reduction of 4 to 13 percentage points in the likelihood they
have collaborated with another entity outside of their consortium over the past year, which is
statistically significant at the 10 percent level when using the full 8-point bandwidth, but not with
smaller bandwidths. When we examine specific types of collaboration, this shows up in a lower
likelihood of a research publication with another partner and a lower likelihood of technological
consulting with others.

When researchers are asked if they are collaborating as much with enterprises as they would like
to, only half of them say that they are. Receiving an In-Tech grant has a negative, but not
statistically significant effect on this response. When asked what the most important reason for not
collaborating more with firms is, less than one-third say the problem is lack of financing. The other
main reasons given are bureaucratic barriers to this cooperation, that firms are difficult to work
with or have no incentives to collaborate, and that they lack information about the needs of firms
or knowledge of how to talk about business.

Firms are more likely to say they are doing as much collaboration with researchers as they would
like, with only one-quarter of In-Tech funded firms saying they are not. In-Tech funding has a
positive, but not statistically significant, impact on the likelihood of doing as much collaboration
as they would like with researchers. The main barriers that those who would like to collaborate
more identify are again mostly non-financial: only 19 percent say lack of funding is the main
constraint, whereas the modal response is that researchers do not understand the needs of firms,
while other frequent reasons given are lack of knowledge about the capabilities of researchers, and
being too busy with day-to-day operations to set up these collaborations.

Almost all firms say they know of researchers they can ask for ideas or help in solving problems,
and likewise almost all researchers say they know of firms in their industry they could talk to if
they had ideas to take to market. In-Tech funding has a statistically significant 7 to 13 percentage
point increase in the likelihood researchers around the cutoff have knowledge of firms they can
ask, and a positive, but not statistically significant impact on firms’ knowledge of researchers.


                                                 18
 
Considering all these non-consortia forms of collaboration together, in which some forms of other
collaboration appear to have been crowded out, while other forms of overall collaboration-ability
may have increased, we see that the impact on the summary index varies between -0.07 and +0.04
standard deviations, and is not statistically significant. Thus, any overall impact on other
collaboration is small in magnitude.

4.3 Impact on Research and Innovation

Table 6 examines the impact of In-Tech funding on research and innovation achievements over
the past five years. The first five rows consider patenting activity. Survey participants were asked
about patent applications related to the In-Tech project, as well as those related to other projects.
65 percent of funded In-Tech projects had applied for a patent related to their project, with this
rate similar across both funding rounds. To date 41 percent have a patent approved, with only 2
percent of those applying having had their patent rejected, and almost all of those who applied but
had not had their patent approved in the process of still waiting for an answer on their application
(32 percent of patent applicants from the first funding round, and 44 percent of those from the
second funding round, were still awaiting the decision). Almost all those applying for a patent
apply at the Polish patent office, while approximately one-quarter additionally apply at the
European patent office.

In-Tech funding has a treatment effect of 41 to 57 percentage points on the likelihood of applying
for a patent for the In-tech project, and a 21 to 44 percentage point increase in the likelihood of
having received a patent to date. Both effects are large and statistically significant. The top-left
panel of Figure 5 illustrates this jump graphically. In-Tech funding has a small and not statistically
significant impact on the likelihood of applying for, or receiving, patents for other projects (top
center panel of Figure 5). There is a positive, but not statistically significant, impact on the
likelihood that they had applied for any patent in Europe across all their different projects.

The next five rows of Table 6 consider research publication outcomes. 73 percent of In-Tech
funded projects have published at least one research article related to the project, which represents
a statistically significant treatment effect of 53 to 63 percentage points. This is illustrated in the
top right panel of Figure 5. There is a small negative, but statistically insignificant, impact on the
likelihood of publishing research articles on other projects during this time, also seen in the bottom


                                                 19
 
left panel of Figure 5. Considering the number of publications, we see no significant effect on the
likelihood that the research team has published at least 10 articles in total over this time.11

We then ask survey respondents to list their five most major publications produced in the last five
years from any project, and search for these in Google Scholar. We construct two proxies for
overall research quality: the number of these five top publications which were in English, and the
number of citations their work has according to Google Scholar. 57 percent of the non-funded
projects have produced no publications in English, and 63 percent have no citations. This compares
to 44 percent of the funded projects having no publications in English, and 41 percent having no
citations. We see positive impacts of funding on the likelihood of producing research that meets
either measure of quality at the discontinuity when we use the full range or local mean, but the
impacts are not statistically significant. Since these publications are relatively recent, the number
of citations is currently low on average (with a mean of 13 and median of 9, conditional on having
any citations), but with high variability (standard deviation of 15). The center panel of Figure 5
shows the variation in citations at each score level, which makes detecting any impact difficult.

The next rows of Table 6 examine different types of innovative activities. Survey participants were
asked if they had done any of six different types of innovation in the past five years, whether
related to the In-Tech project or not. The most common type of innovation for funded projects was
to develop a new product prototype, which 84 percent had done. The next most common forms of
innovation were developing a new product (78%), and developing a new process (78%), while
developing a new industrial design was the least common form (41%). In-Tech funding has small,
and not statistically significant, impacts on all of these measures, suggesting that it did not lead to
an overall increase in these types of innovative activities.

The overall summary index of research and innovation shows a 0.13 to 0.31 standard deviation
increase in research and innovation. This impact is only statistically significant when we use the
local mean specification within the optimal bandwidth, and not using a local linear specification.
The bottom right panel of Figure 5 shows why this variation in treatment effect arises – the research


                                                            
11
  We use 10 or more publications, since the distribution of reported number of publications in the last 5 years is
heavily skewed, with a 25th percentile of 3, median of 12, mean of 41, and 90th percentile of 100. The treatment
effect is also insignificant for the number of publications, with an extremely wide confidence interval of (-32.8,
32.0) as a result.

                                                               20
 
and innovation index increases with score, and so controlling for this increase lowers the treatment
effect.

Taken together, the results show that In-Tech funding resulted in more research and innovation
taking place for the particular project that was put forward on the application, with this research
leading to publications and patents. However, total research and innovation output by the consortia
does not appear to have significantly increased, suggesting some potential crowd-out of other
research activities, or at least a lack of complementarities.

4.4 Impact on Commercialization

Commercialization refers to the process of introducing newly developed processes or products to
market. Table 7 and Figure 6 examine the impact of In-Tech funding on different measures of
commercialization. Fifty-three percent of funded projects have developed a product or process out
of their In-Tech project to the stage where it is ready to be sold or is being sold. Eighty percent
have achieved a broader measure of commercialization potential, which also includes having the
product or process ready to implement for use in their own firm, or having a working prototype
that is almost ready to be sold. In-Tech funding is found to have positive and statistically
significant impacts on both these measures: a 23 to 34 percentage point increase in actually having
something ready to be sold or being sold, and a 40 to 53 percentage point increase in terms of
broader commercialization potential out of the project. These large jumps are clear in the top left
and top center panels of Figure 6.

Some examples of some of these products or processes being sold include: armor which is resistant
to grenades and bullets; a computer modelling method that can be used in shale gas exploration;
liquid crystalline film to be used in breast cancer diagnosis; a special transport vehicle for
underground mines; new chemical composites; modified orthopedic implants; a new process for
continuous casting in manufacturing; a system for adjusting and monitoring wheel suspension
components; a laser diode chamber that allows adjusting the wavelength; a new yeast feed for the
production of biodiesel; a low pressure turbine blade motor; a new blade for rock drills; different
combustion and adhesive components; and technology for making engine components.

One-third of funding applicants are currently selling in Poland a product or process developed
through the In-Tech project, and one-sixth are selling outside Poland, with Western Europe the


                                                  21
 
main market. This is a 14 to 25 percentage point increase in the likelihood of having sales in Poland
arising from the project for those receiving funding at the discontinuity, with this statistically
significant in three out of four specifications. The point estimate is actually larger still in local
linear within an optimal bandwidth specification, but the small bandwidth reduces the sample size
and results in a lack of statistical significance. The impact on sales outside of Poland is more
sensitive to specification, and is not statistically significant with the full eight point range.

Conditional on selling the product or process, the mean sales in 2015 coming from this product or
process was 2.92 million PLN (approx.. USD830,000), and median was 1.5 million PLN (approx..
USD430,000). For the median funded project, these sales only constitute 1.0 percent of total sales
in 2015, while the mean is 10.3 percent. At present then, sales from these products and processes
are small relative to existing business for the firms. The small number of projects with reported
sales and large skewness of the outcome makes the treatment impact sensitive to bandwidth choice,
and the standard errors large, so that the impact is not statistically significant. The bottom left panel
of Figure 6 shows how large, but variable, sales to the right of the cutoff lead to this sensitivity.

Another commercial use of the research from the project has been to develop a new or improved
process that the enterprise in the consortia can use in their own production. 76 percent of funded
firms have done this out of the project, which is a statistically significant 44 to 50 percentage point
treatment effect. This large jump is seen in the bottom center panel of Figure 6.

The commercialization activities through the In-Tech project do not appear to have significantly
crowded out commercialization from other projects, but nor have they spurred additional efforts.
Coupling this lack of impact on other commercialization with the positive impact on
commercialization of the In-Tech project leads to an overall positive impact on our summary index
measure: a 0.19 to 0.20 standard deviation increase in commercialization. This increase is
statistically significant using the full 8-point range on either side of the cutoff, and of similar
magnitude, but not significant, using the narrower ranges chosen by the optimal linear and optimal
local mean estimators within this range. The bottom right panel of Figure 6 shows the jump in
commercialization around the discontinuity.




                                                   22
 
4.5 Summary and Multiple Testing

Across Tables 3 through 7 we have estimated the impact of In-Tech funding on five different
summary indices, and 52 different individual outcomes.12 Table 8 re-examines our estimates using
the sharpened q-values of Anderson (2008) and Benjamini et al. (2006) to control for this multiple
testing. When we look at the overall summary index level, we see strong impacts of the In-Tech
funding on additionality, and on collaboration within the consortia. There is no significant impact
on collaboration outside the consortia. The impact on research and innovation is significant when
we use our full bandwidth with controls, or the local mean specification, and has a sharpened q-
value of 0.109 using the full bandwidth without controls. The impact on commercialization
remains significant after multiple-testing adjustment when either specification with the full eight-
point range is used.

When we switch to examining individual outcomes, we see all 13 individual outcomes with p-
values below 0.05 using the full bandwidth have sharpened q-values below 0.10 after accounting
for testing 52 different outcomes. The four outcomes with p-values between 0.05 and 0.10 are no
longer significant at conventional levels after the multiple testing correction. Eleven of these 13
significant outcomes are specific to the particular project proposed for In-Tech – they show the
project proposed is more likely to have been funded, started, and completed if it was awarded
funding (additionality); that it generated more collaboration within the consortia on R&D; it led to
publications and patents being more likely to be produced relating to this project; and that it led to
a product or process out of this project being commercialized. The other two outcomes show some
broader collaborative benefits – researchers receiving funding now are more likely to know firms
to talk to, and lack of finance is less likely to be a barrier to collaboration.

       5. Conclusions and Discussion

Our regression-discontinuity analysis shows that the In-Tech project did have measurable impacts
on the core outcomes of innovation it was designed to foster. It resulted in more collaboration,
more patents and publications, and some commercialization of the resulting product that came out
of the project. There is thus clear additionality, as the grant led research and innovation activities
to be undertaken that would not otherwise have occurred. This additional innovation does not

                                                            
12
     We exclude here the breakdown in Table 3 by call for proposals, and their respective summary indices.

                                                               23
 
appear to have significantly crowded out other research activities, but, to date, nor has it had
positive spillovers within consortia in terms of additional research and innovation success on other
projects.

Nevertheless, while more research and innovation has occurred, some of this appears to be very
firm-specific in nature, and not necessarily of a quality that contributes to the world innovation
frontier. The majority of the patents are registered just at the Polish patent office, and not at the
European office as well, and most commercialized products are currently just sold in Poland. Just
over 40 percent of the funded projects have no research publications in English, and no citations.

An important caveat in interpreting these results is that research and innovation is a long-term
process. Our analysis measures outcomes 2.5 to 3.5 years after funding was received. This captures
the time needed for the initial research activities to have occurred, but it can take more time for
patents to be granted, publications to be cited, and new innovations to achieve commercial success.
We are not able to measure whether the innovation had spillover benefits for other firms or
researchers in the economy, but suspect that any such benefits would also require longer time
horizons to materialize. In future work, it would therefore be of interest for policy makers to
attempt to track grant applicants over longer time horizons.

 




                                                 24
 
References


Albuquerque, Eduardo, Wilson Suzigan, Glenda Kruss, and Keun Lee (eds.) (2015) Developing
national systems of innovation: univesity-industry interactions in the global south, Cheltenham
UK: Edward Elgar / IDRC.

Anderson, Michael (2008) “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects”
Journal of the American Statistical Association 103(484): 1481-1495.

Arora, Ashish and Alfonso Gambardella (2005) “The Impact of NSF Support for Basic Research
in Economics” Annales d'Economie et de Statistique 91-117.

Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Danielle Li, Bhaven N. Sampat (2015) “Public R&D
Investments and Private-sector Patenting: Evidence from NIH Funding Rules” NBER Working
Paper No. 20889.

Benjamini, Yoav, Abba M. Krieger, and Daniel Yekutieli (2006) “Adaptive Linear Step-Up
Procedures That Control the False Discovery Rate.” Biometrika 93(3): 491–507.

Barajas, Ascension, Elena Huergo, and Lourdes Moreno (2012) “Measuring the Economic
Impact of Research Joint Ventures Supported by the EU Framework Programme” Jounral of
Technology Transfer 37: 917-942.

Benfratello, Luigi and Alessandro Sembenelli (2002) “Research Joint Ventures and Firm Level
Performance” Research Policy 31: 493-507.

Branstetter, Lee G. and Mariko Sakakibara (2002) “When Do Research Consortia Work Well
and Why? Evidence from Japanese Panel Data” American Economic Review 92(1): 143–159.

Bronzini, Raffaello, and Paolo Piselli (2016) “The Impact of R&D Subsidies on Firm
Innovation” Research Policy 45: 442-457.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik (2014a) “Robust Nonparametric
Confidence Intervals for Regression-Discontinuity Designs” Econometrica 82: 2295–2326.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik (2014b) “Robust Data-Driven
Inference in the Regression-Discontinuity Design”, Stata Journal 14(4): 909-46.

Cappelen, Ådne, Arvid Raknerud, and Marina Rybalka. 2012. “The Effects of R&D Tax Credits
on Patenting and Innovations.” Research Policy 41 (2): 334–45.

Cattaneo, Matias and Gonzalo Vazquez-Bare (2016) “The Choice of Neighborhood in
Regression Discontinuity Designs”, Observational Studies, forthcoming.



                                              25
 
Cunningham, Paul and Abdullah Gök (2012) “Impact of Innovation Policy Schemes for
Collaboration”, Compendium of Evidence on the Effectiveness of Innovation Policy Intervention,
http://www.innovation-
policy.org.uk/share/NESTA_Compendium_collaborative_20120528_linked.pdf

Czarnitzki, Dirk, Petr Hanel, and Julio Miguel Rosa (2011) “Evaluating the Impact of R&D Tax
Credits on Innovation: A Microeconometric Study on Canadian Firms” Research Policy 40 (2):
217–29.

Dechezleprêtre, Antoine, Elias Einiö, Ralf Martin, Kieu-Trang Nguyen, and John Van Reenen.
(2016) “Do Tax Incentives for Research Increase Firm Innovation? An RD Design for R&D.”
CEP Discussion Paper No 1413.

Ganguli, Ina (forthcoming) “Saving Soviet Science: The Impact of Grants When Government
R&D Funding Disappears” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Hall, Bronwyn, and Alessandro Maffioli (2008) “Evaluating the Impact of Technology
Development Funds in Emerging Economies: Evidence from Latin America” The European
Journal of Development Research 20(2): 172–98.

Howell, Sabrina T (2016) “Financing Constraints as Barriers to Innovation: Evidence from R&D
Grants to Energy Startups” Mimeo. NYU Stern.

Jacob, Brian A., and Lars Lefgren (2011) “The Impact of Research Grant Funding on Scientific
Productivity” Journal of Public Economics 95(9–10): 1168–77.

Jaffe, Adam B, and Trinh Le (2015) “The Impact of R&D Subsidy on Innovation: A Study of
New Zealand Firms” NBER Working Paper 21479.

Katz, Lawrence, Jeffrey Kling, and Jeffrey Liebman (2007) “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
Effects” Econometrica 75(1): 83-119.

Lööf, Hans and Andres Broström (2008) “Does Knowledge Diffusion between University and
Industry Increase Innovativeness?” Journal of Technology Transfer 33(1): 73–90.

OECD. 2002. Benchmarking Industry–Science Relationships, Paris.

Sakakibara, Mariko and Lee Branstetter (2003) “Measuring the Impact of US Research
Consortia” Managerial and Decision Economics 24(2/3): 51-69.

Scandura, Alessandra (2016) “University-Industry Collaboration and Firms’ R&D Effort”
Research Policy 45: 1907-1922.

Zúñiga-Vicente, José Ángel, César Alonso-Borrego, Francisco J. Forcadell, and José I. Galàn
(2014) “Assessing the Effect of Public Subsidies on Firm R&D Investment: a Survey” Journal of
Economic Surveys 28(1): 36–67.

                                              26
 
Figure 1: Discontinuity in the Likelihood of Being Funded at the Cutoff
                         1
    % of applications that received funding
      .2          .4     0  .6        .8




                                              -30   -20            -10                0       10
                                                          Standardized Score


Notes: scores rounded down to nearest whole number for graphical presentation purposes.



Figure 2: Distribution of Scores
           15            25
                         20
    Frequency
    10                   5
                         0




                                              -30   -20            -10               0        10
                                                                 Score

                                                      Below cutoff             Above cutoff




                                                                          27
 
Figure 3: Funding Resulted in Additionality


                                                     Receive Public Funding                                                               Project Completed




                                                                                                                              1.2
                                          1




                                                                                                                              1
                                          .8
    Proportion Receiving Public Funding




                                                                                           Proportion of Projects Completed
                                                                                                                              .8
                                          .6




                                                                                                                              .6
                                          .4




                                                                                                                              .4
                                          .2




                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                              0
                                          0




                                               -10      -5       0         5     10                                                 -10   -5        0         5     10
                                                       Centered Proposal Score                                                            Centered Proposal Score


Notes: plots show sample means and sample 95 percent confidence intervals within one-unit-interval bins
on either side of the funding cutoff. Local linear regressions over the 8-point range plotted on either side
of the cutoff.




                                                                                      28
 
Figure 4: Impact on Collaboration


                                                                          Any Collaboration Since Applying                                                                             New Collaboration between Leader and Partner
                    Proportion Collaborating Since Applying




                                                                                                                  Proportion with New Collaboration
                                                                                                                                                                                .6
                                                              1




                                                                                                                                                                                .4
                                                              .9
                                                              .8




                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                              .7




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                              .6




                                                                                                                                                                                -.2
                                                              .5




                                                                    -10       -5         0          5        10                                                                       -10       -5          0              5   10
                                                                                   Centered Score                                                                                                     Centered Score




                                                                                                                                    Collaboration Index (average of z-scores)
                                                                               Collaborated on R&D                                                                                                   Collaboration Index
                                                              1.2
    Proportion Collaborating on R&D




                                                                                                                                                                                .5
                                                              1




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                              .8




                                                                                                                                                                                -.5
                                                              .6
                                                              .4




                                                                                                                                                                                -1




                                                                    -10       -5         0          5        10                                                                       -10       -5          0              5   10
                                                                                   Centered Score                                                                                                     Centered Score



Notes: plots show sample means and sample 95 percent confidence intervals within one-unit-interval bins on either side of the funding cutoff.
Local linear regressions over the 8-point range plotted on either side of the cutoff.


                                                                                                                                                                                        29
 
Figure 5: Impact on Research and Innovation


                                            Patent for In-tech project                                             Patent for other project                                                Publication for In-tech project
                                    1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                         Proportion with a publication
                                                                                                        1
      Proportion with a patent




                                                                             Proportion with a patent
                                                                                                        .8
                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                        .6
                                                                                                        .4
                                    .5




                                                                                                                                                                  .5
                                                                                                        .2
                                    0




                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                        0
                                          -10    -5     0      5     10                                      -10      -5     0      5         10                                           -10    -5     0      5      10
                                                  Centered Score                                                       Centered Score                                                              Centered Score


                                           Publication for other project                                     Citations for top 5 publications                                              Research and Innovation Index
                                    1.2




                                                                                                        30




                                                                                                                                                   Research and innovation index
                                                                                                                                                                                   1
    Proportion with a publication




                                                                           Number of citations
                                    1




                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                   .5
                                    .8
                                    .6




                                                                                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                                                   -.5
                                                                                                        0
                                    .2




                                          -10    -5     0      5     10                                      -10      -5     0      5         10                                           -10    -5     0      5      10
                                                  Centered Score                                                       Centered Score                                                              Centered Score



Notes: plots show sample means and sample 95 percent confidence intervals within one-unit-interval bins on either side of the funding cutoff.
Local linear regressions over the 8-point range plotted on either side of the cutoff.

                                                                                                                                   30
 
Figure 6: Impact on Commercialization


                                                                                 Commercialize Product                                             Broad Commercialization Measure                                                Sell project product in Poland
     Proportion Commercializing Product




                                                                                                                                           1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Proportion Selling in Poland
                                                                                                                  Proportion Commercializing
                                          1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .8
                                          .8




                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .6
                                          .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4
                                          .4




                                                                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2
                                          .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                          0




                                                                                                                 0
                                                                           -10      -5     0      5      10                                              -10      -5     0      5   10                                            -10    -5     0      5     10
                                                                                     Centered Score                                                                Centered Score                                                         Centered Score
                                                                1.50e+07




                                                                                    Value of Sales                                                             Commercialize Process                                                Commercialization Index
                                                                                                              Proportion Commercializing Process
                                                                                                                                                   1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                            Commercialization Index
                                                          1.00e+07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.5
    Sales Value (PLN)




                                                                                                                                                   1
                                          -5000000 0 5000000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                                                                                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.5
                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                           -10      -5     0      5      10                                               -10     -5     0      5   10                                            -10    -5     0      5     10
                                                                                     Centered Score                                                                Centered Score                                                         Centered Score



Notes: plots show sample means and sample 95 percent confidence intervals within one-unit-interval bins on either side of the funding cutoff. Local
linear regressions over the 8-point range plotted on either side of the cutoff. Commercialization measures plotted are all for commercialization
coming out of the project proposed to In-Tech, except for summary index which also includes whether other projects have commercialized a product
as one of the components.


                                                                                                                                                                                       31
 
 Table  1: Do Project Characteristics Differ at the  Cutoff (Based on Data from Application Forms)?
                                                                                             Local  linear full               Local  linear MSE                 Local  mean MSE
                                                              Means                     RD coef.               BW          RD coef.           BW           RD coef.           BW  
                                                      Funded     Not‐Funded             (p‐value)               (N)       (p‐value)            (N)        (p‐ value)           (N)
 Applied only for research phase                        0.259          0.226                0.039                8           0.900            1.41            0.042           1.13
                                                                                            0.997               459          0.052            104             0.674            103
 Implementation period in months                         32.0           31.1                0.806                8           0.763            2.89            1.004           1.04
                                                                                            0.568               459          0.928            220             0.618            103
 Two parties in consortium                              0.544          0.545                0.020                8           0.276            2.47            0.137           1.06
                                                                                            0.254               459          0.149            189             0.191            103
 Three  parties in consortium                           0.329          0.319               ‐0.040                8           0.234            1.54           ‐ 0.126          1.95
                                                                                            0.601               459          0.276            143             0.198            145
 Four parties in consortium                             0.127          0.136                0.020                8          ‐0.172            2.37           ‐ 0.072          1.50
                                                                                            0.268               459          0.187            189             0.299            104
 Leader is an enterprise                                0.487          0.449               ‐0.115                8          ‐0.096            5.00           ‐ 0.092          1.91
                                                                                            0.643               459          0.653            329             0.233            145
 Leader has Warsaw address                              0.266          0.256                0.191                8           0.172            6.91            0.223           0.99
                                                                                            0.068               459          0.113            419             0.159             62
 Leader research employees                                73             99                ‐1.879                8          79.367            3.43             N/A            N/A
                                                                                            0.519               459          0.449            246              N/A            N/A
 Leader technical  & admin staff                         133            140               ‐23.431                8          46.788            3.07          70.103            0.66
                                                                                            0.827               459          0.557            245             0.438             60
 1st partner research employees                          132            148               ‐33.509                8          ‐0.920            4.24          ‐ 41.725          1.87
                                                                                            0.946               459          0.806            295             0.795            145
 Project manager has experience  abroad                 0.791          0.748                0.007                8           0.063            2.60            0.036           1.12
                                                                                            0.479               459          0.735            220             0.992            103
 Leader value  of  projects funded                  54,839,388     46,927,429          13,135,652                8        2,916,982           4.98        6,226,447           2.64
 by budget for science  for last 3 years                                                    0.845               459          0.923            329             0.599            220
 Requested grant size                                 2,518,561      
                                                                      2,339,972          325,498                 8         845,834            4.08         409,514            2.59
                                                                                            0.338               224          0.271            148             0.172            110
 Project develops a new product or process              0.519          0.472                0.301                8           0.324            5.85            0.185           1.41
 vs. improving existing product or process                                                  0.043               459          0.042            379             0.119            104
 Project aims to improve  business process              0.146          0.133               ‐0.058                8          ‐0.009            2.74           ‐ 0.054          1.66
                                                                                            0.260               459          0.775            220             0.371            143
 Plan to sell  on export market                         0.437          0.439               ‐0.029                8           0.015            4.35            0.025           1.66
                                                                                            0.847               459          0.249            295             0.894            143
 Sample  Size                                            158            301
 Notes: Requested grant size  is only available  for CFP 1.                                     32
 The   local  mean  estimate  for "leader research  employees"    is  not  available  since    there   are  not enough observations in the  optimal  bandwidth.
Table 2: Survey Response Rates by Respondent Type and Funding Status
                                                                    Local  linear full        Local  linear MSE   Local  mean MSE Local  linear with controls
                                                 Means           RD coef.        BW          RD coef.  BW   RD coef.  BW            RD coef.         BW  
                                    Overall    Funded Not‐Funded (p‐value)        (N)        (p‐value)      (N) (p‐value)    (N)    (p‐value)         (N)
Surveyed                             0.871      0.937    0.837      0.064          8            0.005      2.95   0.057      1.70     0.056            8
                                                                    0.927         459           0.483       220   0.644      144      0.913           459
Leader Surveyed                      0.778      0.854    0.738      0.008          8           ‐0.046      2.79   0.042      2.04     ‐0.004           8
                                                                    0.788         459           0.217       220   0.988      184      0.775           459
Partner Surveyed                     0.603      0.715    0.545      0.001          8           ‐0.084      2.82   0.078      1.59     0.005            8
                                                                    0.971         459           0.707       220   0.910      143      0.936           459
Enterprise  Surveyed                 0.739      0.797    0.708      0.038          8           ‐0.048      3.14   0.023      1.51     0.012            8
                                                                    0.524         459           0.579       245   0.740      143      0.494           459
Research Institute  Surveyed         0.638      0.766    0.571     ‐0.029          8           ‐0.032      2.84   0.089      1.55     ‐0.014           8
                                                                    0.769         459           0.914       220   0.984      143      0.671           459
Sample  Size                                459  158      301
Notes:
Surveyed indicates that at least one  entity in the  consortium was surveyed.
Uniform kernel  used. 
RD coef. Is the  estimated fuzzy‐RD treatment effect. P‐value  is the  bias‐adjusted robust p‐value. BW is the  bandwidth, N the  sample  size.
Local  linear full  is estimated over full  survey sample  within 8 points of  cutoff; local  linear MSE and local  mean MSE use  MSE‐optimizing bandwidths for
local  linear and local  mean estimation within this interval. Last column adds the  following controls: whether the  leader is an enterprise, whether
application is for research phase  only, number of  parties in consortia, whether the  project aims for an export market, and number of  researchers employed.

MSE denotes mean-squared error.




                                                                              33
 
Table 3: Does Innotech Funding Have  Additionality in Terms of Projects Being Funded and Started?
                                                                               Local  linear full     Local  linear MSE  Local  mean MSE Local  linear with controls
                                                            Means           RD coef.        BW       RD coef.  BW   RD coef.         BW       RD coef.       BW  
                                                     Funded Not‐Funded (p‐value)             (N)     (p‐value) (N) (p‐value)         (N)      (p‐value)      (N)
Both Funding Rounds Combined
Project Publicly Funded                               0.986       0.183        0.752           8       0.725       4.69  0.779       3.02       0.761          8
                                                                               0.000         400       0.000       288   0.000       219         0.000       400
Project Started                                       0.986       0.385        0.526           8       0.590       2.77  0.579       3.25        0.533         8
                                                                               0.000         400       0.000       197   0.000       219         0.000       400
Project Completed                                     0.824       0.194        0.541           8       0.529       5.69  0.665       6.20        0.537         8
                                                                               0.000         400       0.000       332   0.000       349         0.000       400
Summary Index                                         0.863      ‐0.507        1.224           8       1.199       6.37  1.278       2.16        1.232         8
                                                                               0.000         400       0.000       349   0.000       164         0.000       400
Call for Proposals 1
Project Publicly Funded                               0.986       0.244        0.753           8       0.639       3.09  0.738       3.61       0.771          8
                                                                               0.000         201       0.001       115   0.000       126         0.000       201
Project Started                                       0.986       0.466        0.517           8       0.495       6.61  0.513       3.70        0.526         8
                                                                               0.000         201       0.002       182   0.000       126         0.000       201
Project Completed                                     0.900       0.252        0.566           8       0.506       5.61  0.630       4.43        0.567         8
                                                                               0.007         201       0.014       169   0.000       135         0.006       201
Summary Index                                         0.913      ‐0.372        1.235           8       1.235       8.80  1.289       2.77        1.254         8
Call for Proposals 2                                                           0.000         201       0.003       201   0.000       100         0.000       201
Project Publicly Funded                               0.987       0.116        0.754           8       0.821       4.47  0.800       1.89       0.757          8
                                                                               0.000         199       0.000       129   0.000        67         0.000       199
Project Started                                       0.987       0.298        0.542           8       0.568       7.36  0.623       2.07        0.548         8
                                                                               0.000         199       0.000       188   0.000        80         0.000       199
Project Completed                                     0.756       0.132        0.500           8       0.500      35.93  0.607       2.10       0.497          8
                                                                               0.004         199       0.007       199   0.001        80         0.005       199
Summary Index                                         0.818      ‐0.653        1.209           8       1.209      10.90  1.419       1.70        1.212         8
                                                                               0.000         199       0.000       199   0.000        66         0.000       199
Notes:
Uniform kernel  used. 
RD coef. Is the  estimated fuzzy‐RD treatment effect. P‐value  is the  bias‐adjusted robust p‐value. BW is the  bandwidth, N the  sample  size.
Local  linear full  is estimated over full  survey sample  within 8 points of cutoff; local  linear MSE and local  mean MSE use  MSE‐optimizing bandwidths for
local  linear and local  mean estimation within this interval. Last column adds the  following controls: whether the  leader is an enterprise, whether
application is for research phase  only, number of parties in consortia, whether the  project aims for an export market, and number of researchers employed.
                                                                                34
 
Table 4: Does Innotech Funding Increase  Collaboration within Consortia? 
                                                                                       Local  linear full             Local  linear MSE        Local  mean MSE       Local  linear with controls
                                                                         Means      RD coef.        BW              RD coef.        BW       RD coef.      BW         RD coef.          BW  
                                                                  Funded Not‐Funded (p‐value)        (N)            (p‐value)        (N)     (p‐value)     (N)        (p‐value)          (N)
Collaborated with Consortia before  applying                       0.872      0.844   ‐0.180          8               ‐0.123        3.45       ‐0.066      2.26         ‐0.177            8
                                                                                       0.131         398               0.455        219         0.052      164           0.144          398
Collaborated with Consortia since  applying                        0.993      0.843    0.078          8                0.203        3.53        0.133      0.82          0.080            8
                                                                                       0.015         395               0.011        242         0.186       57           0.017          395
New Collaboration between leader and first partner                 0.122      0.081    0.140          8                0.183        3.95        0.138      1.62          0.138            8
                                                                                       0.080         395               0.036        244         0.026      125           0.091          395
Collaborated with consortia on R&D                                 0.973      0.694    0.223          8                0.524        2.85        0.270      0.90          0.226            8
                                                                                       0.000         400               0.000        197         0.023       59           0.000          400
Collaborated with consortia on technological  consulting           0.797      0.611    0.046          8                0.306        2.69        0.302      0.95          0.045            8
                                                                                       0.151         400               0.126        197         0.131       59           0.146          400
Collaborated with consortia on licensing or patents                0.432      0.282    0.077          8                0.383        2.39        0.129      2.26          0.073            8
                                                                                       0.216         400               0.097        167         0.258      165           0.236          400
Collaborated with consortia on prototyping                         0.689      0.480    0.020          8                0.200        2.87        0.138      1.79          0.021            8
                                                                                       0.318         400               0.278        197         0.410      130           0.331          400
Collaborated with consortia on research publication                0.628      0.405    0.023          8                0.320        2.54        0.133      2.56          0.026            8
                                                                                       0.446         400               0.098        197         0.748      197           0.428          400
Collaborated with consortia on selling products                    0.297      0.198    0.041          8                0.019        2.33        0.082      1.36          0.023            8
                                                                                       0.816         400               0.993        165         0.634       97           0.875          400
Don't collaborate  with consortia due  to lack of  funding         0.000      0.194   ‐0.119          8               ‐0.169        5.08       ‐0.138      2.13         ‐0.119            8
                                                                                       0.025         400               0.067        307         0.032      164           0.027          400
Collaborated with Consortia since  on other projects               0.755      0.706   ‐0.010          8                0.125        4.07        0.061      2.40         ‐0.008            8
                                                                                       0.318         395               0.313        260         0.666      163           0.329          395
Currently collaborate  with consortia                              0.878      0.730    0.078          8                0.204        3.27        0.141      2.88          0.075            8
                                                                                       0.205         400               0.148        219         0.222      197           0.221          400
Collaborated with partner 2 before  applying                       0.800      0.736    0.010          8               ‐0.072        4.89        0.011      3.07          0.016            8
                                                                                       0.696         170               0.719        120         0.706       89           0.700          170
Collaborated with partner 2 since  applying                        0.983      0.787    0.046          8                0.047        4.71        0.117      3.64          0.058            8
                                                                                       0.934         168               0.846        118         0.642       98           0.888          168
Summary Index                                                      0.205     ‐0.144    0.190          8                0.308        5.58        0.286      3.78          0.186            8
                                                                                       0.003         400               0.086        330         0.003      246           0.004          400
 Notes:
 Uniform kernel  used. 
 RD coef. Is the  estimated fuzzy‐RD treatment effect. P‐value  is the  bias‐adjusted robust p‐value. BW is the  bandwidth, N the  sample  size.
 Local  linear full  is estimated over full  survey sample  within 8 points of  cutoff; local  linear MSE and local  mean MSE use  MSE‐optimizing bandwidths for
 local  linear and local  mean estimation within this interval. Last column adds the  following controls: whether the  leader is an enterprise, whether
 application is for research phase only, number of  parties in consortia, whether the  project      35  aims for an export market, and number of researchers employed.
 Summary     index    does  not  include  prior collaboration,  reverse ‐ codes  "do  not  collaborate  with consortia due  to a lack of  funding", and does not include  collaboration 
 outcomes with partner 2.
Table  5: Does Innotech Funding Increase  or Crowd‐Out Other Types of Collaboration?
                                                                                        Local  linear full         Local  linear MSE      Local  mean MSE    Local  linear with controls
                                                                          Means      RD coef.        BW          RD coef.        BW     RD coef.      BW       RD coef.        BW  
                                                                   Funded Not‐Funded (p‐value)        (N)        (p‐value)       (N)    (p‐value)     (N)     (p‐value)         (N)
Collaborated with entity outside  consortia                         0.878      0.828   ‐0.075          8           ‐0.125        3.52     ‐0.044      1.60      ‐0.078           8
                                                                                        0.074         398           0.219        245       0.262      129        0.080          398
Collaborated with others on R&D                                     0.811      0.762   ‐0.051          8           ‐0.037        3.52     ‐0.063      1.12      ‐0.055           8
                                                                                        0.314         400           0.884        246       0.549       96        0.341          400
Collaborated with others on technological  consulting               0.696      0.679   ‐0.133          8           ‐0.203        4.91     ‐0.121      1.15      ‐0.129           8
                                                                                        0.112         400           0.086        290       0.258       96        0.120          400
Collaborated with others on licensing and patents                   0.439      0.440   ‐0.118          8           ‐0.044        3.55     ‐0.042      3.14      ‐0.116           8
                                                                                        0.723         400           0.945        246       0.325      219        0.725          400
Collaborated with others on prototyping                             0.561      0.508    0.009          8            0.267        2.71      0.221      0.69       0.002           8
                                                                                        0.334         400           0.263        197       0.189       57        0.316          400
Collaborated with others on research publication                    0.574      0.579   ‐0.145          8           ‐0.212        3.00     ‐0.053      2.68      ‐0.156           8
                                                                                        0.072         400           0.262        219       0.144      197        0.079          400
Collaborated with others on selling products                        0.284      0.218   ‐0.070          8            0.174        3.18      0.104      1.38      ‐0.076           8
                                                                                        0.683         400           0.252        219       0.338       97        0.675          400
Doing as much collaboration with firms as would like                0.476      0.512   ‐0.165          8           ‐0.198        3.95     ‐0.078      3.50      ‐0.160           8
                                                                                        0.305         339           0.214        217       0.267      191        0.218          339
Doing as much collaboration with researchers as would like          0.760      0.692    0.205          8            0.192        3.68      0.140      1.29       0.232           8
                                                                                        0.355         293           0.503        185       0.591       68        0.372          293
Know firms in industry could talk with to take  ideas to market     0.944      0.939    0.098          8            0.126        5.98      0.067      2.67       0.096           8
                                                                                        0.022         339           0.031        285       0.044      170        0.020          339
Know researchers could talk with to solve  problems                 0.959      0.948    0.072          8            0.061        3.32      0.061      1.15       0.080           8
                                                                                        0.237         293           0.781        162       0.462       68        0.249          293
Summary Index                                                       0.027     ‐0.043   ‐0.069          8           ‐0.018        3.44      0.040      2.51      ‐0.069           8
                                                                                        0.673         400           0.895        220       0.771      197        0.701          400
Notes:
Uniform kernel  used. 
RD coef. Is the  estimated fuzzy‐RD treatment effect. P‐value  is the  bias‐adjusted robust p‐value. BW is the  bandwidth, N the  sample  size.
Local  linear full  is estimated over full  survey sample  within 8 points of  cutoff; local  linear MSE and local  mean MSE use  MSE‐optimizing bandwidths for
local  linear and local  mean estimation within this interval. Last column adds the  following controls: whether the  leader is an enterprise, whether
application is for research phase  only, number of parties in consortia, whether the project aims for an export market, and number of  researchers employed.
Summary index   is the  average  of  standardized z‐scores of  all  other outcomes in the  table.




                                                                                         36
 
Table  6: Impact on Research and Innovation
                                                                                  Local  linear full         Local  linear MSE      Local  mean MSE     Local  linear with controls
                                                                    Means       RD coef.       BW          RD coef.        BW     RD coef.      BW        RD coef.         BW  
                                                             Funded Not‐Funded (p‐ value)       (N)        (p‐ value)      (N)    (p‐ value)    (N)      (p‐ value)        (N)
Applied for at least one  patent for Innotech project         0.649      0.123    0.413          8            0.565        2.77      0.463      0.98       0.419            8
                                                                                  0.000         400           0.002        197       0.008       59        0.000           400
Applied for at least one  patent for another project          0.736      0.726   ‐ 0.040         8            0.067        3.47      0.029      2.13       ‐ 0.045          8
                                                                                  0.599         400           0.864        220       0.924      164        0.564           400
Applied for a patent in Europe                                0.304      0.286    0.107          8            0.150        4.67      0.192      1.90       0.118            8
                                                                                  0.203         400           0.253        288       0.041      131        0.183           400
Received at least one  patent for Innotech project            0.412      0.079    0.206          8            0.438        2.83      0.370      0.87       0.213            8
                                                                                  0.002         400           0.003        197       0.010       59        0.001           400
Received at least one  patent for other projects              0.561      0.571    0.046          8            0.155        3.52      0.063      1.92       0.048            8
                                                                                  0.538         400           0.390        246       0.502      131        0.514           400
At least one  publication for Innotech project                0.730      0.143    0.593          8            0.530        4.63      0.631      2.91       0.591            8
                                                                                  0.000         400           0.007        288       0.000      197        0.000           400
At least one  publication for other projects                  0.784      0.774   ‐ 0.070         8           ‐ 0.028       5.25     ‐ 0.021     2.81       ‐ 0.085          8
                                                                                  0.295         400           0.687        308       0.461      197        0.295           400
Published 10 or more  articles in last 5 years                0.547      0.508   ‐ 0.023         8           ‐ 0.094       4.03      0.002      1.60       ‐ 0.042          8
                                                                                  0.240         400           0.466        264       0.627      129        0.257           400
Number of main publications in English in last 5 years        2.055      1.325    0.017          8           ‐ 0.002       5.23      0.348      2.99       ‐ 0.024          8
                                                                                  0.447         389           0.486        302       0.797      193        0.479           389
Google  Scholar citations for top 5 papers in last 5 years    7.281      5.086    1.670          8           ‐ 0.713       2.18      1.029      2.90       1.466            8
                                                                                  0.915         389           0.879        162       0.495      193        0.908           389
Developed new industrial  design in last 5 years              0.412      0.337   ‐ 0.061         8            0.087        2.17      0.062      3.70       ‐ 0.061          8
                                                                                  0.676         400           0.850        165       0.659      246        0.709           400
Developed new prototype  in last 5 years                      0.838      0.710    0.010          8            0.077        3.60      0.064      2.13       0.009            8
                                                                                  0.724         400           0.485        246       0.785      164        0.725           400
Developed new product in last 5 years                         0.777      0.675   ‐ 0.017         8            0.129        3.09      0.146      1.86       ‐ 0.014          8
                                                                                  0.438         400           0.537        219       0.305      131        0.420           400
Upgraded product in last 5 years                              0.757      0.683   ‐ 0.179         8           ‐ 0.232       3.39     ‐ 0.129     1.30       ‐ 0.170          8
                                                                                  0.106         400           0.202        220       0.160       96        0.109           400
Developed new process in last 5 years                         0.777      0.675   ‐ 0.017         8            0.129        3.09      0.146      1.86       ‐ 0.014          8
                                                                                  0.438         400           0.537        219       0.305      131        0.420           400
Upgraded process in last 5 years                              0.703      0.599   ‐ 0.086         8            0.017        2.60      0.129      1.12       ‐ 0.088          8
                                                                                  0.912         400           0.858        197       0.474       96        0.929           400
Summary Index of Research and Innovation                      0.203     ‐ 0.119   0.125          8            0.233        3.54      0.312      1.91       0.123            8
                                                                                  0.195         400           0.137        246       0.046      131        0.164           400
 Notes:
 Uniform kernel  used. 
 RD coef. Is the  estimated fuzzy‐RD treatment effect. P‐ value  is the  bias‐adjusted robust p‐value. BW is the  bandwidth, N the  sample  size.
 Local  linear full  is estimated over full  survey sample  within 8 points of cutoff; local  linear MSE and local  mean MSE use  MSE‐ optimizing bandwidths for
 local  linear and local  mean estimation within this interval. Last column adds the  following controls: whether the  leader is an enterprise, whether
 application is for research phase  only, number of parties in consortia, whether the  project aims    37 for an export market, and number of researchers employed.
 Summary index  is the average of standardized z‐scores of all other outcomes in the table.
Table 7: Impact on Commercialization
                                                                                   Local  linear full    Local  linear MSE     Local  mean MSE Local  linear with controls
                                                              Means              RD coef.        BW     RD coef.  BW          RD coef.  BW      RD coef.         BW  
                                                       Funded Not‐Funded         (p‐value)        (N)   (p‐ value)     (N)    (p‐ value)   (N)  (p‐value)         (N)
Has Innotech product ready for sale                     0.527       0.095           0.231          8       0.248       6.83     0.339     1.50    0.232            8
                                                                                    0.009         400      0.544       367      0.014      129    0.009           400
Broad commercial  potential  of Innotech product         0.797       0.175          0.397          8       0.423       3.86     0.529     4.36    0.402            8
                                                                                    0.001         400      0.043       248      0.000      264    0.001           400
Selling Innotech product or process in Poland            0.331       0.071          0.141          8       0.235       3.43     0.251     15.06   0.142            8
                                                                                    0.054         400      0.151       220      0.029      400    0.061           400
Selling Innotech product or process outside  Poland      0.155       0.052         ‐0.157          8      ‐ 0.245      2.76     0.009     4.41    ‐0.148           8
                                                                                    0.364         400      0.012       197      0.004      264    0.342           400
Value  of sales from Innotech product in 2015           458321       70125        ‐435924          8      ‐11724       1.62    418310     26.03  ‐443996           8
                                                                                    0.712         364      0.983       111      0.465      364    0.687           364
Percent of sales from Innotech product in 2015           1.176       0.252         ‐1.243          8       0.016       2.37     0.381     2.01    ‐1.211           8
                                                                                    0.133         354      0.791       139      0.295      136    0.133           354
Innotech process being used commercially                 0.757       0.166          0.441          8       0.453       4.69     0.495     1.99    0.443            8
                                                                                    0.001         379      0.013       271      0.000      125    0.001           379
Commercialized product from other project                0.603       0.573         ‐0.105          8      ‐ 0.029      4.13     0.003     6.14    ‐0.111           8
                                                                                    0.699         339      0.745       229      0.928      295    0.676           339
Summary index  of Commercialization Activities           0.456       ‐0.225         0.186          8       0.200       2.30     0.185     0.72    0.191            8
                                                                                    0.019         400      0.931       165      0.975       57    0.019           400
Notes:
Uniform kernel  used. 
RD coef. Is the  estimated fuzzy‐RD treatment effect. P‐value  is the  bias‐ adjusted robust p‐ value. BW is the  bandwidth, N the  sample  size.
Local  linear full  is estimated over full  survey sample  within 8 points of cutoff; local  linear MSE and local  mean MSE use  MSE‐ optimizing bandwidths for
local  linear and local  mean estimation within this interval. Last column adds the  following controls: whether the  leader is an enterprise, whether
application is for research phase  only, number of parties in consortia, whether the  project aims for an export market, and number of researchers employed.
Summary index   is the  average  of standardized z‐scores of all  other outcomes in the  table.




                                                                                  38
 
Table  8: Sharpened q‐values 
                                                                    Local  linear full  Local  linear MSE    Local  mean MSE    Local  linear with controls
                                                                unadjusted sharpened unadjusted sharpened unadjusted sharpened unadjusted sharpened
Summary Indices
Table  3 (Additionality Index)                                      0.000        0.001       0.000        0.001        0.000        0.001        0.000         0.001
Table  4 (Collaboration Within Consortia Index)                     0.003        0.007       0.086        0.207        0.003        0.008        0.004         0.009
Table  5 (Collaboration Outside  Consortia Index)                   0.673        0.323       0.895        0.594        0.771        0.627        0.701         0.257
Table  6 (Research and Innovation Index)                            0.195        0.109       0.137        0.223        0.046        0.049        0.164         0.090
Table  7 (Commercialization Index)                                  0.019        0.020       0.931        0.594        0.975        0.640        0.019         0.020

Individual outcomes significant at 10 percent levels
Project Publicly Funded                                              0.000       0.001           0.000     0.001         0.000      0.001        0.000         0.001
Project Started                                                      0.000       0.001           0.000     0.003         0.000      0.001        0.000          0.001
Project Completed                                                    0.000       0.001           0.000     0.003         0.000      0.001        0.000         0.001
Collaborated with consortia on R&D                                   0.000       0.001           0.000     0.003         0.023      0.097        0.000         0.001
Applied for at least one  patent for Innotech project                0.000       0.001           0.002     0.020         0.008      0.045        0.000          0.001
At least one  publication for Innotech project                       0.000       0.002           0.007     0.052         0.000      0.001        0.000          0.002
Broad commercial  potential  of  Innotech product                    0.001       0.005           0.043     0.163         0.000      0.001        0.001          0.005
Innotech process being used commercially                             0.001       0.009           0.013     0.064         0.000      0.001        0.001          0.008
Received at least one  patent for Innotech project                   0.002       0.011           0.003     0.022         0.010      0.051        0.001          0.008
Has Innotech product ready for sale                                  0.009       0.041           0.544     0.846         0.014      0.067        0.009          0.039
Collaborated with Consortia since  applying                          0.015       0.063           0.011     0.064         0.186      0.431        0.017         0.072
Know firms in industry could talk with to take  ideas to market      0.022       0.082           0.031     0.134         0.044      0.127        0.020          0.077
Don't collaborate  with consortia due  to lack of  funding           0.025       0.085           0.067     0.228         0.032      0.106        0.027         0.095
Selling Innotech product or process in Poland                        0.054       0.179           0.151     0.402         0.029      0.106        0.061          0.206
Collaborated with entity outside  consortia                          0.074       0.220           0.219     0.502         0.262      0.530        0.080          0.243
Collaborated with others on research publication                     0.072       0.220           0.262     0.517         0.144      0.361        0.079         0.243
New Collaboration between leader and first partner                   0.080       0.227           0.036     0.145         0.026      0.101        0.091          0.264
Note: Sharpened q‐values for indices control  false  discovery rate  when testing the  five  different summary indices; sharpened q‐values for individual  outcomes 




                                                                                  39
 
 Appendix Table 1: Do Project Characteristics Differ at the  Cutoff (Based on Data from Application Forms) ‐ Looking at Projects with Follow‐Up Data?
                                                                                             Local  linear full                Local  linear MSE                Local  mean MSE
                                                              Means                     RD coef.               BW          RD coef.            BW         RD coef.            BW  
                                                      Funded     Not‐Funded             (p‐value)               (N)       (p‐value)             (N)       (p‐ value)           (N)
 Applied only for research phase                        0.257          0.234                0.015                8            0.022            4.21           0.035           1.59
                                                                                            0.864               400           0.576             264           0.704            129
 Implementation period in months                         32.0           30.9                1.287                8            1.466            3.32           1.004           2.49
                                                                                            0.393               400           0.415             219           0.431            167
 Two parties in consortium                              0.541          0.528                0.011                8            0.147            4.16           0.134           1.39
                                                                                            0.306               400           0.281             264           0.205             97
 Three  parties in consortium                           0.324          0.325               ‐0.033                8           ‐0.023            3.21          ‐ 0.065          2.05
                                                                                            0.763               400           0.830             219           0.410            164
 Four parties in consortium                             0.135          0.147                0.022                8            0.022            9.44           0.022           2.63
                                                                                            0.215               400           0.230             400           0.838            197
 Leader is an enterprise                                0.493          0.429               ‐0.114                8           ‐0.148            5.04          ‐ 0.063          1.85
                                                                                            0.854               400           0.551             307           0.440            131
 Leader has Warsaw address                              0.257          0.270                0.198                8            0.293            3.89           0.148           2.35
                                                                                            0.085               400           0.069             248           0.030            167
 Leader research employees                                74            100                 6.728                8          143.851            2.13         48.250            1.02
                                                                                            0.676               400           0.036             164           0.108             96
 Leader technical  & admin staff                         138            138               ‐12.026                8          118.435            2.72         37.205            1.15
                                                                                            0.661               400           0.309             197           0.535             96
 1st partner research employees                          139            140               ‐19.232                8          ‐36.763            6.23         ‐ 30.962          2.23
                                                                                            0.873               400           0.939             349           0.905            165
 Project manager has experience  abroad                 0.791          0.746               ‐0.002                8            0.041            2.95           0.031           1.00
                                                                                            0.467               400           0.970             197           0.964             96
 Leader value  of  projects funded                  51,446,003     48,096,697          27,079,720                8       27,079,720            10.56     14,779,790           2.33
 by budget for science  for last 3 years                                                    0.857               400           0.857             400           0.306            165
 Requested grant size                                 2,531,234      
                                                                      2,361,212          418,617                 8         709,923             6.01        710,049            1.89
                                                                                            0.314               201           0.172             175           0.284             64
 Project develops a new product or process              0.507          0.452                0.319                8            0.359            6.27           0.226           1.66
 vs. improving existing product or process                                                  0.055               400           0.039             349           0.045            129
 Project aims to improve  business process              0.149          0.135               ‐0.083                8           ‐0.122            6.38          ‐ 0.063          2.36
                                                                                            0.132               400           0.088             349           0.166            167
 Plan to sell  on export market                         0.419          0.448               ‐0.080                8            0.028            3.29          ‐ 0.039          2.65
                                                                                            0.937               400           0.995             219           0.575            197
 Sample  Size                                            148            252
 Notes: Requested grant size  is only available  for CFP 1.                                     40
 The   local  mean  estimate  for "leader research  employees"    is  not  available  since    there   are  not enough observations in the  optimal  bandwidth.
Appendix Table 2: Distribution of Projects Across Fields of Science  and Technology
                                            Percentage  of projects in each field
                                           Overall        Funded         Not‐ Funded
Natural  sciences                            6.1             7.59           5.32
Civil  engineering                          4.79             3.16           5.65
Electrical  engineering                     17.65           13.29           19.93
Mechanical  engineering                     15.69           20.25           13.29
Chemical  engineering                       2.83             3.16           2.66
Materials engineering                       18.52           24.05           15.61
Medical  engineering                         2.4             1.27           2.99
Environmental  engineering                  5.45             2.53           6.98
Other engineering and technology            14.6            12.66           15.61
Medical  and health sciences                7.63            11.39           5.65
Agricultural  sciences                      3.27               0            4.98
Social  sciences                            1.09             0.63           1.33

Sample  size                                  459             158           301
Note: OECD field of  science  and technology (FOS) classification.




                                                                     41
 
