                                                    WPS7990


Policy Research Working Paper                      7990




           Weakness in Investment Growth
           Causes, Implications and Policy Responses

                                M. Ayhan Kose
                              Franziska Ohnsorge
                                 Lei Sandy Ye
                                 Ergys Islamaj




Development Economics
Development Prospects Group
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7990


  Abstract
  Investment growth in emerging market and developing                               spillovers from major economies. Third, by slowing cap-
  economies has slowed sharply since 2010. This paper                               ital accumulation and technological progress embedded
  presents a comprehensive analysis of the causes and impli-                        in investment, weak post-crisis investment growth has
  cations of this slowdown and presents a menu of policy                            contributed to sluggish growth of potential output in
  responses to improve investment growth. It reports four                           recent years. Finally, although specific policy priorities
  main results. First, the slowdown has been broad-based                            depend on country circumstances, policymakers can boost
  and most pronounced in the largest emerging markets                               investment both directly, through public investment, and
  and in commodity exporters. Second, it reflects a range                           indirectly, by encouraging private investment, including
  of obstacles: weak activity, negative terms-of-trade shocks,                      foreign direct investment, and by undertaking measures to
  declining foreign direct investment inflows, elevated pri-                        improve overall growth prospects and the business climate.
  vate debt burdens, heightened political risk, and adverse




  This paper is a product of the Development Prospects Group, Development Economics. It is part of a larger effort by the
  World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may
  be contacted at lye1@worldbank.org .




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                   Weakness in Investment Growth: 
                               Causes, Implications and Policy Responses 
                                                                  


                     M. Ayhan Kose, Franziska Ohnsorge, Lei Sandy Ye, and Ergys Islamaj* 




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JEL Classification Numbers: E22, F2, F6, O1, O4  
Keywords: emerging markets; developing economies; investment slowdown; policy space; infrastructure 
investment; monetary policy; fiscal policy; structural reforms 




*  Kose  (World  Bank,  Development  Prospects  Group;  Brookings   Institution;  CEPR;  CAMA;  akose@worldbank.org); 
Ohnsorge (World  Bank, Development Prospects Group; fohnsorge@worldbank.org); Ye (World Bank, Development 
Prospects  Group;  lye1@worldbank.org);  Islamaj  (World  Bank,  Development  Prospects  Group; 
eislamaj@worldbank.org). This paper was prepared with contributions from Mai Anh Bui, Jongrim Ha, Raju Huidrom, 
Csilla  Lakatos,  Hideaki  Matsuoka,  Trang  Nguyen,  Yoki  Okawa,  Naotaka  Sugawara,  Congyan  Tan,  Ekaterine 
Vashakmadze,  and  Shu  Yu.  Mai  Anh  Bui,  Collette  Wheeler,  Yirou  Li,  Liwei  Liu,  and  Cristhian  Vera  Avellan  provided 
excellent  research  assistance.  We  would  like  to  thank  for  useful  comments  Carlos  Arteta,  Martin  Baily,  Eduardo 
Borensztein, Ajai Chopra, Kevin Clinton, Kemal Dervis, Graham Hacche, Raju Huidrom, Oliver Masetti, Ugo Panizza, 
David  Robinson,  Claudia  Sepulveda,  Marc  Stocker,  Zia  Qureshi,  Ekaterine  Vashakmadze,  Kei‐Mu  Yi,  and  our  many 
colleagues  at  the  World  Bank.  The  findings,  interpretations,  and  conclusions  expressed  in  this  article  are  entirely 
those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the 
countries they represent. Figures and background data are available at www.worldbank.org/gep. 
                                        
                                                  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Slowing  investment  growth. Investment growth  in  emerging  market  and  developing  economies  (EMDEs)  has 
slowed sharply since 2010, declining from 10 percent, on average, in 2010 to 3.4 percent in 2015. Investment 
growth  was  not  only  well  below  its  pre‐crisis  average,  but  was  also  below  its  long‐term  average  in  nearly  70 
percent  of  EMDEs  in  2015.  Surveys  of  long‐term  forecasts  suggest  that  investment  weakness  is  expected  to 
persist (Figure A1). 
Factors associated with the slowdown. In commodity importers, slowing FDI inflows and spillovers from soft 
activity  in  major  economies  appeared  to  account  for  much  of  the  slowdown  in  investment  growth.  In 
commodity  exporters,  a  sharp  terms  of trade  deterioration  (for  energy  exporters)  and  mounting  private debt 
burdens  were  the  main  factors  associated  with  the  slowdown  in  investment  growth.  Political  and  policy 
uncertainty has further contributed to lower investment growth in several EMDEs. 
Spillovers.  Over  the  past  five  years,  advanced  economy  growth  has  repeatedly  fallen  short  of  expectations, 
partly because of crisis legacies. Sub‐par growth and growth prospects in advanced‐economy trading partners 
and source countries for FDI into EMDEs have slowed EMDE output growth. For every 1 percentage point lower 
output growth in the United States or Euro Area, EMDE output growth fell 0.8‐1.3 percentage points within a 
year. EMDE investment growth responded about twice as strongly as EMDE output to declines in U.S. and Euro 
Area  growth.  Sluggish  economic  activity  in  major  advanced  economies  has  coincided  with  a  policy‐driven 
slowdown in investment growth in China. This has contributed to weakening global commodity prices and has 
weighed on growth in other EMDEs through inter‐sectoral input‐output links and, indirectly, via output growth 
spillovers.  
“Investment‐less”  credit  booms.  Investment  weakness  has  been  set  against  the  backdrop  of  exceptionally 
benign domestic (and global) financing conditions until late 2016. Policy interest rates of AE central banks are 
at or near record lows. Private credit growth in about 30 EMDEs was near or above levels associated with credit 
booms  at  some  point  during  2010‐15.  Historically,  around  40  percent  of  credit  booms  have  coincided  with 
investment  surges.  However,  similar  credit  booms  since  2010  have  taken  place  with  virtually  no  such 
investment surges but, instead, often with rapidly rising consumption. 
Long‐term  implications  of  weak  investment  growth.  By  slowing  capital  accumulation  and  technological 
progress  embedded  in  investment,  weak  post‐crisis  investment  growth  has  contributed  to  lower  potential 
output  growth  from  pre‐crisis  rates.  The  slowdown  in  potential  growth  could  be  intensified  if  weakness  in 
investment  also  sets  back  total  factor  productivity  growth  through  a  slowdown  in  embodied  technological 
progress. 
Policy responses. Policymakers can boost investment both directly, through public investment, and indirectly, 
by  encouraging  private  investment,  including  foreign  direct  investment,  and  by  undertaking  measures  to 
improve  overall  growth  prospects  and  the  business  climate.  Doing  so  directly  through  expanding  public 
investment  in  infrastructure  and  human  capital  would  help  raise  demand  in  the  short‐run,  increase  potential 
output  in  the  long‐run  and  improve  the  environment  for  private  investment  and  trade.  Public  investment 
would also help close investment gaps targeted by the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. More 
effective use of counter‐cyclical fiscal and monetary policies can also promote private investment indirectly by 
strengthening output growth, especially in commodity‐exporting EMDEs. These policies may be less effective, 
however,  if  employed  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  a  persistent  terms  of  trade  shock  or  if  there  is  limited  fiscal 
space.  In  any  event,  to  raise  investment  growth  sustainably,  such  policies  will  need  to  be  buttressed  by 
structural  reforms  to  encourage  both  domestic  private  and  foreign  direct  investment.  Historically,  reform 
waves in EMDEs have been associated with higher investment and output growth.                                                         



                                                               2 
 Figure A1. Investment growth slowdown 
 Investment growth in EMDEs has slowed sharply since the global financial crisis. In 2015, the share of EMDEs with investment 
 growth  below  its  long‐term  average  reached  its  highest  level  except  during  global  downturns.  Long‐term  forecasts  suggest 
 continued  weakness  in  investment  growth.  Weak  investment  growth  has  been  accompanied  by  anemic  productivity  growth, 
 compounding risks that the income catch‐up of EMDEs to advanced economy (AE) levels may slow.  
  
 A. Investment growth                                                          B. Quarterly investment growth: EMDEs 
  Percent                                                                      Year-on-year, percent                                                  EMDEs
                          1990-2008 average                                                                                                           1990-2008 average
 12                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                      2003-08 average
                          2003-08 average

     8                                                                         10


     4                                                                             5


     0                                                                             0




                                                                                                 2010Q1


                                                                                                                 2011Q1


                                                                                                                                  2012Q1


                                                                                                                                                  2013Q1


                                                                                                                                                            2014Q1


                                                                                                                                                                     2015Q1


                                                                                                                                                                                2016Q1
             2010
             2011
             2012
             2013
             2014
             2015

                         2010
                         2011
                         2012
                         2013
                         2014
                         2015

                                       2010
                                       2011
                                       2012
                                       2013
                                       2014
                                       2015



              EMDEs         AEs            World
                                                                                                                            
 C. Share of EMDEs with investment growth below its                            D. Five‐year‐ahead forecasts of investment growth 
 long‐term average                                                              Percent
  Percent of EMDEs                                                                                                               EMDEs AEs World
                                                                                 10
  100
                                                                                         8
     80
                                                                                         6
     60

     40                                                                                  4

     20                                                                                  2

         0                                                                               0
             1990
             1992
             1994
             1996
             1998
             2000
             2002
             2004
             2006
             2008
             2010
             2012
             2014




                                                                                                          2010

                                                                                                                          2011

                                                                                                                                           2012

                                                                                                                                                     2013

                                                                                                                                                             2014

                                                                                                                                                                     2015

                                                                                                                                                                              2016
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 E. Share of world investment                                                  F. Change in TFP and investment growth, 2010‐15 
  Percent             EMDE excluding BRICS                                      Percentage points
                      Other BRICS                                                    30
                                                                                Change in investment




     50               China                                                                            20
     40                                                                                                10
                                                                                      growth




                                                                                                          0
     30                                                                                                -10
     20                                                                                                -20
                                                                                                       -30
     10
                                                                                                       -40
         0                                                                                                    -15            -10    -5      0      5                          10
             1993-1999     2000-08         2010-15                                                                             Change in TFP growth                                   
                                                        
Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; International Monetary Fund; Oxford Economics; Penn World Tables; World Development 
Indicators, World Bank. 
A. Weighted averages. Long‐term average starts in 1991 for EMDEs due to lack of earlier data. 
B. Weighted averages. Includes 28 EMDEs with available quarterly data. Long‐term averages start in 1991 for EMDEs and are based on annual 
data. Last observation is for Q2 2016. 
C. Long‐term averages are country‐specific and refer to 1990‐2008. Latest year is 2015. 
D. Each line shows five‐year‐ahead Consensus Forecasts as of the latest available month in the year denoted. Unweighted averages of 21 
EMDEs and 25 advanced economies. World sample includes 46 countries. Latest data is as of October 2016. 
E. Each column shows the period average of the share of global investment contributed by each respective group denoted. The world sample 
includes 100 EMDEs and 34 AEs. 
F. Correlation of change in investment growth from 2010‐15 with change in TFP growth over the same period. Red dotted line denotes the 
linear regression line. Includes 40 EMDEs. 


                                                                     3 
1. Introduction1 

Investment  growth  in  emerging  market  and  developing  economies  (EMDEs)  has  slowed  sharply  since 
2010,  declining  from  10.2  percent,  on  average,  in  2010  to  3.4  percent  in  2015.2 It  has  likely  decelerated 
by more than half a percentage point in 2016. Investment growth is now not only well below its pre‐crisis 
average, but also below its long‐term average in the highest share of EMDEs in 25 years with the exception 
of during serious global downturns. EMDEs with below long‐term average investment growth account for 
35 percent of global GDP and contain 71 percent of the world’s population and 73 percent of the world’s 
poor.  Moreover,  expectations  for  long‐term  investment  growth  in  EMDEs  have  been  revised  down 
significantly,  partly  because  the  slowdown  in  investment  has  been  highly  synchronous  and  protracted 
among these economies. 

Recent  investment  weakness  in  EMDEs  has  followed  the  significant  slowdown  in  investment  growth  in 
advanced economies (AEs) in the immediate aftermath of the global financial crisis. However, post‐crisis 
investment weakness has different features in EMDEs than in AEs. In AEs, investment contracted sharply 
during  the  global  financial  crisis  and,  in  the  Euro  Area,  during  the  subsequent  debt  crisis.  Investment  in 
AEs  recovered  somewhat  in  2014‐16,  but  at  a  slower  pace  than  in  recoveries  following  earlier  global 
downturns.  In  contrast,  in  EMDEs,  investment  continued  growing  through  the  global  financial  crisis  and 
its  immediate  aftermath,  but  this  expansion  has  slowed  since  2010.  World  investment  growth  has  also 
gradually lost steam over the past six years. 

The slowdown in investment growth is occurring despite large unmet investment needs in many EMDEs. 
EMDEs’ infrastructure, education, and health systems are struggling to keep pace with rapid urbanization, 
economic  activity,  and  changing  demands  on  workforces.  Commodity‐exporting  EMDEs  require 
investment to shift away from natural resource‐based sectors toward other engines of growth. Vigorous 
private investment could give momentum to slowing productivity growth. 

More  generally,  investment  is  critical  to  sustaining  long‐term  growth.  Capital  accumulation  raises  labor 
productivity,  a  key  driver  of  the  long‐term  growth  of  real  wages  and  household  incomes,  not  only  by 
capital‐deepening—equipping  workers  with  more  capital—but  often  also  by  embodying  productivity‐
enhancing  technological  advances.  While  feeble  investment  in  AEs  has  featured  prominently  in  recent 
policy  and  academic  debates,  slowing  investment  growth  in  EMDEs  has  received  less  attention. 3  Yet, 
EMDEs  constituted  about  45  percent  of  world  investment  and  two‐thirds  of  world  investment  growth 
during 2010‐2015 (Figure 1). 

This paper examines the recent weakness in EMDE investment, its underlying drivers, and possible policy 
responses to revive investment growth. In particular, it addresses the following questions. First, what are 
the main features of the investment slowdown? Second, what is the macroeconomic backdrop to slowing 


1 This  paper  draws  from  a  background  study  featured  in  World  Bank  (2017).  Figures  and  background  data  presented  here  are 

available at www.worldbank.org/gep. 
2 Throughout  this  paper,  unless  otherwise  specified,  investment  refers  to  real  gross  fixed  capital  formation  (public  and  private 

combined). For the sake of brevity, “investment” is understood to indicate investment levels. Investment growth is measured as 
the annual percent change in real investment. The long‐term average refers to the average of available data for 1990‐2008, the 
pre‐crisis average to the average during 2003‐08. 
3  Post‐crisis  investment  weakness  in  advanced  economies  has  been  explored  in  Banerjee,  Kearns,  and  Lombardi  (2015);  IMF 

(2015a); Leboeuf and Fay (2016); and Ollivaud, Guillmette, and Turner (2016). 


                                                                       4 
investment  growth  in  EMDEs?  Third,  what  are  the  factors  associated  with  the  investment  slowdown, 
including  spillovers  from  weak  activity  and  investment  in  major  economies?  Fourth,  what  are  the 
implications of weak investment growth for long‐term growth prospects? Fifth, which policies can support 
investment? 

The  paper  informs  the  debate  on  the  recent  slowdown  in  investment  by  making  the  following 
contributions. First, it focuses on EMDEs, whereas the bulk of the  existing literature has focused on AEs. 
The few existing studies that analyze EMDE investment are either based on pre‐crisis data or confine their 
analysis  narrowly  to  the  2008‐09  crisis  or  simply  focus  on  specific  regions. 4  Second,  it  estimates  the 
contributions  of  a  comprehensive  set  of  factors  associated  with  weak  investment  growth.  A  number  of 
empirical  methods  are  used  to  zoom  in  on  specific  external  and  domestic  factors.  Third,  it  examines  the 
implications of investment weakness in EMDEs for global trade, long‐term prospects for growth and catch‐
up, and it highlights the potential impact on productivity growth. Fourth, in light of its findings and insights 
from  an  extensive  literature,  the  paper  provides  a  wide  range  of  macro‐  and  microeconomic  policy 
recommendations to revive investment growth. 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  2  describes  the  main  features  of  the  investment 
slowdown.  Section  3  explores  the  macroeconomic  backdrop  behind  the  slowdown.  Section  4  examines 
the  factors  associated  with  the  slowdown.  Section  5  assesses  the  implications  of  weak  investment  for 
global trade, long‐term growth, and income catch‐up. Section 6 discusses policies to promote investment 
growth. Section 7 concludes.   

2. Main features of the investment slowdown 

During 2003‐08, EMDE investment growth reached historic highs averaging 12 percent a year, more than 
twice  the  long‐term  average  growth  rate  of  5  percent  (Figure  2).  The  investment  boom  was  particularly 
pronounced  in  commodity  exporters,  where  soaring  commodity  prices  encouraged  investment  in 
resource  exploration  and  development  and,  in  anticipation  of  higher  future  incomes,  in  non‐resource 
projects  (World Bank 2016a).  Some of  this  elevated  pre‐crisis investment fueled activity in  nontradables 
sectors (e.g., real estate) or in sectors whose growth prospects have dimmed considerably (e.g., mining). 
Since 2010, however, EMDE investment growth has slowed steadily from 10 percent in 2010 to 3.4 percent 
in  2015.  By  2014,  it  was  not  only  well  below  its  double‐digit  pre‐crisis  average  rates  but  also  below  its 
long‐term average over 1990‐2008.  

The  investment  slowdown  has  been  broad‐based.  It  has  been  more  sustained  in  EMDEs  than  in  AEs  and 
more  pronounced  than  in  periods  following  earlier  global  downturns.  The  slowdown  has  been  visible  in 
both  private  and  public  components  of  investment.  Repeated  downgrades  to  consensus  forecasts  for 
investment growth suggest a gradual recognition of its likely persistence.  

Unusually weak. Investment growth remains more anemic—and its weakness has been more persistent—
than  in  the  aftermath  of  previous  global  recessions  and  slowdowns  (Figure  3).  From  an  unusually  strong 
rebound  in  2010,  investment  growth  in  EMDE  commodity  exporters  has  now  slowed  well  below  growth 
rates observed after previous global recessions and slowdowns. 


4 These  include  Anand  and  Tulin  (2014);  Caselli,  Pagano,  and  Schivardi  (2003);  Qureshi,  Diaz‐Sanchez,  and  Varoudakis  (2015); 

Bahal,  Raissi,  and  Tulin  (2015);  and  Cerra  et  al.  (2016).  Firm‐level  studies  include  Magud  and  Sosa  (2015)  and  Li,  Magud,  and 
Valencia (2015). 

                                                                       5 
Broad‐based.  In  2015,  investment  growth  was  below  its  long‐term  average  in  more  than  60  percent  of 
EMDEs, the largest share over the past quarter‐century outside serious global downturns (Figure 4). In the 
majority of EMDEs, investment growth has slowed in at least two out of three years during 2013‐15.  

Different between commodity exporters and importers. The slowdown in EMDE investment growth has 
been  most  pronounced  among  the  BRICS  and  commodity‐exporting  economies.  By  2015,  investment 
growth  had  dropped  to  3.7  percent  in  the  BRICS  and  to  1.6  percent  in  non‐BRICS  commodity‐exporting 
EMDEs from about 13 percent and 7 percent, respectively, in 2010. China accounted for about one‐third 
of the investment growth slowdown in EMDEs between 2010 and 2015, and Brazil and Russia for another 
one‐third.  

In  commodity  exporters,  investment  weakness  affected  all  types  of  investment  (machinery  and 
equipment  as  well  as  construction)  and  all  sources  of  investment  (public  and  private).  Reflecting  the 
divergence  between  commodity  exporters  and  importers,  the  EMDE  investment  growth  slowdown  has 
been  concentrated  in  EMDE  regions  with  a  large  number  of  commodity‐exporting  economies.  This 
includes  Europe  and  Central  Asia  (ECA),  where  investment  growth  has  been  anemic  from  2012‐2015, 
Middle  East  and  North  Africa  (MNA),  and  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  (LAC),  where  investment  has 
contracted in several large countries. 

Although  investment  growth  in  commodity‐importing  EMDEs  (excluding  China  and  India)  has  been 
resilient  as  a  group,  this  resilience  has  been  mainly  driven  by  a  few  large  commodity  importers.  Among 
smaller  commodity  importers  (those  not  part  of  the  largest  twenty  EMDEs  in  nominal  GDP  terms), 
investment growth has stagnated over the post‐crisis period.  

Different  from  advanced  economies.  The  sustained  investment  growth  slowdown  in  EMDEs  contrasts 
with  the  partial  recovery  in  AE  investment  growth  since  the  global  financial  crisis.  Investment  growth  in 
AEs averaged 2.1 percent over 2010‐15. By 2014, it had reattained its long‐term average growth rate, with 
investment growth not far below pre‐crisis rates. The share of AEs investing below their long‐term average 
rates declined from more than 80 percent in 2013 to about 60 percent in 2015. 

Weak  public  and  private  investment.  During  2010‐15,  private  investment  accounted  for  roughly  70 
percent  of  total  EMDE  investment  on  average.  The  coordinated  fiscal  stimulus  of  2008‐09  lifted  public 
investment growth above long‐term averages in both AEs and EMDEs. In AEs, this boost was subsequently 
reversed.  In  EMDEs,  public  investment  growth  has  remained  positive  but  weaker  during  2010‐13  and, 
from 2014‐15, dropped to below its long‐term average, as discussed in detail later in the paper. Since the 
post‐crisis  rebound  of  2010,  private  investment  growth  slowed  in  synch  with  public  investment  growth. 
In more than half of all EMDEs, private investment growth remained below the long‐term average during 
2010‐15.   

Expected  to  persist.  EMDE  investment  growth  has  consistently  fallen  short  of  expectations  (Figure  5). 
While 2010  consensus forecasts expected investment growth for  EMDEs to reach 7 percent  in 2015, the 
outturn was 0.9 percent. Both short‐term forecasts and long‐term expectations for investment growth in 
EMDEs  have  declined  since  2010.  This  may  partly  reflect  a  recognition  that  the  investment  slowdown  is 
returning  growth  to  long‐term  average  rates  from  record‐high  pre‐crisis  rates.  However,  the  depth  and 
reach  of  the  weakness  in  investment  suggest  that  the  recent  slowdown  could  be  more  than  a  simple 
reversion  to  the  long‐term  trends.  The  downward  revisions  have  been  considerably  more  pronounced 



                                                           6 
than those for real GDP growth. In AEs, long‐term expectations about investment growth have been more 
steady, with a decline of just 1 percentage point over 2010‐15. 

3. Macroeconomic backdrop 

Before delving into the main obstacles associated with the slowdown in investment in EMDEs, it is useful 
to  consider  the  macroeconomic  backdrop,  shaped  by  a  wide  range  of  competing  factors.  Globally, 
borrowing costs have been at record lows and financial market liquidity has been ample since the financial 
crisis  (Figure  6).  In  several  EMDEs,  domestic  private  credit  to  the  nonfinancial  private  sector  surged. 
However, multiple headwinds have offset the tailwinds to investment from historically low financing cost 
until  late  2016.  The  headwinds  have  included  disappointing  activity  and  weak  growth  prospects,  severe 
adverse terms of trade shocks for commodity exporters, easing and volatile capital flows, bouts of policy 
uncertainty in major economies, and rapid accumulation of private debt. 

Weak  activity.  EMDE  output  growth  has  slowed  sharply  post‐crisis,  from  6.4  percent  in  2011  to  3.5 
percent  in  2015,  well  below  its  pre‐crisis  average  of  7  percent  (Figure  6).  To  the  extent  that  growth 
weakness is structural, investment weakness may be expected to persist (Didier et al. 2015). About one‐
third of the growth slowdown in EMDEs has been estimated to reflect structural causes. While the sources 
of  the  growth  slowdown  have  varied  across  EMDEs,  these  have  included  a  new  era  of  lower  commodity 
prices,  spillovers  from  soft  activity  in  major  economies,  weakening  productivity  growth,  and  a  maturing 
of supply chains that has slowed global trade growth.  

In major economies, activity has been soft post‐crisis despite unprecedented monetary policy action. The 
Euro  Area  crisis  was  accompanied  by  a  recession  in  2012‐13  that  hurt  trading  partners,  especially  in 
Eastern  Europe  and  North  Africa.  Euro  Area  growth  prospects  have  continued  to  be  subdued  as  crisis 
legacies  have  unwound.  A  series  of  one‐off  events,  such  as  the  debt  ceiling  debate  in  the  U.S.,  caused 
disappointing  growth  outcomes.  A  secular  decline  in  productivity  growth  has  also  reduced  growth 
prospects in  the  United States.  Growth in Japan  has fluctuated around zero as a result of one‐off events 
(e.g.,  major  earthquakes  in  2011  and  2016),  earlier  than  expected  policy  tightening  (VAT  hike  in  2014), 
long‐term  population  pressures,  and  a  slow  pace  of  structural  reforms.  Weak  growth  prospects  across 
advanced economies have raised the possibility of secular stagnation and a protracted period of extremely 
low long‐run equilibrium interest rates that restrict monetary policy options (Summers 2014; Teulings and 
Baldwin 2014). In China, growth has slowed gradually towards more sustainable levels, with a rebalancing 
from  manufacturing  to  services.  This  healthy  transition  has  reduced  commodity  demand,  with  adverse 
spillovers to commodity‐exporting EMDEs (World Bank 2016a).  

Adverse  terms  of  trade  shocks.  About  two‐thirds  of  EMDEs  are  reliant  on  exports  of  energy,  metals,  or 
agricultural commodities.  Most commodity prices have fallen sharply from their early‐2011 peaks—with 
metals  and  energy  prices  plunging  by  more  than  40  percent  (Figure  7).  As  a  result,  the  terms  of  trade  of 
commodity exporters have deteriorated by 4 percent since 2011, and those of oil exporters by 21 percent. 

Subdued and volatile capital flows. FDI has been an important source of investment in EMDEs. FDI inflows 
to  EMDEs  have  more  than  tripled  since  2000  and  accounted  for  about  one‐third  of  global  FDI  inflows  in 
2015.  On  average  among  EMDEs,  gross  FDI  inflows  amounted  to  3  percent  of  GDP  and  20  percent  of 
domestic investment in 2015. Since 2010, however, growth in FDI inflows to EMDEs has slowed, partly as 
a result of weak activity in AEs (Figure 8). Non‐FDI inflows have been more resilient—but notably volatile—
reflecting investors’ search for yield amid low AE interest rates, with a shift away from bank flows to non‐

                                                             7 
bank flows (McQuade and Schmitz 2016). 

Heightened  uncertainty.  Political  uncertainty  has  increased  in  many  EMDEs  since  the  2008‐09  global 
financial  crisis  (Figure  9).  This  has  reflected  geopolitical  tensions  in  Eastern  Europe,  security  challenges 
and  conflicts  in  the  Middle  East,  and  acute  domestic  political  tensions  in  several  large  EMDEs.  Even  in 
major  AEs  and  EMDEs  without  significant  political  tensions,  major  policy  shifts  have  often  been 
accompanied  by  policy  uncertainty.  For  example,  bouts  of  policy  uncertainty—e.g.,  government 
shutdowns  and  political  stalemates  in  the  United  States,  the  Taper  tantrum  episode  associated  with  the 
U.S.  Federal  Reserve  Bank’s  policy  plans,  concerns  around  the  future  of  the  Euro  Area  during  the  Euro 
Area crisis, the U.K. referendum vote to leave the European Union (EU), and reforms related to financial 
markets  and  currency  regime  in  China—have  been  a  source  of  global  financial  market  volatility  further 
weighing on investor sentiment. 

Rapid  credit  growth  and  debt  overhang.  On  average,  private  credit  in  both  commodity  exporters  and 
importers has increased by near 20 percentage points of GDP from 2000 to 2015 (Figure 10). The share of 
EMDEs with private credit‐to‐GDP ratios exceeding 60 percent had reached about one‐fifth by 2015, the 
highest  share  since  1990.  Historically,  during  the  three  decades  prior  to  the  2008‐09  crisis,  about  40 
percent  of  all  credit  booms  have  overlapped  with  investment  surges  within  one  or  two  years.  Credit 
booms since 2010, however, have been unusually “investment‐less”: virtually none of the post‐crisis credit 
booms in EMDEs have been accompanied by investment surges. In several countries, rapid credit growth 
instead fueled above‐average consumption growth. In the past, when such investment‐less credit booms 
unwound, output contracted more than when the credit boom had been accompanied by an investment 
surge. 

4. Factors associated with the investment slowdown 

A series of econometric exercises is conducted to estimate the relative importance of these external and 
domestic  factors  to  investment  growth.  First,  in  a  panel  regression,  investment  in  73  EMDEs  and  26  AEs 
for  1998‐2015  is  modelled  following  the  standard  framework  implying  that  the  level  of  investment  is 
chosen such that the marginal return on capital matches the risk‐adjusted cost of capital. Specifically, the 
regression model includes as explanatory variables the proxies for the drivers of investment, including the 
marginal  return  to  capital  (e.g.,  output  growth  and  terms  of  trade  growth)  and  the  risk‐adjusted  cost  of 
capital  (e.g.,  measures  of  uncertainty,  FDI  inflows,  and  the  private  credit‐to‐GDP  ratio).5 These  also  are 
the factors that have shaped the macroeconomic backdrop as previously discussed. 

Second,  the  analysis  drills  down  into  the  short‐term  effects  of  uncertainty  and  weak  activity  in  major 
advanced economies on EMDE investment growth using time‐series methods. This is done in two sets of 
vector autoregressions tailored to examine each factor in detail. The need for quarterly data restricts the 
cross‐country dimension of the sample (to 18 EMDEs) used in these exercises.  

                                            



5 A large cross‐country dataset for investment growth is only available for aggregate gross fixed capital formation, which includes 

both private and public investment. The correlates of investment modelled here are mainly those relating to private investment 
whereas  public  investment  is  assumed  to  be  mostly  subject  to  discretionary  policy  decisions.  In  EMDEs,  private  investment  on 
average constitutes about 70 percent of total investment. To mitigate concerns about endogeneity, output growth prospects are 
proxied by lagged output growth, in line with other studies (see Annex 1). 

                                                                     8 
4.1 Medium‐term correlates of EMDE investment growth  

Figure 11 summarizes the estimated effects of these variables on investment growth. Details of the panel 
regression  model  used  to  derive  these  results  are  presented  in  Annex  1  (Annex  Tables  1.1  and  1.2). 
Whereas  investment  weakness  in  AEs  has  mainly  reflected  sluggish  output  (see  G20  (2016a)  and  IMF 
(2015a)),  investment  weakness  in  EMDEs  has  been  associated  with  a  wider  number  of  factors.  While 
slowing output growth can account for three‐quarters, on average, for slowdowns in investment growth 
among  AEs  during  2011‐15,  it  accounted  for  a  small  share  of  the  investment  growth  slowdown  in  the 
average  EMDE.  More  important  were  terms‐of‐trade  shocks  (for  oil  exporters),  and  slowing  FDI  inflows 
(for commodity importers) as well as private debt burdens and political risk (for all groups of EMDEs).  

In oil exporters, on average, the terms‐of‐trade shock caused by the oil price decline from 2014 onwards 
accounted for about one‐half of the investment growth slowdown. In commodity importers, on average, 
slowing  FDI  inflows  accounted  for  more  than  half  of  the  slowdown  in  investment  growth.  Private  sector 
debt‐to‐GDP  ratios  have  had  nonlinear  effects  on  investment:  with  mounting  private  debt  burdens,  the 
beneficial effects of financial deepening on investment are increasingly outweighed by adverse effects of 
debt  overhang  (Appendix  1). 6  The  post‐crisis  deleveraging  in  some  commodity‐importing  EMDEs  has 
relieved  some  of  the  headwinds  to  investment  growth.  In  contrast,  in  several  non‐energy  commodity 
exporters,  elevated  private  debt  has  weighed  on  investment.  In  some  energy  exporters  with  initially 
moderate post‐crisis private debt stocks, a rapid buildup of private sector debt has increasingly held back 
investment growth. Rising political uncertainty may have accounted for about one‐tenth of the slowdown 
in investment growth in commodity‐importing and exporting EMDEs since 2011. 

The actual investment growth slowdowns were considerably steeper than predicted by this econometric 
analysis.  This  suggests  that  there  may  be  other,  unobserved  factors  at  work  or  that  important 
nonlinearities  have  been  present  that  have  amplified  the  investment  growth  slowdown  over  time.  The 
next  two  exercises  consider  some  additional  factors  that  could  have  been  responsible  for  the  slowdown 
in investment. 

4.2 Short‐term impact of uncertainty on investment growth 

The  annual  measure  of  political  risk  used  in  the  panel  regression  above  is  available  for  a  large  group  of 
countries over an extended time period. For a considerably smaller group of countries and a shorter time 
window,  two  more  granular  quarterly  measures  of  uncertainty  are  examined:  uncertainty  related  to 
policies, as measured by the Economic Policy Uncertainty (EPU) index by Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016), 
and uncertainty about financial market prospects (as proxied by stock market volatility).  

The impact of these two variables on EMDE investment growth is estimated separately in a series of vector 
autoregression models for 18 EMDEs during 1998Q1‐2016Q2 (Appendix 2). Details of the estimation are 
presented  in  Annex  2B.  The  results  emphasize  the  importance  of  uncertainty  in  driving  investment 
growth: 

Global financial market uncertainty. The VIX index, which tracks the implied volatility of the U.S. S&P 500 
stock  market  price  index,  captures  global  financial  market  uncertainty  as  well  as  U.S.  policy  uncertainty. 

6 Credit  to  the  private  sector  is  used  as  a  proxy  for  private  sector  debt.  At  80  percent  of  GDP,  an  increase  in  private  debt  was 

associated  with  a  one‐third  sharper  decline  in  investment  growth  than  a  similarly  sized  increase  in  private  debt  from  a  starting 
point of 40 percent of GDP (See Appendix 1 and Annex 2A for details on the methodology). 

                                                                           9 
It  is  a  key  explanatory  variable  in  driving  EMDE  investment,  especially  when  there  has  been  a  sustained 
increase  in  the  index.  For  example,  a  10  percent  increase  in  the  VIX  would  considerably  reduce  EMDE 
investment growth (by about 0.6 percentage points within one year). This type of increase in uncertainty 
corresponds  to  about  half  of  the  five‐day  jump  that  was  observed  during  heightened  uncertainty  about 
the  health  of  the  Chinese  equity  markets  and  capital  outflows  in  August  2015,  or  the  two‐month  rise  at 
the height of the Euro Area crisis in September 2011. 

Policy uncertainty in the European Union. Bouts of policy uncertainty in the EU, especially during the Euro 
Area crisis, had spillovers to close economic partners. For example, the Economic Policy Uncertainty Index 
for  Europe  doubled  in  June  2016  following  the  United  Kingdom’s  vote  to  exit  the  EU  or  during  the  four 
months ending September 2011 (at the height of the Euro Area crisis). These uncertainties have reduced 
investment, especially in EMDEs in the ECA region. 

Domestic policy uncertainty. A 10 percent increase in the EPU Index of domestic policy uncertainty in Brazil 
may have reduced investment growth by about 1 percentage point.  

4.3 Adverse spillovers from major economies 

Disappointing  U.S.  and  Euro  Area  activity.  U.S.  and  Euro  Area  growth  has  repeatedly  disappointed 
expectations  in  recent  years.  Long‐term  consensus  growth  forecasts  for  the  United  States  and  the  Euro 
Area have been revised downwards from 2.9 and 1.7 percent a year in 2010 to 2.3 and 1.4 percent a year 
in 2015, respectively—below pre‐crisis estimates of potential growth. Weaker growth prospects in these 
two major economies, in turn, worsened EMDE growth prospects and reduced incentives for investment 
in their EMDE trading partners.  

In  2015,  the  United  States  and  the  Euro  Area  accounted  for  22  and  16  percent  of  global  output, 
respectively, and for 11 percent and 25 percent, respectively, of global trade. Given the sheer size of these 
economies  and  their  degree  of  trade  and  financial  integration  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  a  slowdown  in 
their growth significantly worsens growth prospects for EMDEs (World Bank 2016a).  

To  quantify  growth  spillovers  from  the  United  States  and  the  Euro  Area  (which  complements  the 
previously described panel regression using annual data), Bayesian structural vector autoregressions were 
estimated  for  1998Q1–2016Q2  for  18  EMDEs  (excluding  China,  details  of  the  model  are  presented  in 
Annex 2C).  

The main results suggest that a 1 percentage point decline in U.S. output growth reduces average EMDE 
output growth over the following year by about 0.8 percentage point (Figure 12). Perhaps in recognition 
of  the  possibility  that  U.S.  adverse  growth  shocks  are  persistent,  EMDE  investment  growth  responded 
considerably  more  sharply  to  U.S.  growth  slowdowns  than  EMDE  output  growth.  Furthermore,  a  1 
percentage  point  decline  in  Euro  Area  output  growth  lowered  EMDE  output  growth  by  about  1.3 
percentage points within a year. Again, EMDE investment growth responded almost twice as strongly (2.1 
percentage  points)  than  EMDE  output  growth.  The  somewhat  larger  estimated  magnitude  of  spillovers 
from  the  Euro  Area  than  from  U.S.  growth  shocks  may  reflect  the  greater  trade‐intensity  of  Euro  Area 
activity (Figure 12). 

Policy  driven  slowdown  in  China.  Sluggish  economic  activity  in  major  AEs  has  coincided  with  a  policy‐
driven slowdown in output growth in China. This has been accompanied by a rebalancing from investment 


                                                          10 
growth towards other, less trade‐intensive sources of growth. As a result, China’s investment growth has 
slowed gradually from record‐high levels in the wake of the crisis (Appendix 3).  

China  is  now  the  largest  single  trading  partner  for  many  EMDEs,  especially  in  Sub‐Saharan  Africa.  It 
accounted for virtually all of the increase in global metals demand and about half of the increase in global 
primary  energy  demand  from  2010‐14  (World  Bank  2016a;  Huidrom,  Kose,  and  Ohnsorge  forthcoming). 
As a result, China’s output and investment slowdown has weighed on growth in other EMDEs. 

To estimate the magnitude of the impact of China’s output and investment slowdown on EMDE activity, 
a  Bayesian  vector  autoregression  is  estimated  for  1998Q1–2016Q2  for  18  EMDEs.  A  1  percentage  point 
decline in China’s output growth is accompanied by about 0.5 percentage point slower output growth in 
other  commodity‐importing  EMDEs  and  1  percentage  point  slower  output  growth  in  commodity‐
exporting  EMDEs  within  a  year.  Since  much  of  China’s  investment  is  resource‐intensive,  China’s 
rebalancing away from investment has had an additional adverse impact on commodity‐exporting EMDEs. 

5. Implications of weak investment for global trade, long‐term growth and catch‐up 

The post‐crisis investment growth slowdown from record‐high pre‐crisis rates has lasting implications for 
global  trade  and  long‐term  growth  prospects.  In  many  countries,  investment  is  more  import‐intensive 
than other components of output. A slowdown in investment growth, therefore, weighs heavily on global 
trade  growth.  Moreover,  by  slowing  the  rate  of  capital  accumulation  and  technological  progress 
embedded  in  investment,  a  prolonged  period  of  weak  investment  growth  can  set  back  potential  output 
growth in EMDEs for years to come, with adverse implications for their ability to catch up with AE income 
levels.  

Slower  global  trade.  Since  investment  tends  to  be  more  import‐intensive  than  other  components  of 
demand,  investment  weakness  has  been  an  important  source  of  the  post‐crisis  global  trade  slowdown 
(World  Bank  2015b;  IMF  2016;  Constantinescu  et  al.  2016).  This  was  reflected  in  weak  import  growth  in 
capital  goods  (typically  machinery  and  equipment),  which  accounted  for  about  14  percent  of  EMDE 
imports during 2015 (Figure 13). Capital goods imports tend to embody efficiency‐enhancing technology 
transfers  across  borders  (Alfaro  and  Hammel  2007).  Hence,  their  slowdown  may  also  be  reflected  in 
slowing  EMDE  productivity  growth.  Post‐crisis  global  investment  weakness  was  accompanied  by  a 
pullback  in  productive  investment  of  multinational  companies,  which  account  for  one‐third  of  global 
trade.  Capital  expenditures  (excluding  mergers  and  acquisitions)  by  the  5,000  largest  multinationals 
shrank in both 2014 and 2015 (UNCTAD 2016). 

The  global  trade  slowdown  is  not  only  a  symptom,  but  also  a  transmission  mechanism  that  propagates 
the slowdown in investment across countries (Freund 2016). Trade can facilitate more efficient allocation 
of  capital  goods  and,  thus,  improve  aggregate  productivity  which,  in  turn,  would  encourage  investment 
(Mutreja, Ravikumar, and Sposi 2014). 

Slower  capital  accumulation.  Among  OECD  countries,  the  post‐crisis  slowdown  in  potential  growth  to  a 
large  extent  reflects  the  slowing  pace  of  capital  deepening  (Ollivaud,  Guillemette,  and  Turner  2016;  Hall 
2016). Similarly, slowing capital accumulation weighs on potential growth in EMDEs. If investment growth 
is  assumed  to  remain  as  low  as  in  2015  (3.3  percent),  2020  potential  growth  would  be  about  two‐thirds 
of potential growth in the pre‐crisis investment growth scenario. 



                                                          11 
Weaker  productivity  growth.  In  addition  to  slowing  capital  accumulation,  weak  investment  growth  is 
associated with slower total factor productivity growth, as investment is often critical to the adoption of 
new,  productivity‐enhancing  technologies. 7  Among  AEs,  a  steady  productivity  growth  slowdown  was 
underway even before the global financial crisis. Possible drivers include structural change towards lower‐
productivity  services,  caused  partly  by  demand  shifts  related  to  population  ageing,  a  lack  of 
transformative  innovations,  and  slower  technology  diffusion. 8  Weaker  investment  growth  may  partly 
account for the slowdown in total factor productivity growth in EMDEs, from 2.2 percent in 2010 to ‐0.2 
percent in 2015.9 The productivity slowdown was most pronounced in commodity‐exporting EMDEs and 
those  EMDEs  with  the  slowest  investment  growth  (Figure  14).  Weaker  total  factor  productivity  growth 
would also be reflected in slower labor productivity growth—the key driver of long‐term real wage growth 
and household income growth (Blanchard and Katz 1999; Feldstein 2008).  

Slower income catch‐up. Weak investment growth in EMDEs is both a symptom and a source of slowing 
pace of catch‐up to AE income levels. Specifically, by reducing potential growth in EMDEs relative to AEs, 
it slows the pace of catch‐up in per‐capita incomes. In 2015, the difference in investment growth between 
EMDEs and AEs reached its lowest level since the early 2000s. If weakness in investment growth persists 
in  EMDEs,  per  capita  income  catch‐up  to  U.S.  levels  would  require  several  generations.10 Since  growth 
remains  one  of  the  most  powerful  drivers  of  poverty  reduction,  any  setbacks  to  growth  also  imperil  the 
achievement of global goals for poverty reduction (World Bank 2015d).  

6. Policies to promote investment growth 

The  analysis  in  this  paper  suggests  that  both  external  and  domestic  factors  are  holding  back  investment 
in EMDEs. External factors include weak FDI inflows, low commodity prices, and bouts of global policy or 
political uncertainty. Domestic factors are overall weakness in economic activity and heightened domestic 
policy  uncertainty.  In  the  near‐term,  some  of  these  drivers  of  investment  growth  are  expected  to  turn 
more benign, but only very gradually. Investment growth is therefore expected to remain weak.  

Yet  many  EMDEs  have  large  unmet  investment  needs.  First,  a  number  of  EMDEs  are  poorly  equipped  to 
keep  pace  with  rapid  urbanization,  growing  economic  activity,  and  changing  demands  on  workforce. 
Second, investment is also needed to smooth the transition away from growth driven by natural resources 
(in  commodity  exporters)  or  nontradables  sectors  (in  some  commodity  importers)  towards  more 
sustainable sources of growth. Finally, a boost to private investment, especially, would help revive slowing 
productivity  growth.  The  specific  investment  priorities  differ  across  countries  and  regions.  Robust  policy 
action—even  in  countries  with  limited  room  to  mobilize  domestic  resources—is  needed  to  accelerate 
investment growth prospects.  


7 Gollop, Fraumeni, and Jorgenson (1987); Griliches (1988); Jorgenson (1991); Colecchia and Schreyer (2002); Bourreau, Cambini, 

and Dogan (2012); and OECD (2016a). 
8 Brynjolfsson  and  McAfee  (2011);  Cowen  (2011);  Gordon  (2012);  Bailey,  Manyika,  and  Gupta  (2013);  McGowan  and  Andrews 

(2015); Andrews, Criscuolo, and Gal (2015); and OECD (2016a). 
9 TFP  is  calculated  as  residual  from  the  growth‐accounting  framework  in  Didier  et  al.  (2015).  The  slowdown  happened  despite 

some evidence of somewhat faster cross‐country technology absorption from countries at the productivity frontier (Comin and 
Ferrer 2013; IFC 2016a). 
10  To  the  extent  that  weak  investment  growth  is  associated  with  weak  TFP  growth,  slowing  income  catch‐up  can  be  further 

compounded,  as  TFP  differences  are  a  major  source  of  differences  in  cross‐country  income  per  capita  (Klenow  and  Rodriguez‐
Clare 1997; Hall and Jones 1999; Caselli 2005; and Hsieh and Klenow 2010). An ageing population in many EMDEs, however, may 
be a force in supporting a higher capital level per person (Bussolo, Koettl, and Sinnott 2015). 

                                                                    12 
Although  specific  policy  needs  depend  on  country  circumstances,  in  order  to  have  a  sustained 
improvement in investment growth prospects, it is necessary to employ a full range of available policies—
counter‐cyclical  fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus,  as  well  as  structural  reforms.  A  two‐pronged  approach 
would  simultaneously  boost  public  and  private  investment.  Fiscal  policy  measures  could  help  by  directly 
expanding public investment, while monetary policy could boost activity mainly through lowering the cost 
of  financing  for  investment.  Structural  reforms  could  support  investment  by  addressing  the  factors 
holding  back  private  investment,  including  measures  to  improve  aggregate  growth  and  the  business 
climate, as well as to reduce uncertainty.  

6.1 Fiscal policy 

Public  investment  accounted  for  31  percent  of  total  investment  in  EMDEs  and  15  percent  of  total 
investment  in  AEs,  on  average,  over  the  period  2010‐15.  In  AEs,  public  investment  growth  has  moved 
broadly counter‐cyclically to private investment growth since 2008 (Figure 15). In EMDEs, the broad‐based 
countercyclical surge in public investment in 2008‐09 offset a significant slowdown in private investment 
growth. Post‐crisis, this was followed by a period of easing public as well as private investment growth. In 
the  majority  of  EMDEs,  public  and  private  investment  growth  have  both  been  below  their  long‐run 
averages since 2010 (Appendix 4). 

Policymakers  can  use  public  investment  in  three  ways  to  lift  overall  investment  and  output.  First,  public 
investment  can  raise  domestic  demand  as  part  of  fiscal  stimulus.  Second,  a  shift  in  government 
expenditures toward investment away from less efficient expenditures can make government operations 
more  growth‐friendly.  Alternatively,  revenues  can  be  raised—preferably  in  ways  that  do  not  discourage 
investment—to  finance  public  investment  while  containing  fiscal  deficits.  Third,  even  within  an  existing 
envelope of public investment spending, spending efficiency can be improved to increase the benefits to 
growth from public investment. 

Counter‐cyclical fiscal stimulus. Growth prospects play a major role in investment decisions. To the extent 
that  the  EMDE  growth  slowdown  since  2010  is  cyclical,  fiscal  stimulus  can  help  raise  growth  and 
investment  where  there  is  policy  space  (Didier  et  al.  2015).  The  current  low‐interest  rate  environment 
offers  a  rare  opportunity  to  implement  fiscal  stimulus  with  limited  impairment  of  long‐term  fiscal 
sustainability (Kose et al. forthcoming; OECD 2016c). Provided there is sufficient fiscal space and economic 
slack, and that measures are integrated into a credible medium‐term fiscal framework, fiscal stimulus can 
support output growth (Huidrom, Kose, and Ohnsorge 2016). 

In order to analyze the implications of expansion in public investment for activity and private investment, 
a  vector  autoregression  model  is  estimated  for  eight  EMDEs  with  available  data,  for  1998Q1‐2016Q2. 
Details  of  the  estimation  are  presented  in  Annex  2D.  A  1  percent  increase  in  public  investment  raises 
private investment about 0.26 percent above the baseline after just over a year (a temporary “crowding‐
in” effect). Thereafter, however, this positive effect dissipates and private investment returns toward the 
baseline (Figure 16).  

Although  the  availability  of  cheap  financing  from  global  markets  makes  it  relatively  easier  to  undertake 
fiscal  stimulus  programs,  most  EMDEs  have  limited  fiscal  space  for  expansionary  policy,  given  debt 
burdens  and  sizable  deficits.  In  addition,  cyclical  policies  for  commodity  exporters  may  be  ineffective  if 
they face persistent terms of trade shocks.  



                                                          13 
Expenditure  reallocation  or  revenue  increases.  Absent  room  for  fiscal  stimulus,  spending  on  public 
investment  can  also  be  boosted  by  reallocating  expenditures  towards  growth‐  enhancing  investment  at 
the expense of expenditures that are less clearly aligned with policy priorities. Such offsetting expenditure 
cuts  could  be  identified  in  periodic  Public  Expenditure  Reviews  that  assess  all  government  expenditures 
against  policy  priorities  (for  example,  World  Bank  2015e;  2016c‐d).  Alternatively,  domestic  resources 
could be mobilized through increased revenue collection, whether by strengthening tax administrations, 
broadening  tax  bases,  or  raising  tax  rates.  Revenue‐to‐GDP  ratios  are  particularly  low  in  South  Asia  and 
Sub‐Saharan  Africa  (World  Bank  2015b,  2016e).  Even  absent  hikes  in  tax  rates,  efforts  to  remove 
exemptions,  tighten  tax  administration,  and  broaden  tax  bases  could  yield  revenue  gains  that  could 
increase resources to finance public investment projects.  

Expenditure  efficiency.  Even  if  the  resource  envelope  for  public  investment  cannot  be  increased,  public 
investment  can  be  turned  more  effective  in  reaching  policy  priorities  by  strengthening  expenditure 
efficiency  (Buffie  et  al.  2012).  EMDEs  in  Sub‐Saharan  Africa  and  South  Asia  consistently  score  lowest 
among  EMDE regions in indicators of  efficiency of education and  health care systems  (Herrera and Pang 
2005).  Measures  can  be  taken  both  on  the  revenue  and  the  expenditure  side  to  raise  public  spending 
efficiency. On the revenue side, output‐based funding rules can strengthen incentives for ensuring greater 
efficiency.  On  the  expenditure  side,  medium‐term  budget  frameworks  can  improve  spending 
predictability; greater transparency of  expenditures and independent spending  evaluations can improve 
incentives  to  tighten  efficiency;  and  better  coordination  between  different  levels  of  government  can 
reduce  duplication  and  inconsistencies  (Mandl,  Dierx,  and  Ilzkovitz  2008;  St.  Aubyn  et  al.  2009).  The 
disconnect between spending and asset accumulation of infrastructure services is particularly acute when 
governance and fiscal institutions are weak (Keefer and Knack 2007). 

Expenditure  efficiency  has  also  been  prioritized  by  G20  policymakers  (G20  2015).  Policy  commitments 
among G20 countries include efforts to strengthen cost‐benefit analyses and needs assessments, improve 
prioritization,  increase  the  focus  on  investment  quality,  improve  coordination  of  investment  plans  and 
reduce duplication, and increase transparency. 

Addressing  substantial  investment  needs.  Regardless  of  the  sources  of  financing,  considerable 
investment is needed in all EMDE regions to meet the demands of rapid urbanization and growing activity, 
as well as to achieve the UNDP’s Sustainable Development Goals. In total, such investment needs amount 
to about 1.9‐3.1 percent of GDP per year during 2015‐30, over and above the average EMDE investment 
of 24 percent of GDP during 2010‐15 (UNCTAD 2014; Aschauer 1989; Fernald 1999; Czernich et al. 2011)). 
While specific investment priorities vary widely across regions, investments in infrastructure as well as in 
human capital, in particular health and education, foster long‐term prospects for inclusive growth.11  

Infrastructure  investment.  Infrastructure  investment  gaps  are  sizable  (World  Bank  2016b,  Figure  18).12 


11 Where  investment  needs  are  large  relative  to  public  financial  resources  and  institutions  are  robust,  public  investment  can 

leverage  private  investment  in  public‐private  partnerships  (PPP).  Currently,  the  share  of  the  private  sector  in  infrastructure 
investment  is  30‐80  percent,  depending  on  the  industry,  in  developing  countries  (UNCTAD  2014).  However,  the  share  of  the 
private  sector  in  education  and  health  investment  in  developing  countries  is  modest  at  15  and  20  percent,  respectively.  The 
challenges to designing effective PPPs are summarized in Bloomfield (2006) and Pongsiri (2002).  The beneficial effects of public 
investment projects can be especially large when the economy’s stock of infrastructure capital is relatively low (Calderon, Moral‐
Benito, and Serven 2015). 
12 Even in OECD countries, sizable infrastructure gaps remain to maintain, improve, and expand energy, water, and transportation 

infrastructure (IEA 2014; OECD 2015 a,b). 

                                                                     14 
Investment in infrastructure not only raises investment directly, but can also crowd in private investment, 
under  the  right  conditions.  Crowding‐in  of  private  investment  is  more  likely  if  public  investment  occurs 
amidst  economic  slack  and  accommodative  financial  conditions,  if  there  are  sizable  infrastructure  gaps 
impeding private investment, and if it is implemented in a strong institutional environment with sufficient 
trade and financial openness (Kessides 2004; Appendix 4). 

Investment  in  public  infrastructure  can  spark  large  benefits.  In  particular,  it  can  encourage  urbanization 
in  EMDEs  by  expanding  market  access,  improving  the  delivery  of  services,  fostering  innovation,  or 
reducing transportation costs (Sokoloff 1988; Citigroup 2016). Urbanization, in turn, has been associated 
with higher growth of output as well as labor productivity (Glaeser 2008; World Bank 2009; Dasgupta, Lall, 
and Lozano‐Gracia 2014). Infrastructure capital appears to be inversely correlated with income inequality 
among EMDEs, although the direction  of causality remains a matter of debate (Ferreira 1995; Getachew 
2010; Calderon and Serven 2014). 

Health  investment.  Gaps  in  health  investment  relative  to  the  levels  needed  to  reach  sustainable 
development  goals  remain  substantial  (UNCTAD  2014;  Wagstaff,  Bredenkamp,  and  Buisman  2014). 
Investment  in  health  yields  both  microeconomic  and  macroeconomic  benefits  that  are  associated  with 
aggregate  gains  in  human  welfare.  Healthier  individuals  are  more  productive,  better  at  creating  and 
adapting to new technologies, and inclined to invest more in education (Aghion, Howitt, and Murtin 2011). 
They  also  have  a  longer  life  expectancy  and  are  likely  to  save  more,  which  feeds  back  into  investment 
(Zhang  et  al.  2003).  This  relationship  holds  across  and  within  countries  and  for  numerous  measures  of 
health  outcomes  (Weil  2014).  At  the  macroeconomic  level,  better  health  outcomes  are  associated  with 
higher  growth.13 By  one  estimate,  a  1‐year  improvement  in  a  population’s  life  expectancy  is  associated 
with 4 percent higher output (Bloom, Canning, and Sevilla 2004). 

Educational  investment.  Education  investment  gaps  relative  to  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  also 
remain  sizable  (UNCTAD  2014).  Yet  education  investment  that  improves  worker  skills  or  reduces  skill 
mismatches  can  raise  worker  incomes  and  productivity,  as  well  as  benefit  firms.  For  individual  workers, 
the  average  rate  of  return  to  another  year  of  schooling  is  estimated  to  be  a  10  percent  increase  in  their 
lifetime labor market earnings (Montenegro and Patrinos 2014). For firms, a better match of worker skills 
to  technological  needs  accelerates  firms’  pace  of  technology  absorption  and  expansion  (Winthrop  et  al. 
2013).  This  is  also  reflected  in  the  positive  impact  of  education  investment  on  growth  in  macro‐level 
regressions.14 

Clean  energy  investment.  Progress  in  achieving  the  United  Nation’s  Sustainable  Energy  for  All  Initiative 
objective remains slow (World Bank 2015f). Annual investment in  clean energy is  estimated  to be about 
one‐third  of  that  required  to  achieve  the  initiative’s  goals.  Yet  clean  energy  technologies  can  generate 
more  employment  than  traditional  energy  sources  and  energy‐saving  technologies  can  be  productivity‐
enhancing (Wei, Patadia, and Kammen 2010; Adhvaryu, Kala, and Nyshadham 2016). 

6.2 Monetary policy 

Like  fiscal  stimulus,  monetary  policy  can  boost  growth  and  investment  in  a  cyclical  slowdown.  The  room 
to  employ  monetary  policy  in  the  short  run  varies  significantly  across  emerging  economies.  Most 

13 World Bank (2007); Barro (2013); Baker et al. (2014); Barro and Lee (2015). 
14 By  one  estimate,  1  additional  year  of  male  upper‐level  schooling  can  raise  growth  by  1.2  percentage  points  per  year  (Barro 

2013). Jones (2003) theoretically shows how educational attainment can be interpreted as an investment rate. 

                                                                      15 
commodity‐exporting  EMDEs  have  limited  monetary  policy  space  as  inflation  is  already  above  target 
(Figure  17).  A  number  of  commodity‐importing  EMDEs  (especially  in  Central  and  Southeastern  Europe, 
and  in  South  and  East  Asia)  have  below‐target  inflation  and  thus  have  some  room  to  counteract  shocks 
with  further  interest  rate  cuts.  However,  this  room  may  narrow  once  monetary  policy  tightens  in  major 
advanced economies.  

EMDEs typically have less developed financial systems than AEs, which limits the transmission of monetary 
policy.  EMDE  policymakers  face  a  variety  of  challenges  that  differ  significantly  from  those  facing  their 
counterparts in AEs: a susceptibility to rapid reversals in capital flows and the risks of contagion and full‐
blown  financial  crises;  a  limited  influence  on  global  markets  combined  with  time‐varying  external  credit 
constraints; generally limited ability  to  borrow internationally in  domestic  currency; the  management of 
generally large international reserves; and higher degree of pass‐through from exchange rate fluctuations 
to domestic prices (Chinn 2014; Mishra et al. 2014). 

6.3 Structural reforms 

The  environment  for  EMDE  investment  growth  is  likely  to  remain  challenging.  AE  growth  is  expected  to 
remain  subdued.  Commodity  prices  are  forecasted  to  rise  only  very  gradually  as  excess  supply, 
accumulated  with  strong  pre‐crisis  investment  in  natural  resources,  is  unwound  slowly  (World  Bank 
2016a).  As  monetary  policy  in  AEs  is  expected  to  gradually  normalize  over  the  next  few  years,  financing 
conditions  could  tighten  and  capital  flows  to  EMDEs  may  ease.  To  offset  these  challenges,  sustained 
improvements  in  the  business  climate  and  labor  and  product  markets  are  needed  to  stimulate  private 
investment.  

Efforts  to  increase  public  investment  are  most  effective  in  stimulating  private  investment  and  growth 
when implemented in a conducive business environment. Improvements in the business climate can both 
stimulate investment (domestic and FDI) and amplify the crowding‐in effects of public and foreign direct 
investment—in  addition  to  indirect  benefits  through  higher  growth,  less  informality,  and  more  dynamic 
job  creation  (Didier  et  al.  2015).15 Business  climate  improvements  include  various  areas.  Lower  startup 
costs  are  associated  with  higher  profitability  of  incumbent  firms,  greater  investment  in  information  and 
communications  technology,  and  more  beneficial  effects  of  FDI  for  domestic  investment.  Reforms  to 
reduce  trade  barriers  can  encourage  FDI  and  aggregate  investment  (Appendix  5).  Corporate  governance 
and  financial  sector  reforms  can  improve  the  allocation  of  resources,  including  capital,  across  firms  and 
sectors.  Labor  and  product  market  reforms  that  increase  firm  profitability  can  encourage  investment. 
Stronger property rights can encourage corporate and real estate investment. Improved access to power 
supplies can increase firm investment and productivity.  

The  panel  regression  aforementioned  suggests  that  past  major  reform  spurts  in  EMDEs  have  been 
associated  with  higher  investment  growth.  This  is  also  apparent  in  an  event  study  of  large  spurts  and 
setbacks  in  reforms  among  97  EMDEs  during  1996‐2015  (Figure  19).  In  the  period  of  the  Great 
Moderation,  about  half  of  governance  spurts  occurred  in  commodity  importers.  Details  of  the  approach 
are  discussed  in  Annex  2E.  Reform  spurts  were  associated  with  significantly  higher  (by  more  than  4 
percentage points) investment growth, on average, in the period of the reform. 


15 For  the  linkages  between  these  reform  measures  and  investment  growth,  see  Reinikka  and  Svensson  (2002);  Field  (2005); 

Wacziarg and Welch (2008); Schivardi and Viviano (2011); Munemo (2014); Corcoran and Gillanders (2015); Calcagnini, Ferrando, 
Giombini (2015); and Andrews, Criscuolo and Gal (2015). 

                                                                  16 
Progress in improving business climates has slowed in EMDEs since 2011. During the preceding six years, 
the  cost  of  doing  business,  compliance  times  to  meet  regulations,  and  the  number  of  regulatory 
procedures were cut considerably. On average, EMDEs move 6‐10 percent closer to best practices in these 
dimensions.  Since  2011,  however,  improvements  have  continued  in  EMDEs  but,  on  average,  at  a  slower 
pace (Figure 19). That said, some EMDEs, including China and a number of EMDEs in Europe and Central 
Asia, and Sub‐Saharan Africa, have accelerated their improvements in business climates. 

Policymakers in  G20  countries have identified nine structural reform priorities.  These include promoting 
trade  and  investment  openness;  advancing  labor  market  reform,  educational  attainment,  and  skills; 
encouraging  innovation;  improving  infrastructure;  promoting  fiscal  reform;  promoting  competition  and 
an  enabling  environment;  improving  and  strengthening  the  financial  system;  enhancing  environmental 
sustainability;  and  promoting  inclusive  growth  (G20  2016b).  Measures  that  particularly  benefit 
investment  include,  for  example,  harmonizing  cross‐border  regulations;  easing  or  simplifying  product 
market  regulations;  and  leveling  the  playing  field  between  private  and  state‐owned  enterprises  (G20 
2015).  In  addition,  public  investment  is  to  be  complemented  by  measures  to  strengthen  private 
investment (e.g., promotion of participation of private investors in public‐private partnerships). 

Trade and integration agreements can demonstrate a binding commitment to reforms that will have the 
collateral benefit of improving the investment climate (Kose et al. 2009; Mody and Murshid 2005). Under 
an  enhanced  investment  climate,  stronger  investment  would  also  improve  trade  flows,  as  investment 
weakness has been a major driver of the recent slowdown in global trade. Regional trade agreements can 
help lower nontariff barriers and, thus, encourage  FDI and deepen supply  chain integration  (World Bank 
2016a; Petri and Plummer 2016). To be sustainable, these agreements need to be supported by measures 
to compensate vulnerable groups of society that could be adversely affected.  

7. Conclusions 

Relative  to  double‐digit  highs  before  the  global  financial  crisis,  investment  growth  in  EMDEs  has  slowed 
considerably  and  steadily,  from  10  percent  in  2010  to  3.4  percent  in  2015.  The  most  pronounced 
slowdowns  have  taken  place  in  BRICS  and  in  commodity‐exporting  EMDEs.  Investment  growth  is  now 
below its long‐term average in the largest number of EMDEs over the past quarter century, except during 
periods  of  serious  global  downturns.  Long‐term  investment  growth  expectations  have  repeatedly  been 
scaled  back,  possibly  in  recognition  of  considerably  slower  post‐crisis  output  growth  prospects,  with 
knock‐on effects on investment. The paper’s main findings are as follows: 

Factors  associated  with  the  slowdown.  Whereas  investment  weakness  in  AEs  mainly  reflected  anemic 
output  growth,  investment  weakness  in  EMDEs  has  had  a  range  of  sources.  In  commodity  importers, 
slowing FDI inflows and spillovers from soft activity in major advanced economies accounted for much of 
the  slowdown  in  investment  growth  since  2011.  In  commodity  exporters,  a  sharp  deterioration  in  their 
terms  of  trade  (for  energy  exporters),  slowing  growth  in  China,  and  mounting  private  debt  burdens 
accounted  for  much  of  the  slowdown  in  investment  growth.  In  several  EMDEs,  political  and  policy 
uncertainty has been a key factor associated with investment contractions or slowdowns. 

Spillovers. Over the past five years, AE growth has repeatedly fallen short of expectations partly because 
of  crisis  legacies.  Sub‐par  growth  and  growth  prospects  in  AE  trading  partners  and  source  countries  for 
FDI into EMDEs have slowed EMDE output growth. For every 1 percentage point lower output growth in 
the United States or Euro Area, EMDE output growth fell 0.8‐1.3 percentage points within a year. Perhaps 

                                                         17 
in  recognition  of  prospects  for  a  weaker  external  environment,  EMDE  investment  growth  responded 
about twice as strongly as EMDE output to declines in U.S. and Euro Area growth.  

Sluggish economic activity in major AEs has coincided with a policy‐driven slowdown in investment growth 
in China (Hong et al. 2016). This has contributed to weakening global commodity prices and has weighed 
on  growth  in  other  EMDEs  through  inter‐sectoral  input‐output  links  and,  indirectly,  via  output  growth 
spillovers.  A  1  percentage  point  decline  in  China’s  output  growth  is  associated  with  a  decline  in  output 
growth  within  a  year  of  0.5  percentage  point  (in  commodity  importers)  to  1.0  percentage  point  (in 
commodity  exporters).  In  addition  to  the  overall  output  growth  slowdown  in  China,  a  rebalancing  of 
growth  away  from  trade‐intensive  investment  towards  less  trade‐intensive  sources  of  growth  has 
generated adverse spillovers to other EMDEs, especially for commodity exporters. 

“Investment‐less” credit booms. Investment weakness has been set against the backdrop of exceptionally 
benign domestic (and global) financing conditions until late 2016. Policy interest rates of AE central banks 
are  at  or  near  record  lows  and,  in  several  instances,  negative  (Arteta  et  al.  2016;  World  Bank  2016a). 
Private credit growth in about 30 EMDEs was near or above levels associated with credit booms at some 
point  during  2010‐15.  Historically,  around  40  percent  of  credit  booms  have  coincided  with  investment 
surges.  However,  similar  credit  booms  since  2010  have  taken  place  with  virtually  no  such  investment 
surges but, instead, often with rapidly rising consumption.  

Long‐term  implications  of  weak  investment  growth.  By  slowing  capital  accumulation  and  technological 
progress embedded in investment, weak post‐crisis investment growth has contributed to lower potential 
output  growth  relative  to  pre‐crisis  rates.  This  slowdown  in  potential  growth  could  be  intensified  if 
weakness in investment also sets back total factor productivity growth through a slowdown in embodied 
technological progress.  

Policy  responses.  Policymakers  can  boost  investment  both  directly,  through  public  investment,  and 
indirectly,  by  encouraging  private  investment,  including  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI),  and  by 
undertaking  measures  to  improve  overall  growth  prospects  and  the  business  climate.  Doing  so  directly 
through  expanding  public  investment  in  infrastructure  and  human  capital  (especially  education  and 
health) would help raise demand in the short‐run, increase potential output in the long‐run and improve 
the  environment  for  private  investment  and  trade.  Public  investment  would  also  help  close  investment 
gaps targeted by the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, which have been estimated at up to 
3 percent of global GDP per year. 

More  effective  use  of  counter‐cyclical  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  can  also  promote  private  investment 
indirectly by strengthening output growth, especially in commodity‐exporting EMDEs. These policies may 
be less effective, however, if employed to mitigate the impact of a persistent terms of trade shock. Also, 
there  may be little scope for increased  public investment or expansionary fiscal policy, if  there is limited 
fiscal space. In any event, to raise investment growth sustainably, such policies will need to be buttressed 
by  structural  reforms  to  encourage  both  domestic  private  and  foreign  direct  investment.  Historically, 
reform  waves  in  EMDEs  have  been  associated  with  higher  investment  and  output  growth.  Policy 
frameworks committed to reform, such as expansion of cross‐border trade flows, can help lift investment 
by boosting confidence in growth prospects—not least via attracting FDI. 

 



                                                          18 
Annex 1. Determinants of investment: Empirical framework 

Framework.  As  in  Hall  and  Jorgenson’s  (1967)  seminal  work,  private  investment  is  modelled  as  the  level 
of private investment Ip chosen such that the marginal return on capital (MPK) equals the cost of capital, 
which consists of the real interest rate r and the rate of depreciation of capital ( ):  

                                                                                 

As a result, private investment Ip also  depends on the  determinants of  the marginal product of  capital—
especially  total  factor  productivity  TFP,  the  existing  stock  of  private  capital  Kp,  and  the  availability  of 
complementary  public  capital  Kg.  In  the  presence  of  uncertainty,  the  cost  of  capital  include  a  risk 
premium	 : 

                                                                     ,     ,    , , ,       

Higher  cost  of  capital—whether  due  to  higher  risk  premia  or  higher  risk‐free  real  interest  rates—would 
reduce  investment,  whereas  higher  productivity  and  complementary  public  capital  would  raise  it.  In  the 
data used in this study, the distinction between private and public capital is not available for a broad set 
of  countries.  Hence,  the  analysis  is  based  on  aggregate  investment  I,  including  both  private  and  public 
investment.  

                                                                         , , , ,      
The  investment  growth  regression  employed  in  the  paper  includes  explanatory  variables  as  proxies  for 
elements of this equation. The returns to capital (MPK) are proxied by output growth and terms of trade 
growth. The risk premium is proxied by measures of political uncertainty and financial market uncertainty. 
The cost of financing investment is proxied by FDI inflows, private credit, and the business climate.  

These explanatory variables are also used in an extensive literature that has examined the determinants 
of investment growth. These include weak output growth, the terms‐of‐trade shocks caused by the slide 
in commodity prices since 2011, slow FDI flows, and intermittent bouts of political and policy uncertainty.  

Weak output growth. The weakness in investment growth has coincided with weakness in output growth 
and  a  deteriorating  growth  outlook  for  EMDEs  (Didier  et  al.  2015).  The  growth  slowdown  in  EMDEs  has 
reflected  both  structural  factors  and  cyclical  components.  Weak  growth  prospects  signal  reduced 
opportunities for firms selling their goods and services and thus lead to lower investment. This is captured 
in the “accelerator model,” which assumes that firms aim to maintain a constant capital‐to‐output ratio, 
in  line  with  their  expectations  of  future  output  growth  (Jorgenson  1963;  Jorgenson  and  Siebert  1968). 
Recent work on advanced economies has shown that output growth captures broad trends in investment, 
but  actual  investment  often  falls  short  of  the  model  predictions. 16  In  the  regression,  weak  growth 
prospects are proxied by lagged output growth to reduce concerns about endogeneity.17 


16 Lewis et al. (2014); Barkbu et al. (2015); Banerjee, Kearns, and Lombardi (2015); and Leboeuf and Fay (2016). 
17 Ideally,  growth  prospects  would  be  captured  by  forecasts  for  several  years  ahead.  However,  these  are  highly  endogenous  to 

investment and highly correlated with FDI inflows. Alternatively, a truly exogenous source of output growth would be used, such 
as  changes  in  public  investment.  However,  the  available  panel  data  on  public  and  private  investment  are  sparse  to  conduct  a 
panel  regression.  Some  authors  include  measures  of  foreign  demand  into  similar  types  of  panel  regressions.  However,  when 
included here, export growth is insignificant as its effect is captured by domestic output growth. 

                                                                     19 
Terms of trade movements. Sharp decreases in commodity prices have caused large post‐crisis swings in 
terms  of  trade  (Baffes  et  al.  2015).  Terms  of  trade  developments  shape  growth  prospects  for  both 
commodity exporters and importers. In commodity‐exporting economies, the terms of trade movements 
are dominated by commodity price fluctuations. Weaker terms of trade decreases return to investment, 
especially  in  commodity‐related  projects,  and,  by  reducing  firms’  net  worth,  tighten  their  financial 
constraints. 

Debt overhang.  Elevated private debt may have an adverse impact on firms’ investment for two reasons. 
First,  since  the  benefits  from  investment  are  shared  between  the  owner  and  the  creditors  of  leveraged 
firms, high debt can discourage investment; and, second, high debt may reflect misallocation of capital to 
less innovative firms. This adverse effect is particularly pronounced for investment in an environment of 
weak  growth  prospects  and  in  investment  in  long‐lived  assets,  including  real  estate. 18  The  regression 
includes the lagged private sector credit‐to‐GDP ratio to proxy for household and firm debt burdens and 
the  square  of  the  lagged  private  sector  credit‐to‐GDP  ratio  to  capture  the  balance  between  beneficial 
effects of financial deepening and the adverse effects of debt overhang. 

Reduced FDI inflows. FDI inflows can lift growth both by financing investment and by acting as catalyst for 
additional,  domestically‐financed  investment.  FDI  may  also  have  indirect,  productivity‐enhancing 
“collateral”  benefits  (Kose  et  al.  2009).  These  include  pressures  for  better  institutions,  financial 
development, and more stabilizing macroeconomic policies. The absorption by domestic firms of the new 
technology,  or  managerial  practices,  introduced  by  FDI  can  stimulate  domestic  investment,  provided 
financing is available. Forays into new export markets by domestic firms, encouraged by FDI, may require 
up‐front investment. To fully harness the benefits of FDI for investment, however, a set of conducive initial 
conditions  are  necessary.  These  include  a  sufficiently  skilled  labor  force  that  can  readily  adopt  new 
technologies,  a  developed  financial  system  that  can  readily  finance  productive  new  investment,  sound 
institutions that facilitate firm startup and market entry and exit, and open trade regimes that encourage 
investment  in  industries  with  a  comparative  advantage. 19  The  regression  includes  the  change  in  FDI 
inflows into the reporting economy (in percentage points of GDP) as a proxy for external financing sources 
of investment.20  

Business  climate  and  reforms.  A  number  of  studies  have  highlighted  the  importance  of  the  institutional 
environment  for  investment.  Post‐crisis,  private  investment  recovered  faster  in  countries  with  more 
developed  financial  market  infrastructure,  and  higher  institutional  quality  (e.g.,  governance  quality)  has 
been associated with higher investment.21 To capture the business climate, a dummy variable is included 
for  large  reforms  (two  standard  deviation  improvements)  captured  in  one  of  four  governance  indicators 
(regulatory  quality,  government  effectiveness,  rule  of  law,  and  control  of  corruption).  The  World 
Governance  Indicators  are  typically  highly  persistent  over  time.  Hence,  much  of  their  cross‐country 

18 For arguments based on shared benefits from investment, see Myers (1977); Whited (1992); Occhino and Pescatori (2010); and 

Kalemli‐Ozcan, Laeven and Moreno (2015). For misallocation arguments, see Lamont (2002); Hennessy (2004); Borio et al. (2015); 
Ollivaud, Guillemette and Turner (2016); and Melzer (forthcoming). 
19 Borensztein,  Gregorio  and  Lee  (1998);  Bengoa  and  Sanchez‐Robles  (2003);  Kohpaiboon  (2003);  Alfaro  et  al.  (2004);  Busse  and 

Groizard (2008); Kose, et al. (2009); Azman‐Saini, Law, and Ahmad (2010); and Azzimonti (2016). 
20 Ideally,  non‐FDI  capital  inflows  would  be  included.  However,  this  would  reduce  the  sample  size  by  one‐third  because  of  poor 

data availability pre‐crisis. 
21 Mauro  (1995);  World  Bank  (2005);  Everhart,  Martinez‐Vazquez  and  McNab  (2009);  Morrissey  and  Udomkerdmongkol  (2012); 

Lim (2014); and Qureshi, Diaz‐Sanchez, and Varoudakis (2015). 


                                                                      20 
variability  is  captured  by  the  country  fixed  effects.  Therefore,  the  regression  analysis  here  focuses  on 
periods  in  which  there  are  large,  statistically  significant  improvements  (two  standard  deviations)  in  any 
two‐year period.22  

Policy uncertainty. When firms are uncertain about future demand and future policies, their expected risk‐
adjusted  returns  may  not  exceed  the  costs  of  capital  or  the  returns  on  liquid  financial  assets.  This  may 
make  firms  unwilling  to  commit  to  irreversible  physical  investment,  a  result  found  in  a  number  of  firm‐
level  studies  on  advanced  economies.  In  macroeconomic  studies,  the  uncertainty  generated  by  political 
risk has been shown to weigh on investment (Appendix 2).23 The regression includes, as proxy for political 
stability,  the  International  Country  Risk  Guide  (ICRG)  political  stability  rating.  A  higher  index  indicates 
greater  political  stability.  The  ICRG  political  risk  index  is  a  weighted  average  of  ratings  of  government 
stability, socioeconomic conditions, investment profile, corruption, the role of military in politics, law and 
order,  external  and  internal  conflict,  religious  and  ethnic  tensions,  democratic  accountability,  and 
bureaucratic quality. 

Data. Data sources are drawn from Haver Analytics, World Bank’s World Development Indicators, Oxford 
Economics,  as  well  as  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  Investment  growth  denotes  the  annual  growth 
rate of real gross fixed capital formation. In instances where data on gross fixed capital formation are not 
available, gross capital formation is used as a proxy. 

Methodology. A fixed effects panel regression is used to estimate the correlates of investment growth in 
73  EMDEs  with  populations  above  3  million  for  the  period  1998‐2015.  The  econometric  framework  is 
similar to that of Nabar and Joyce (2009). However, the focus in this paper is on investment growth, as a 
critical component of overall output growth (ultimately, the source of rising living standards), rather than 
changes in the investment‐to‐GDP ratio that would only capture changes in investment growth relative to 
output growth. This is in line with recent studies on advanced economies (Banerjee, Kearns and Lombardi 
2015; Bussiere, Ferrara, and Milovic 2016; Barkbu et al. 2015; Kothari, Lewellen, and Warner 2015) or for 
individual  EMDEs  (Anand  and  Tulin  2014).  The  results  are  shown  in  Annex  Table  1.1.  The  regressions 
control  for  sudden  stops  in  capital  inflows  and  for  country‐fixed  effects.  Since  several  sudden  stops 
occurred during global recessions and slowdowns, they also capture the impact of these episodes.  

Robustness.  The  choice  of  these  explanatory  variables  is  confirmed  by  a  Bayesian  Model  Averaging 
approach  (Annex  Table  1.2).  The  results  are  broadly  robust  across  subsamples,  to  the  inclusion  of  event 
dummies such as for periods of large political risk events, and to the inclusion of five‐year‐ahead growth 
forecasts as additional explanatory variables. An alternative estimation technique, generalized method of 
moments, yields similar estimates. The results are also robust to the use of private investment growth (for 
a  subset  of  countries  and  years)  as  the  dependent  variable.  The  analysis  here  employs  a  parsimonious 
specification  to  reduce  collinearity  between  explanatory  variables.  However,  the  results  are  broadly 
robust  to  controlling  for  lagged  public  debt,  squared  lagged  public  debt,  subcomponents  of  the  ICRG 
index, and terms of trade volatility. 




22 A similar variable can be constructed for major reform setbacks. However, when a dummy variable for such setbacks is included 

in the regression the estimated coefficient is insignificant. 
23 Alesina  and  Perotti  (1996);  Bloom,  Bond,  and  Van  Reenen  (2007);  Gilchrist,  Sim,  and  Zakrajsek  (2014);  Julio  and  Yook  (2012); 

IFC (2016b). 

                                                                       21 
Annex Table 1. 1. Correlates of investment growth 


                                             (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)


                                                         EMDE:
                                                         incl pol.                       5-year
                                                           risk                           ahead                         Private
 VARIABLES                                 EMDE           events          GMM           forecasts         AE          Investment

 Lagged Real GDP growth
 (percent)                                0.429**        0.415**         0.441***          1.717       0.829***         0.381**
                                          [0.163]        [0.164]          [0.168]         [1.219]       [0.157]         [0.186]
 Change in FDI inflows
 (percentage points of GDP)                0.605**        0.602**        0.468**          0.179        0.145***        0.997***
                                           [0.269]        [0.271]        [0.232]         [0.158]        [0.049]         [0.342]
 Political stability                      0.473***       0.405***        0.297**        0.602***         0.017         0.509***
                                           [0.138]        [0.140]        [0.145]         [0.172]        [0.116]         [0.181]
 Lagged credit to GDP ratio
 (percent of GDP)                          -0.095         -0.126*        -0.217**         -0.092        -0.029           0.018
                                           [0.072]        [0.074]         [0.098]         [0.096]       [0.053]         [0.079]
 Lagged credit to GDP ratio,
 squared                                  -0.001**        -0.001*          0.001        -0.002***        -10e-5        -0.002***
                                           [0.000]        [0.001]         [0.001]        [0.000]        [0.000]         [0.000]
 Terms of trade growth (percent)          0.131***       0.132***        0.133***       0.277***          0.026          -0.093
                                           [0.037]        [0.035]         [0.032]        [0.069]        [0.119]         [0.061]
 Large reform spurt                       4.503**          4.266*         2.862*          3.607          -0.149          6.831*
                                           [2.223]        [2.232]         [1.727]        [3.232]        [1.028]         [3.744]
 Large deterioration in political
 stability                                              -3.854**
                                                        [1.526]

 Sudden stop dummy                       -4.094***       -4.059**       -5.381***        -7.495**      -4.543***       -7.151***
                                          [1.544]         [1.544]        [1.220]          [2.664]       [0.901]         [1.703]



 Constant                                -19.315**        -13.811          -7.974       -33.95***        3.162         -22.974*
                                          [9.450]         [9.585]         [8.822]        [9.765]        [9.781]        [11.804]

 Observations                               1,098          1,092           1,098           327            411             809
 R-squared                                  0.126          0.136                          0.270          0.272           0.128
 Number of countries                          73             73              73            20              26              59


Note: Results of a panel regression with country fixed effects for 73 EMDEs during 1998‐2015. Column (1) denotes the baseline 
regression. All coefficient estimates (except that for the squared credit‐to‐GDP ratio) are expected to be positive; the 
coefficient estimate for the squared credit‐to‐GDP ratio is expected to be negative. Column 2 controls for episodes of large 
deterioration in political stability, as defined by two standard deviation below the historical mean. GMM stands for generalized 
methods of moments. Column 4 replaces five‐year ahead forecasts for lagged growth. AE stands for advanced economies. For 
the GMM regression in Column (3), the Wald chi square statistic is 84.25. Column (6) replaces dependent variable with private 
investment growth. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                                                               22 
Annex Table 1.2. Bayesian Model Averaging 

 Dependent variable: Investment growth
 VARIABLES                                                         (1)

 Lagged real GDP growth (percent)                                0.558
                                                                 [1.00]
 Change in FDI inflows (percentage points of GDP)                0.703
                                                                 [1.00]
 Political stability                                             0.126
                                                                 [0.83]
 Lagged credit to GDP ratio (percent of GDP)                     -0.067
                                                                 [0.81]
 Terms of trade growth (percent)                                 0.154
                                                                 [0.99]
 Large reform spurt                                              3.017
                                                                 [0.53]
 Sudden stop dummy                                               -3.777
                                                                 [0.84]
 Constant                                                        -1.116
                                                                 [1.00]

 Observations                                                     1,098

                                                             
Note: Estimation results are based on Bayesian model averaging. The sample is the same as in Annex Table 1.1. 
Probability of inclusion of each variable are in brackets. 



Annex 2. Definitions and methodology 

A. Investment‐less credit booms. Data for the broadest definition of credit are provided by the Bank for 
International  Settlements  for  14  EMDEs  from  1980  to  2015  (Argentina,  Brazil,  China,  Hungary,  India, 
Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Poland, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey).  

For  other  EMDEs,  where  credit  from  the  domestic  banking  system  remains  the  main  source  of  credit 
(Ohnsorge  and  Yu  2016),  annual  data  on  claims  by  banks  on  the  private  sector,  provided  by  the  IMF’s 
International  Financial  Statistics,  are  used  as  proxies  for  credit  to  the  nonfinancial  private  sector.  This 
broadens  the  sample  by  another  41  countries,  mainly  from  2000  onwards.  These  include  Azerbaijan, 
Bahrain,  Bangladesh,  Bulgaria,  Bolivia,  Botswana,  Colombia,  Chile,  Costa  Rica,  Cote  d’Ivoire,  Croatia, 
Egypt,  Gabon,  Georgia,  Ghana,  Guatemala,  Honduras,  Jamaica,  Jordan,  Kazakhstan,  Kenya,  Kuwait, 
Mauritius,  Mongolia,  Namibia,  Nigeria,  Oman,  Pakistan,  Philippines,  Panama,  Paraguay,  Peru,  Qatar, 
Senegal, Serbia, Tunisia, Sri Lanka, Ukraine, Uruguay, República Bolivariana de Venezuela, and Zambia.   

Advanced  economies  (AEs)  included  in  the  sample  are  Australia;  Austria;  Belgium;  Canada;  Denmark; 
Finland; France; Germany; Greece; Hong Kong SAR, China; Ireland; Israel; Italy; Japan; Republic of Korea; 
Luxembourg;  Netherlands;  New  Zealand;  Norway;  Portugal;  Singapore;  Spain;  Sweden;  Switzerland; 
United Kingdom; and United States. 


                                                           23 
B. Implications of rising uncertainty on investment in EMDEs. To assess the role of uncertainty for EMDE 
investment  during  1998Q1‐2016Q2,  aggregate  vector  autoregressive  models  for  18  EMDEs  are  applied. 
Given limited data availability, the sample varies for each  indicator  of uncertainty. Therefore,  a series of 
separate  vector  autoregressive  models  are  estimated.  The  results  are  statistically  significant  within  the 
usual 16‐84 percent confidence bands. 

The sample includes 18 EMDEs with available data for key quarterly macroeconomic indicators and stock 
market indexes: Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Costa Rica, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Paraguay, 
Peru,  Philippines,  Poland,  Romania,  Russia,  South  Africa,  Thailand,  and  Turkey.  The  literature  on 
uncertainty  often  uses  the  option‐induced  volatility  measure  VXO  (e.g.,  Bloom  2009)  or  rich  monthly 
macro‐data  (279  macro  and  financial  series  in  the  case  of  Jurado,  Ludvigson,  and  Ng  2015)  to  construct 
uncertainty measures. However, for many EMDEs, such measures cannot be constructed.  

There  are  two  sources  of  uncertainty:  domestic  and  global.  Global  uncertainty  is  captured  by  financial 
market  and  policy  uncertainty  in  the  United  States  and  the  European  Union  (EU).  Financial  market 
uncertainty is proxied by  the VIX for the United States and by the standard deviation of daily stock price 
changes for the Euro Area. Policy uncertainty is captured by the Economy Policy Uncertainty Index for the 
United  States  and  the  EU.  Domestic  financial  market  uncertainty  is  proxied  by  the  standard  deviation  of 
daily  stock  market  changes;  domestic  policy  uncertainty  is  proxied  by  the  ICRG  index  of  political  risk  or, 
for Brazil, the Economic Policy Uncertainty Index. 

Global uncertainty. Vector autoregressions are used to estimate the impact of global uncertainty on EMDE 
investment.  The  data  consist  of  investment‐weighted  averages  for  18  EMDEs  for  1998Q1‐2016Q2. 
Endogenous  variables  follow  this  Cholesky  ordering:  global  financial  market  or  policy  uncertainty,  EMDE 
stock price index; EMDE bond price index, and aggregate real output and investment in EMDEs. Exogenous 
regressors,  included  with  two  lags,  are:  G7  real  GDP  growth,  world  stock  price  index,  and  U.S.  10‐year 
bond  yields.  For  the  estimation  of  the  impact  of  EU  uncertainty  (as  measured  by  the  EPU),  the  sample 
includes  EMDEs  in  Europe  and  Central  Asia  (Bulgaria,  Hungary,  Poland,  Romania,  Russia,  Turkey).24 The 
results are statistically significant within the usual 16‐84 percent confidence bands.  

Domestic  uncertainty.  Country‐specific  vector  autoregressions  are  used  to  estimate  the  impact  of 
domestic  uncertainty  on  EMDE  investment  growth.  The  sample  includes  data  for  the  same  18  EMDEs  as 
listed above for 1998Q1‐2016Q2. The variables include, in this Cholesky ordering: global financial market 
uncertainty, domestic financial market or political uncertainty, domestic stock prices, short‐term interest 
rates,  and  domestic  real  investment.  G7  real  GDP  growth  is  included  as  an  exogenous  regressor  to 
preserve  degrees  of  freedom.  The  regression  is  estimated  with  two  lags.  The  model  is  adapted  from  the 
Bloom  (2009)  U.S.  model,  with  these  changes:  employment  is  dropped  due  to  data  constraints,  global 
uncertainty  measures  are  added,  and  quarterly  data  replaces  monthly  data.  For  the  full  sample  of 
emerging  market  and  developing  economies,  on  average,  the  impact  of  domestic  uncertainty—whether 
financial  or  political  in  nature—is  insignificant  throughout  the  forecast  horizon.  These  results  are  not 
reported  in  the  text.  Data  for  the  International  Country  Risk  Guide  variables  are  quite  smooth;  a  short‐
term  quarterly  vector  autoregression  model  therefore  struggles  to  identify  any  significant  correlations. 
Economic  Policy  Uncertainty  data  show  more  variance  for  the  Brazilian  economy;  in  these  cases,  the 



24 A similar estimation for other EMDEs yielded insignificant results, likely reflecting weaker trade and financial links with the EU. 



                                                                 24 
estimated  impact  of  domestic  uncertainty  (as  measured  by  the  EPU)  on  domestic  investment  is  highly 
significant.  

C.  Spillovers  from  the  United  States,  the  Euro  Area,  and  China.  In  order  to  quantify  spillovers  from  an 
output  slowdown  in  the  United  States  and  the  Euro  Area,  a  Bayesian  structural  vector  autoregression  is 
estimated  for  1998Q1–2016Q2,  using  weighted  average  data  for  18  EMDEs.  The  sample  includes  Brazil, 
Bulgaria,  Chile,  Costa  Rica,  Hungary,  India,  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  Mexico,  Paraguay,  Peru,  Philippines, 
Poland,  Romania,  Russia,  South  Africa,  Thailand  and  Turkey.  The  regression  includes,  in  this  Cholesky 
ordering: weighted average output growth in major advanced economies and China (excluding either the 
United  States  or  the  Euro  Area),  U.S.  or  Euro  Area  output  growth,  proxies  for  global  financial  conditions 
(U.S.  10‐year  sovereign  bond  yield  and  JP  Morgan’s  EMBI  index),  and  aggregate  output  growth  or 
investment  growth  in  EMDEs  (excluding  China).  To  conserve  degrees  of  freedom,  oil  price  growth  is 
included  as  an  exogenous  regressor  in  the  model.  A  similar  estimation  is  applied  to  estimate  the  impact 
of a slowdown in China’s output or investment growth on EMDE output growth. The regression includes, 
in  this  Cholesky  ordering:  weighted  average  output  growth  in  major  advanced  economies,  proxies  for 
global financial conditions (U.S. 10‐year sovereign bond yield and JP Morgan’s EMBI index), China’s output 
growth  or  China’s  non‐investment  growth  and  China’s  investment  growth,  and  output  growth  in  EMDEs 
(excluding China). The oil price is again included as exogenous regressor.  

D.  Crowding‐in  of  private  investment  by  public  investment.  A  vector  autoregression  is  conducted  to 
estimate crowding‐in of private investment by public investment for eight EMDEs with available data for 
1998Q1‐2016Q2. A decomposition of investment into private and public investment is only  available for 
a  restricted  sample  of  EMDEs.  The  sample  includes  Bulgaria,  Czech  Republic,  Hungary,  Mexico,  Poland, 
Romania, Slovak Republic, and Turkey. These countries are highly open and rank above the EMDE average 
in  the  World  Bank  Doing  Business  indicators.  Variables  included  are,  in  this  ordering:  real  government 
investment,  real  GDP,  real  private  investment,  current  account  balance,  and  the  real  effective  exchange 
rate. The results are statistically significant within the usual 16‐84 percent confidence bands. 

E. Investment growth and reforms. Values in columns of Figure 19 are based on a panel data regression 
in  which  the  dependent  variable  is  real  investment  growth.  A  spurt  (setback)  is  defined  as  a  two‐year 
increase  (decrease)  by  two  standard  deviations  in  one  or  more  of  the  following  four  measures  of  the 
Worldwide  Governance  Index  (WGI):  regulatory  quality,  government  effectiveness,  rule  of  law,  and 
control of corruption. The WGI indicators are principal components of a wide range of survey based and 
other indicators. For each index, the standard deviation is measured as the average of the standard errors 
of the WGI Index in the beginning and at the end of each two‐year interval. Episodes in which there were 
improvements in one measure and simultaneous setbacks in another are excluded. The sample spans 97 
EMDEs over 1996‐2015, and excludes EMDEs with populations less than 3 million. 

Let t denote the end of a two‐year spurt or setback. The coefficients are dummy variables for spurts and 
setbacks  over  the  [t‐3,  t+2]  window  around  these  episodes.  In  Figure  19,  “Reform”  denotes  the  t=[‐1,0] 
window (i.e., around the two years of improvement/deterioration). All coefficients show the investment 
growth  differential  of  economies  during  an  episode  compared  to  those  that  experienced  neither 
improvements nor setbacks. All estimates include time‐fixed effects to control for global common shocks 
and  country‐fixed  effects  to  control  for  time ‐ invariant  heterogeneity  at  the  country ‐ level.  Robust 
standard  error  estimates  during  the  reform  spurt  window  are  jointly  significant  at  the  ten  percent  level 
(Annex Table 2.1).                                       

                                                           25 
Annex Table 2.1. Investment growth around governance reform spurts and setbacks  

 Dependent variable:
 investment growth
 t-3                                      -1.52
                                         (2.74)
 t-2                                      -2.67
                                         (2.37)
 t-1                                       0.84
                                         (2.69)
 Period t of reform spurt               4.58**
                                         (2.01)
 t+1                                       2.32
                                         (2.37)
 t+2                                      -0.46
                                         (2.96)
 s-3                                      -2.33
                                         (3.58)
 s-2                                      -1.05
                                         (2.18)
 s-1                                      -1.81
                                         (2.86)
 Period s of reform setback               -2.17
                                         (2.56)
 s+1                                      -2.02
                                         (2.83)
 s+2                                      -0.78
                                         (2.97)
 Observations                             1,582
 R-squared                                0.127

 Note: The regression includes time and 
 country fixed effects. t indicates the period 
 of the significant reform spurt, s the period 
 of the significant reform setback as defined 
 in Annex 2E. Robust standard errors in 
 parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 




                                                  26 
 Figure 1. Investment growth slowdown 
 Investment growth in EMDEs has slowed sharply since the global financial crisis. In 2015, the share of EMDEs with investment 
 growth below its long‐term average reached its highest level excepting global downturns. Long‐term forecasts suggest 
 continued weakness in investment growth. The investment growth differential between EMDEs and AEs has narrowed. 
  
 A. Investment growth                                                                                             B. Share of EMDEs with investment growth below its long‐
                                                                                                                  term average 
 Percent                                                                                                          Percent of EMDEs
                                                 1990-2008 average
 12                                                                                                               100
                                                 2003-08 average
                                                                                                                   80
     8
                                                                                                                   60
     4                                                                                                             40

                                                                                                                   20
     0
             2010
             2011
             2012
             2013
             2014
             2015

                                           2010
                                           2011
                                           2012
                                           2013
                                           2014
                                           2015

                                                                            2010
                                                                            2011
                                                                            2012
                                                                            2013
                                                                            2014
                                                                            2015
                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                        1990
                                                                                                                                 1992
                                                                                                                                        1994
                                                                                                                                               1996
                                                                                                                                                      1998
                                                                                                                                                               2000
                                                                                                                                                                      2002
                                                                                                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                                                                                                     2006
                                                                                                                                                                                            2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2014
        EMDEs          AEs          World
                                                                                                                                                           
 C. Catch‐up to U.S. per capita incomes                                                                           D. Five‐year‐ahead forecasts of investment growth 
 Number of years                                                            1993-2008                             Percent
 120                                                                        2003-08                                                               EMDEs AEs World
                                                                                                                   10
                                                                            2013-15
 100
                                                                                                                    8
     80
     60                                                                                                             6

     40                                                                                                             4
     20
                                                                                                                    2
         0
                    EMDEs                         EMDE                         EMDE                                 0
                                                                                                                               2010

                                                                                                                                           2011

                                                                                                                                                        2012

                                                                                                                                                                       2013

                                                                                                                                                                                     2014

                                                                                                                                                                                                   2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2016
                                                commodity                   commodity
                                                 exporters                   importers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 E. Difference between AE and EMDE investment growth                                                              F. Share of world investment 
 Percentage points                                                                                                Percent                         EMDEs excluding BRICS
 20                                                                                                                                               Other BRICS
     15                                                                                                            50                             China

     10                                                                                                            40
      5
                                                                                                                   30
      0
     -5                                                                                                            20
 -10
                                                                                                                   10
 -15
             1991
                    1993
                           1995
                                  1997
                                         1999
                                                2001
                                                       2003
                                                              2005
                                                                     2007
                                                                            2009
                                                                                   2011
                                                                                          2013
                                                                                                 2015




                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                           1993-1999                            2000-08                            2010-15                  




Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; International Monetary Fund; Oxford Economics; World Development 
Indicators, World Bank. 
A. Weighted averages. Long‐term average starts in 1991 for EMDEs due to lack of earlier data.  
B. Long‐term averages are country‐specific and refer to 1990‐2008. Latest year is 2015.  
C. Number of years needed to catch‐up with 2015 real per capita GDP level in the United States, assuming average growth rates 
over each period denoted for each group.  
D. Each line shows five‐year‐ahead Consensus Forecasts as of the latest available month in the year denoted. Unweighted 
averages of 21 EMDEs and 25 advanced economies. World sample includes 46 countries. Last observation is for October 2016.  
E. The sample includes 100 EMDEs and 34 AEs. Difference between EMDEs’ and AEs’ weighted average investment growth 
rates.  
F. Each column shows the period average of the share of global investment contributed by each respective group denoted. The 
world sample includes 100 EMDEs and 34 AEs. 

                                                                                                            27 
 Figure 2. Investment growth slowdown: Group‐specific and regional dimensions 
 The slowdown in EMDE investment growth has been pronounced and persistent among BRICS, commodity exporters, and 
 many commodity importers. It has been concentrated in EMDE regions with predominantly commodity‐exporting countries, in 
 Europe and Central Asia, Latin America and Caribbean, and Middle East and North Africa.    
 A. Investment growth                                          B. Investment growth (cont.) 
 Percent                                 1990-2008 average                                   Percent                            1990-2008 average
                                         2003-2008 average                                   14                                 2003-2008 average
 14                                                                                          12
 12                                                                                          10
 10                                                                                           8
  8                                                                                           6
  6                                                                                           4
  4                                                                                           2
  2                                                                                           0




                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                   2011
                                                                                                   2012
                                                                                                   2013
                                                                                                   2014
                                                                                                   2015

                                                                                                                2010
                                                                                                                2011
                                                                                                                2012
                                                                                                                2013
                                                                                                                2014
                                                                                                                2015

                                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                                              2011
                                                                                                                              2012
                                                                                                                              2013
                                                                                                                              2014
                                                                                                                              2015

                                                                                                                                             2010
                                                                                                                                             2011
                                                                                                                                             2012
                                                                                                                                             2013
                                                                                                                                             2014
                                                                                                                                             2015
  0
        2010
        2011
        2012
        2013
        2014
        2015

                              2010
                              2011
                              2012
                              2013
                              2014
                              2015

                                                  2010
                                                  2011
                                                  2012
                                                  2013
                                                  2014
                                                  2015

                                                              2010
                                                              2011
                                                              2012
                                                              2013
                                                              2014
                                                              2015                                  EMDE com.     EMDE com. Large importers    Other
                                                                                                   exp. ex BRICS imp. ex BRICS ex BRICS     importers ex
                 EMDEs           BRICS             AEs                World                                                                   BRICS
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 C. Quarterly investment growth: EMDEs                                                       D. Contributions to EMDE investment growth 
 Year-on-year, percent                      EMDEs                                             Percentage points            Other EMDEs
 15                                         1990-2008 average
                                            2003-08 average                                   12                           Brazil, Russia, S. Africa
                                                                                              10                           India
 10
                                                                                               8                           China
                                                                                               6
  5                                                                                            4
                                                                                               2
  0                                                                                            0
        2010Q1


                     2011Q1


                              2012Q1


                                         2013Q1


                                                   2014Q1


                                                             2015Q1


                                                                          2016Q1




                                                                                              -2
                                                                                                     2010     2011     2012        2013   2014      2015
                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
 E. Regional dimensions                                                                      F. Regional dimensions (cont.) 
 Percent                                    1990-2008 average                                Percent                          1990-2008 average
 15.0                                       2003-08 average                                  12                               2003-08 average


 10.0                                                                                         8

  5.0                                                                                         4

  0.0                                                                                         0
                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                   2011
                                                                                                   2012
                                                                                                   2013
                                                                                                   2014
                                                                                                   2015

                                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                                      2011
                                                                                                                      2012
                                                                                                                      2013
                                                                                                                      2014
                                                                                                                      2015

                                                                                                                                          2010
                                                                                                                                          2011
                                                                                                                                          2012
                                                                                                                                          2013
                                                                                                                                          2014
                                                                                                                                          2015
                 2010
                 2011
                 2012
                 2013
                 2014
                 2015

                                       2010
                                       2011
                                       2012
                                       2013
                                       2014
                                       2015

                                                            2010
                                                            2011
                                                            2012
                                                            2013
                                                            2014
                                                            2015




                 East Asia and         Europe and              Latin                                Middle East         South Asia        Sub-Saharan
                    Pacific            Central Asia         America and                             and North                                Africa
                                                             Caribbean                                 Africa                                               
Sources: Haver Analytics; International Monetary Fund; Oxford Economics; World Development Indicators, World Bank. 
A.B. Weighted averages. Long‐term average starts in 1991 for EMDEs due to lack of earlier data. The EMDE sample includes 126 
economies. “ex BRICS” excludes BRICS economies within each group. Large importers refer to the seven EMDE commodity 
importers ranked in the top 20 EMDEs (ex BRICS) in nominal GDP terms. Other importers include 42 economies. 
C. Weighted averages. Includes 28 EMDEs with available quarterly data. Long‐term averages start in 1991 for EMDEs and are 
based on annual data. Last observation is for Q2 2016. 
D. Percentage point contribution by each country group to EMDE investment growth. 
E.F. Medians across EMDEs of each region to ensure broad‐based representation. Long‐term averages are period averages of 
annual medians. East Asia and Pacific, Europe and Central Asia, Latin America and Caribbean, Middle East and North Africa, 
South Asia, and Sub‐Saharan Africa include 8, 12, 18, 10, 5, and 26 economies, respectively. 

                                                                                       28 
Figure 3.  Investment growth after global downturns 
After an unusually strong rebound in 2010, investment growth in EMDE commodity exporters in 2014‐15 slowed well 
below the average growth rates after previous global downturns. In EMDE commodity importers, investment growth 
has been consistently more anemic than after previous global downturns.  
 
A. Advanced economies                                      B. EMDE commodity exporters 
     Percent         Average     2009                           Percent
                                                                                Average       2009
     10                                                         16
                                                                14
       5
                                                                12
       0                                                        10
                                                                 8
      -5                                                         6
                                                                 4
     -10
                                                                 2
     -15                                                         0
           -2   -1   0   1      2   3     4   5   6                  -2    -1   0     1    2   3      4     5   6
                               Year                                                       Year
                                                                                                                     


C. EMDE commodity importers                                D. World 
 
      Percent                                                    Percent            Average          2009
                     Average       2009                          16
      16
      12                                                         12

       8                                                          8

       4                                                          4

       0                                                          0
      -4                                                         -4
      -8                                                         -8
           -2   -1   0   1      2   3     4   5   6                   -2   -1   0     1    2   3     4      5   6
                               Year                                                       Year
                                                                                                                         

Sources: Haver Analytics, International Monetary Fund, Oxford Economics, World Bank. 
Notes: Unweighted average investment growth. The horizontal axis denotes years. Zero refers to the year of the start of global 
downturns, which include global recessions and slowdowns. Average refers to unweighted average investment growth during 
global recessions and slowdowns of 1975, 1982, 1991, 1998, and 2001. 




                                                                29 
    Figure 4. Economies with investment growing below its long‐term average 
     




    The share of EMDEs with investment growth below its long‐term average has risen since 2012. The increase has been 
    especially pronounced for commodity exporters.  
     
    A. EMDEs with investment growth below long‐term                                                          B. All economies and advanced economies with 
    average                                                                                                  investment growth below long‐term average 
        Percent of countries                                                                                 Percent of countries
        100           Commodity exporters                                                                    100
                                                                                                                         AEs World                      Share = 50
                      Commodity importers
         80           Share = 50                                                                                 80

         60                                                                                                      60

         40                                                                                                      40

         20                                                                                                      20

             0                                                                                                    0
                     2010


                                   2011


                                                 2012


                                                            2013


                                                                          2014


                                                                                        2015




                                                                                                                             2010


                                                                                                                                       2011


                                                                                                                                                 2012


                                                                                                                                                            2013


                                                                                                                                                                           2014


                                                                                                                                                                                         2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
Sources: Haver Analytics; International Monetary Fund; Oxford Economics; World Development Indicators, World Bank.  
A.B. Long‐term averages are country‐specific and refer to the period 1990‐2008. The world sample includes 157 economies. The 
AE sample includes 35 economies, and the EMDE sample includes 78 commodity exporters and 44 commodity importers.  

     
    Figure 5. Investment growth forecasts 
     




    Short‐term and long‐term forecasts for investment growth in EMDEs have declined steadily since 2010. 
     
    A. Next‐year forecasts in EMDEs                            B.  Forecasts: Five‐year ahead expectations   
        Percent                                                                                          Percent                               EMDEs

                                                          GDP             Investment                                                           EMDE commodity importers
        12                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                                                               EMDE commodity exporters
                                                                                                                                               EMDEs: 2015 actual

                                                                                                             6
        8

                                                                                                             4

        4
                                                                                                             2



        0                                                                                                    0
             2008


                    2009


                            2010


                                          2011


                                                  2012


                                                         2013


                                                                   2014


                                                                                 2015


                                                                                        2016




                                                                                                                      2010



                                                                                                                                2011



                                                                                                                                        2012



                                                                                                                                                 2013



                                                                                                                                                          2014



                                                                                                                                                                    2015



                                                                                                                                                                                  2016




                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                          
 
 
A. Next‐year monthly Consensus Forecasts of investment and output growth. Unweighted averages across 18 EMDEs. Latest 
observation is October 2016. 
B. Each column shows five‐year‐ahead Consensus Forecasts as of the latest available month in the year denoted. Unweighted 
averages among 11 EMDE commodity importers and 10 EMDE commodity exporters. Diamond denotes average actual 
investment growth in 2015 for 21 EMDEs. Last observation is for October 2016.




                                                                                                   30 
Figure 6. Global financial conditions and activity 
    Global financing conditions have been exceptionally benign from 2010 until late 2016, with policy rates in EMDEs and AEs at 
    historic lows. Since 2010, output growth has slowed sharply in EMDEs and has been mediocre in AEs. 
 

    A. Monetary policy rates                                        B. Output growth   
    Percent        EMDE commodity exporters                          Percent                            1990-2008 average
                   EMDE commodity importers                             8                               2003-08 average
    40
                   Advanced economies
                                                                        6
    30
                                                                        4
    20
                                                                        2

    10                                                                  0




                                                                            2010
                                                                                   2012
                                                                                          2014
                                                                                                 2016
                                                                                                        2010
                                                                                                               2012
                                                                                                                      2014
                                                                                                                             2016
                                                                                                                                    2010
                                                                                                                                           2012
                                                                                                                                                  2014
                                                                                                                                                         2016
        0
         1980 1986 1992 1998 2004 2010 2016                                        EMDEs                          AEs                      World
                                                                                                                                                                 




                                                                     
                                                                     
Sources: Haver Analytics, World Bank. 
A. Medians for available data for 69 EMDEs and 26 AEs. Last observation is for November 2016. 
B. Weighted averages.  

    Figure 7. Terms of trade and investment growth 
     
    The terms of trade of commodity exporters have deteriorated since 2011, reflecting the 30‐60 percent declines in 
    global energy, metals, and agricultural commodity prices from their early‐2011 peaks. EMDEs with larger declines 
    in their terms of trade experienced lower investment growth over 2010‐15. 
     
    A. Cumulative change in commodity prices                    B.  Investment growth in EMDEs with high and low 
                                                                changes in terms of trade, 2010‐15 
    Percent                 2011Q1-2014Q2                            Percent
    20
                            2014Q2-2016Q3                            8
        0
                                                                     6
    -20

    -40                                                              4

    -60                                                              2

    -80
              Energy    Agriculture    Metals &                      0
                                       minerals    
                                                                                           Low                                      High                         




 
 

Source: World Bank. 
A. Energy index includes crude oil (85 percent weight), coal, and natural gas. Agriculture index includes 21 agricultural 
commodities. Metals and minerals index includes 6 metals traded on the Land & Metal Exchange, plus iron ore. 
B. “Low” and “High” indicates annual terms of trade growth in the bottom and top one‐thirds of the distribution, respectively. 
Difference in medians between “high” and “low” subsamples is significant at the five percent level. Group medians for 108 
EMDEs during 2010‐15. 




                                                              31 
 Figure 8. FDI flows and investment growth 
  
 Since 2010, weak investment growth has partly reflected shrinking FDI inflows among both EMDE commodity importers and 
 exporters. 
                                                                
 A. FDI inflows to GDP in EMDEs                                B. Investment growth in EMDEs with high and low FDI 
                                                               inflows, 2010‐15 
     Percent of GDP                                                        Percent
                        Commodity importers
     6                                                                     7
                        Commodity exporters
                                                                           6
     4                                                                     5
                                                                           4
     2                                                                     3
                                                                           2
     0                                                                     1
          2001
          2002
          2003
          2004
          2005
          2006
          2007
          2008
          2009
          2010
          2011
          2012
          2013
          2014
          2015



                                                                           0
                                                                                      Low                 High              
                                                                        
Sources: International Monetary Fund, World Bank. 
A. Gross FDI inflows as ratios to GDP. Weighted averages. Includes 75 EMDEs. 
B. “Low” and “High” indicate annual change in the FDI to GDP ratio in the bottom and top one‐thirds of the distribution, 
respectively. Difference in medians between “high” and “low” subsamples is significant at the five percent level. Group medians 
for 120 EMDEs during 2010‐15.  
  
 Figure 9. Political stability and investment growth 
  
 Weak investment growth compared to pre‐crisis rates partly reflects reduced political stability since the global financial 
 crisis. 
                                                               
 A. Political stability in EMDEs                              B. Investment growth in EMDEs with strong and weak 
                                                              improvement in political stability, 2010‐15 
 Index           Commodity importers                                   Percent
     68          Commodity exporters
                                                                       6


     64
                                                                       4

     60
                                                                       2
     56
          2000
          2001
          2002
          2003
          2004
          2005
          2006
          2007
          2008
          2009
          2010
          2011
          2012
          2013
          2014
          2015




                                                                       0
                                                                               Weak improvement   Strong improvement    
Sources: Political Risk Services International Country Risk Guide (ICRG). 
A. Lines show unweighted annual average, as measured by the ICRG index, for each group. A decrease in the index denotes 
deteriorating political stability. Includes 95 EMDEs. 
B. “Strong improvement” and “Weak improvement” indicate improvement in political stability from 
2010‐15 in the top and bottom one third of the distribution, respectively. Difference in medians between “strong 
improvement” and “weak improvement” subsamples is significant at the ten percent level. Group medians for 61 EMDEs during 
2010‐15.

                                                              32 
Figure 10. Private debt and investment growth 
    Domestic private debt has risen sharply in EMDEs since the global financial crisis. EMDEs with larger private debt experienced 
    slower investment growth during 2010‐15. 
 

    A. Private debt in EMDEs                                         B.   Investment growth in EMDEs with high and low 
                                                                     private debt‐to‐GDP ratios, 2010‐15 
        Percent of GDP                                                   Percent
         60                                                              7
                                                                         6
        40                                                               5
                                                                         4

        20                                                               3
                         Commodity importers                             2
                         Commodity exporters
                                                                         1
         0
             2000
             2001
             2002
             2003
             2004
             2005
             2006
             2007
             2008
             2009
             2010
             2011
             2012
             2013
             2014
             2015

                                                                         0
                                                                                   Low                  High           




                                                                      
Source: World Bank. 
Notes: Private debt refers to domestic credit to private sector by banks as percent of GDP. 
A. Unweighted averages. Includes 115 EMDEs. 
B. “Low” and “High” indicate median credit‐to‐GDP ratios over 2010‐15 in the bottom and top one‐thirds of the distribution, 
respectively. Difference in medians between “high” and “low” subsamples is significant at the five percent level. Group medians 
for 107 EMDEs during 2010‐15. 
 
Figure 11. Correlates of investment growth 
    Slowing output growth, declining FDI inflows, and worsening terms of trade (for commodity exporters) are associated with 
    lower investment growth in EMDEs. Rising private debt and deteriorating political stability are additional headwinds for many 
    EMDEs.  
                                                                   
    A. Correlates of investment growth                             
                                                                     
        Variable                                            Effect 
        Real GDP growth                                        + 
        Increase in FDI inflows                                + 
        Political stability                                    + 
        Private debt                                           … 
        Private debt squared                                   — 
        Terms of trade improvement                             + 
        Reform spurt                                           + 
     




Source: World Bank. 
Notes: Estimated impact of explanatory variables on investment growth in 73 EMDEs during 1998‐2015, based on a panel 
regression with country fixed effects. The explanatory variables denoted with plus/minus signs are significant at the five 
percent level. Details are discussed in Annex 1.   



                                                               33 
Figure 12. Spillovers from the United States and the Euro Area 
 
Weak growth in the United States and the Euro Area has had adverse spillovers on output and investment in EMDEs. 
 
A. Five‐year ahead growth forecasts for the United States    B. Import intensity of demand components, 2014 
and Euro Area 
Percent                                                                  Percent
                                                                                                 Private Consumption
3.0                  United States      Euro Area                                                Investment
                                                                         40                      Export

2.5                                                                      30

2.0                                                                      20

1.5                                                                      10

1.0                                                                       0
          2010   2011       2012     2013
                                            2014       2015                        China            US           Euro Area
C. Spillovers to EMDE output growth from decline in U.S.                D. Spillovers to EMDE output growth from decline in Euro 
output growth                                                           Area output growth 
Percentage points                                                        Percentage points
    0.0                                                                  0.5
                                                                         0.0
-0.5                                                                     -0.5
                                                                         -1.0
-1.0
                                                                         -1.5

-1.5                                                                     -2.0
                                                                         -2.5
-2.0                                                                     -3.0
           1     2      3     4     5       6   7        8                      1     2      3     4     5   6     7    8
                            Quarter                                                              Quarter
                                                                                                                 
E. Spillovers to EMDE investment growth from decline in                 F. Spillovers to EMDE investment growth from decline in 
U.S. output growth                                                      Euro Area output growth 
Percentage points                                                        Percentage points
1.0                                                                      1.0
    0.0                                                                  0.0

-1.0                                                                     -1.0
                                                                         -2.0
-2.0
                                                                         -3.0
-3.0
                                                                         -4.0
-4.0                                                                     -5.0
-5.0                                                                     -6.0
           1     2      3    4      5       6      7     8                      1     2      3    4      5   6      7    8
                            Quarter                                                              Quarter
                                                                                                                              
Sources: Consensus Economics, World Bank estimates, World Input‐Output Database. 
A. Five‐year ahead Consensus Forecasts as of the latest available month in the year denoted. 
C.‐F. Cumulative impulse response of weighted average EMDE output growth (C.D.) or investment growth (E.F.) at 1‐8 quarters to a 1 
percentage point decline in growth in real GDP in the United States (C.E.) and Euro Area (D.F.). Growth spillovers based on a Bayesian 
vector autoregression of world GDP growth (excluding the source country of spillovers), output growth in the source country of the shock, 
the U.S. 10‐year sovereign bond yield, JP Morgan’s EMBI index, investment (E.F.) or output (C.D.) in EMDEs excluding China. The oil price is 
exogenous. Blue dotted lines denote 16th‐84th percentile confidence intervals, and blue solid lines denote median responses. Sample 
includes 18 EMDEs (Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Costa Rica, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, 
Romania, Russia, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey) from 1998Q1‐2016Q2. 
 




                                                                  34 
    Figure 13. Slowdown in investment and global trade 
     
    The investment growth slowdown across the world has been accompanied by a downturn in the growth of exports 
    as well as capital goods trade. 
     
    A. World investment and exports                         B. Investment and exports growth: EMDEs 
        Log index, 1995=0                                                                            Percent                                                1990-2008 average
         1.4                                                                                                                                                2003-08 average
                                                                                                     12
        1.2             Investment                 Exports

        1.0                    1995-2008 Trend
                                                                                                      8
        0.8
        0.6                                                                                           4
        0.4
        0.2                                  1995-2008 Trend                                          0




                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                                     2011
                                                                                                                             2012
                                                                                                                                    2013
                                                                                                                                            2014
                                                                                                                                                     2015


                                                                                                                                                                 2010
                                                                                                                                                                        2011
                                                                                                                                                                                2012
                                                                                                                                                                                       2013
                                                                                                                                                                                               2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2015
        0.0
              1995
                     1997
                            1999
                                   2001
                                          2003
                                                 2005
                                                        2007
                                                               2009
                                                                      2011
                                                                             2013
                                                                                    2015

                                                                                                                            Investment                                         Exports
                                                                                                                                                                                                              




    C. Global capital goods trade and investment                                                     D. Investment by 5,000 largest multinational 
                                                                                                     companies 
    Index, 2000=100                          Capital goods trade                                     US$, billions                                    US$, billions
    350                                      Investment                                                                         Capital expenditures
                                                                                                     2500                       Acquisition outlays (RHS)        800
    300                                      Pre-crisis trend
                                                                                                                                                                 700
                                                                                                     2000
    250                                                                                                                                                          600
                                                                                                     1500                                                        500
    200
                                                                                                                                                                 400
    150                                                                                              1000                                                        300
    100                                                                                                                                                          200
                                                                                                      500
                                                                                                                                                                 100
        50                                                                                                0                                                      0
              2000
              2001
              2002
              2003
              2004
              2005
              2006
              2007
              2008
              2009
              2010
              2011
              2012
              2013
              2014
              2015




                                                                                                                     2007
                                                                                                                             2008
                                                                                                                                     2009
                                                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                                                                        2011
                                                                                                                                                               2012
                                                                                                                                                                        2013
                                                                                                                                                                                2014
                                                                                                                                                                                        2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                              




 

Sources: Haver Analytics; Thomson ONE; UNCTAD (2016); World Integrated Trade Solution, World Bank; World Bank. 
A. Denotes levels of real gross fixed investment as well as exports. 
B. Weighted averages. Long‐term average for investment starts in 1991 due to data availability. 
C. Capital goods trade and gross fixed capital formation expressed in current U.S. dollars. Trend line shows the pre‐crisis (2003‐
08) trend of the average of capital goods trade. 
D. Top 5,000 MNEs capital expenditures and acquisition outlays based on data from Thomson ONE. 




                                                                                               35 
             Figure 14. Labor productivity, TFP, and investment 
              
             Slowing capital accumulation and total factor productivity growth have lowered EMDE income catch‐up and labor 
             productivity growth. Labor productivity growth has slowed in EMDEs since the crisis, most markedly in economies 
             with relatively low investment growth. 
              
             A. Catch‐up to U.S. per capita incomes                       B.  Average TFP growth 
              Number of years                                        1993-2008                                      Percent                                         Commodity importers
              120                                                    2003-08                                         4                                              Commodity exporters
                                                                     2013-15                                                                                       Dashed lines: Long-term
              100                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                   average
                              80                                                                                     2
                              60                                                                                     1
                              40                                                                                     0
                              20                                                                                     -1
                               0                                                                                     -2
                                           EMDE           EMDE            EMDE                                       -3
                                                        commodity      commodity




                                                                                                                              2003
                                                                                                                                     2004
                                                                                                                                              2005
                                                                                                                                                     2006
                                                                                                                                                            2007
                                                                                                                                                                   2008
                                                                                                                                                                          2009
                                                                                                                                                                                 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                         2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2015
                                                         exporters      importers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
C. Changes in TFP and investment growth: 2010‐15                                                                    D. Differential between EMDEs and AEs in per 
                                                                                                                    capita investment and GDP growth 
Percentage points                                                                                                   Percentage point
                                                                                                                                     Investment per capita                              GDP per capita
                                   30                                                                               20
Change in investment growth




                                   20
                                                                                                                    15
                                   10
                                                                                                                    10
                                    0
                                                                                                                     5
                                   -10
                                   -20                                                                               0
                                   -30                                                                               -5
                                   -40                                                                              -10
                                         -15     -10    -5      0      5      10
                                                                                                                           1991

                                                                                                                                       1994

                                                                                                                                                     1997

                                                                                                                                                               2000

                                                                                                                                                                          2003

                                                                                                                                                                                        2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                 2009

                                                                                                                                                                                                               2012

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2015
                                                   Change in TFP growth                                                                                                                                                               

             E. Labor productivity growth in EMDEs                                                                    F. Labor productivity growth in EMDEs with high and low 
                                                                                                                      investment growth, 2010‐15 
                        Percent                                             Percent                                       Percent
                                               Investment growth
                        12                                                       6                                        4
                                               Labor productivity growth (RHS)
                              10                                                 5
                                                                                                                          3
                               8                                                 4
                                                                                                                          2
                               6                                                 3

                               4                                                 2                                        1

                               2                                                 1                                        0
                               0                                                 0                                                    Low investment                                     High investment
                                                                                                                                         growth                                              growth
                                     2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Sources: Haver Analytics, International Labor Organization, International Monetary Fund, Penn World Table, World Bank. 
A. Number of years needed to catch‐up with 2015 real per capita GDP level in the United States, assuming average growth rates 
over each period denoted for each group. B. Unweighted averages. TFP calculated as residual from the growth‐accounting 
framework in Didier et al. (2015). Dashed lines indicate long‐term average for 1990‐2008 for each respective group. 
C. Correlation of change in investment growth from 2010‐15 with change in TFP growth over the same period. Red dotted line 
denotes the linear regression line. Includes 40 EMDEs. D. Weighted averages. Difference between EMDEs and AEs. The shaded 
areas are global recessions and downturns. E. Weighted averages. Labor productivity is defined as real output per person 
engaged. F. “Low” and “High” indicate annual growth rates in real investment in the bottom and top one‐third of the 
distribution, respectively. Difference in medians between “high” and “low” subsamples is significant at the five percent level. 
Group medians for 123 EMDEs during 2010‐15. 
 


                                                                                                      36 
 Figure 15. Public and private investment 

    In EMDEs, both public and private investment have declined from 2009‐10 peaks. In AEs, post‐crisis public investment 
    contracted as private investment growth stabilized and picked up.  
     
    A. Public investment growth                                         B. Private Investment Growth 
    Percent           1990-2008 average                                  Percent           1990-2008 average
                      2003-08 average                                    20                2003-08 average
        20
                                                                         15
        15
                                                                         10
        10
                                                                          5
         5                                                                0
         0                                                               -5
        -5                                                              -10
    -10                                                                 -15
              2008
              2009
              2010
              2011
              2012
              2013
              2014
              2015

                                     2008
                                     2009
                                     2010
                                     2011
                                     2012
                                     2013
                                     2014
                                     2015




                                                                               2008
                                                                               2009
                                                                               2010
                                                                               2011
                                                                               2012
                                                                               2013
                                                                               2014
                                                                               2015

                                                                                                      2008
                                                                                                      2009
                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                      2011
                                                                                                      2012
                                                                                                      2013
                                                                                                      2014
                                                                                                      2015
                      AEs                 EMDEs                                        AEs                 EMDEs          
Sources: Eurostat, General Statistics Office of Vietnam, Haver Analytics, International Monetary Fund, Ministry of National 
Economy of the Republic of Kazakhstan, OECD, Reserve Bank of India, Sri Lanka Ministry of Finance, World Bank. 
A.B. Public and private investment growth rates are weighted averages of gross fixed capital formation growth rates in the 
public and private sectors, respectively, in constant 2005 U.S. dollars. The sample includes 20 advanced economies and 99 
EMDEs from 1990 to 2015.   
 
  Figure 16. Public investment and growth 

    Public investment boosts output growth and crowds‐in private investment, but the effects dissipate after about two years. 
                                                                   
    A. Cumulative impact on output of a 1 percent increase in     B. Cumulative impact on private investment of a 1 percent 
    public investment                                             increase in public investment 
    Percent deviation from the baseline                                  Percent deviation from the baseline
    0.3                                                                  0.8
                                                                         0.6
        0.2
                                                                         0.4
        0.1                                                              0.2

        0.0                                                              0.0
                                                                        -0.2
    -0.1
                                                                        -0.4
    -0.2                                                                -0.6
              1   3   5     7     9 11 13 15 17 19                             1   3   5     7     9 11 13 15 17 19
                                Quarter                                                          Quarter                  
Sources: International Monetary Fund, World Bank estimates. 
Notes: The graphs show the cumulative impulse responses (percentage points) of output and private investment due to a 
positive shock to government investment, based on a sample of 8 EMDEs for 1998Q1‐2016Q2.Variables included are, in this 
ordering, real government investment, real GDP¸ real private investment, current account balance, and the real effective 
exchange rate. The shock size is such that government investment increases by 1 percent from the baseline on impact. Solid 
lines represent the median, and dotted bands are the 16‐84 percent confidence bands.  




                                                               37 
    Figure 17. Fiscal and monetary policy space 
    Elevated debt and wide fiscal deficits restrict the use of counter‐cyclical fiscal stimulus in a number of EMDEs. Above‐target 
    inflation, especially in many commodity‐exporting EMDEs, constrains the use of monetary stimulus. 
                                                                        
    A. Government debt and fiscal balance                              B. Gap between inflation and inflation target 
    Percent of GDP                                 Percent of GDP                            Percentage points
               Commodity                                       60                            25                                           Range   Median        Mean
    6
               exporters                                               50                     20
    4
               Commodity
    2                                                                  40                     15
               importers
    0                                                                                         10
                                                                       30
    -2                                                                                         5
                                                                       20
    -4                                                                                         0
    -6                                                                 10
                                                                                              -5
    -8                                                                 0                     -10
              2007 2010 2016 2007 2010 2016                                                            Apr-16 Jul-16 Latest Apr-16 Jul-16 Latest
               Balance (LHS)                 Debt (RHS)                                                Commodity exporters Commodity importers                                


Sources: Central Banking News, Haver Analytics, International Monetary Fund. 
A. “Balance” stands for fiscal balance and reflects the unweighted average of 89 commodity‐exporting and 62 commodity‐
importing EMDEs. “Debt” stands for general government debt and reflects unweighted average gross government debt of 86 
commodity‐exporting and 61 commodity‐importing EMDEs. 
B. Figure includes 22 commodity‐exporting and 18 commodity‐importing countries with a stated inflation target and for which 
current inflation data is available. Latest observation is for Nov 2016. 
 
Figure 18. Infrastructure, education, and health investment needs 
    Substantial gaps in infrastructure, education, and health investment needs remain across the world. 
                                                                     
    A. Global infrastructure investment gap                         B. Investment gaps in reaching SDG 
    Percent of global GDP                                   0.58       3.5                   US$, billions
                                                   0.71                                      1,600                    Investment gap, average 2015-30
                                          0.75                                               1,200                    Investment, 2014

                         0.12                                                                 800
               0.27 0.04
    1.01
                                                                                              400

                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                         Water and


                                                                                                                                           security
                                                                                                                                           Climate

                                                                                                                                                       Health

                                                                                                                                                                 Education
                                                                                                          Power



                                                                                                                              Telecoms
                                                                                                                  Transport




                                                                                                                                           change
                                                                                                                                         Sanitation
                Rail




                                                                       Total
      Roads




                       Ports

                               Airports

                                           Power

                                                    Water

                                                             Telecom




                                                                                                                                            Food




                                                                                                                                                                              
Sources: UNCTAD (2014), World Bank (2016b), World Bank estimates. 
A. The figure shows global investment in infrastructure (as percent of GDP) required over 2015‐30, as projected by McKinsey 
Global Institute. 
B. Investment refers to capital expenditure. Upper bounds for the estimated investment needs are reported. Red column 
denotes 2014 or latest available year. SDG refers to the United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals. 




                                                                                       38 
Figure 19. Investment and governance reform  
Reform spurts are significantly associated with higher investment growth. Since 2011, improvements in the 
business climate have continued, but at a slower pace. 
 
A. Growth differentials during reform spurts and                 B. Distance to frontier of Ease of Doing Business 
setbacks 
    Growth differential, in percentage points                     Distance to frontier score
    6                                                                    2004    2005-2010     2011-2016
                                                                 80

    3                                                            60

    0                                                            40

-3                                                               20

-6                                                                  0
            Reform spurt          Reform setback                          Time          Cost      Procedure
                                                                                                               
 
Sources: Doing Business Report, World Bank; Worldwide Governance Indicators, World Bank; Haver 
Analytics; World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund. 
A. The columns show the cumulative investment growth differential of economies during a reform spurt or setback episode, 
relative to those that experienced neither spurts nor setbacks. Spurt (setback) is defined by a two year increase (decrease) 
by two standard deviations in one or more of indexes of regulatory quality, government effectiveness, rule of law, and 
control of corruption. Differentials are based on estimates from a panel data regression with time and country fixed 
effects.The sample includes 75 reform spurt episodes and 71 reform setback episodes among 97 EMDEs over 1996‐2015. 
The growth differential during reform spurt episodes is significant at the ten percent level. See Annex 2E for more details. 
B. Indicates proximity in score to country with the highest‐ranking (best) scores for Ease of Doing Business across all time 
periods with available data. A higher distance to frontier score (DTF) indicates an easier business environment. Unweighted 
averages of 117 EMDEs. “Time” refers to the average DTF of the time to start a business, obtain construction permits, 
connect electricity, registering property, paying taxes, and enforcing contracts. “Cost” refers to the average DTF of the costs 
to starting a business, connect electricity, registering property, and enforcing contracts. “Procedure” refers to the average 
DTF of the number of procedures to starting a business, obtain construction permits, connecting electricity, and registering 
property. Blue column denotes the DTF level in 2004. The red and orange columns denote the change in DTF over the 
respective periods. Each year denoted refers to June of previous year to June of current year.    




                                                              39 
Appendix 1. Investment‐less credit booms25 

Since the global financial crisis, private credit has risen sharply in several emerging market and developing 
economies (EMDEs) and advanced economies (AEs). During this period, credit booms have been unusually 
“investment‐less.” Virtually none of the post‐crisis credit booms have been accompanied by the investment 
surges  that  were  common  in  earlier  episodes.  The  absence  of  investment  surges  during  credit  booms  is 
accompanied by lower growth once the credit boom unwinds. 

Since the global financial crisis, credit to the nonfinancial private sector has risen rapidly in several EMDEs 
while  investment  growth  has  slowed.  In  the  past,  credit  booms  have  often  financed  rapid  investment 
growth,  with  investment  subsequently  stalling.  Against  this  background,  this  appendix  addresses  the 
following questions: 

        How  has  total  investment,  including  both  private  and  public  investment,  evolved  during  credit 
         booms and deleveraging episodes in EMDEs? 

        How often have credit booms been accompanied by investment booms? 

        How has output growth evolved during credit booms and deleveraging episodes in EMDEs? 

The  results  indicate  that  while  investment  often  rose  sharply  during  previous  credit  booms,  this  has  not 
been so for credit booms since 2010. This pattern is cause for concern since, when credit booms unwind, 
GDP growth tends to contract more if the credit boom was not accompanied by an investment surge.  

Data  and  Methodology.  Credit  to  the  nonfinancial  private  sector  consists  of  claims—including  loans  and 
debt securities—on households and nonfinancial corporations by the domestic financial system as well as 
external creditors. Details of the dataset can be found in Annex 1A.  

A  credit  boom  is  defined  as  an  episode  during  which  the  private  sector  credit‐to‐GDP  ratio  is  more  than 
1.65  standard  deviations  above  its  Hodrick‐Prescott  (HP)  filtered  trend  in  at  least  one  year  (World  Bank 
2016b; Ohnsorge and Yu 2016). An episode starts when the deviation first exceeds one standard deviation 
and ends when the credit‐to‐GDP ratio begins to fall. Conversely, a deleveraging episode is defined as an 
episode during which the private sector credit‐to‐GDP ratio is more than 1.65 standard deviations below 
trend  in  at  least  one  year.  The  deleveraging  episode  starts  when  the  ratio  falls  more  than  one  standard 
deviation below trend and ends when the credit‐to‐GDP ratio begins to climb.  

Credit booms and deleveraging episodes are studied within a 7‐year event window that covers their peak 
or trough years (t=0), the three prior years, and the three following years. In the sample used here, there 
have  been  59  credit  booms  and  28  deleveraging  episodes  in  EMDEs.  A  typical  credit  boom  lasted  about 
1.7 years, while an average deleveraging episode lasted about 1.4 years. 

Investment behavior during credit booms and deleveraging episodes  

Credit booms have typically been associated with rising investment. During the median credit boom over 
the  past  two  to  three  decades,  real  investment  grew  by  1  percentage  point  of  GDP  above  its  long‐term 
(HP‐filtered)  trend  until  the  peak  of  the  credit  boom  (Figure  1.1).  In  a  quarter  of  previous  credit  booms, 
the  real  investment‐to‐GDP  ratio  dropped  about  2  percentage  points  below  its  long‐term  (HP‐filtered) 


Note: This appendix was prepared by Shu Yu. 

                                                            40 
trend  over  the  two  years  after  the  peak.  Investment  swung  sharply  in  the  most  severe  credit  boom  and 
bust  episodes.  For  example,  during  the  Asian  financial  crisis  of  the  late  1990s,  in  the  median  affected 
EMDE, investment contracted by 3 percentage points of GDP in 1998 and by 5.6 percentage points of GDP 
in 1999.26 

Similarly,  investment  growth  slowed  during  deleveraging  episodes.  Real  investment  dropped  below  its 
long‐term  trend  by  about  2  percentage  points  of  GDP  during  the  last  three  years  of  the  median 
deleveraging  episode  (Figure  1.1).  After  the  trough  of  a  typical  deleveraging  episode,  real  investment 
growth bounced back and, within three years, rose near or slightly above its long‐term trend. 

Credit and investment booms together 

Although  investment  growth  tended  to  rise  during  credit  booms,  not  all  credit  booms  were  associated 
with  investment  booms.  For  instance,  Mendoza  and  Terrones  (2012)  document  that  the  coincidence 
between  investment  booms  and  credit  booms  in  EMDEs  was  about  34  percent  (26  percentage  points 
lower  than  the  coincidence  in  AEs).  The  moderate  coincidence  of  credit  booms  and  investment  booms 
may reflect credit booms that mainly fueled consumption (Mendoza and Terrones 2012; Elekdag and Wu 
2013). In a quarter of past credit booms, consumption rose above its Hodrick‐Prescott filtered trend by 3 
percentage points of GDP during the peak of the credit boom. Consumption on average fell below trend 
by about 1 percentage point of GDP during deleveraging episodes (Figure 1.1). 

Following  former  studies  and  in  parallel  to  credit  booms,  investment  surges  are  defined  as  years  when 
the  investment‐to‐GDP  ratio  is  at  least  one  (1.65  for  investment  booms)  standard  deviation  higher  than 
its  long‐term  Hodrick‐Prescott  filtered  trend.  Similarly,  episodes  of  investment  slowdown  are  defined  as 
years in which the investment‐to‐GDP ratio is at least one standard deviation  below its Hodrick‐Prescott 
filtered trend.27 

Investment  surges  in  AEs  occurred  with  credit  booms  more  often  than  in  EMDEs,  with  a  more  rapid  rise 
in  investment.  In  EMDEs,  about  40  percent  of  credit  booms  were  accompanied  by  investment  surges 
around  the  peak  year  of  a  credit  boom  (Figure  1.2).  More  than  65  percent  of  investment  surges  that 
coincided with credit booms during the peak year qualified as investment booms in advanced economies, 
but only 56 percent of such investment surges turned out to be investment booms in EMDEs. 

After the global financial crisis, the coincidence between credit booms and investment surges during the 
peak year of a credit boom dropped significantly (Figure 1.2). By 2007, about half of the EMDEs in a credit 
boom  were  also  in  an  investment  surge.  However,  from  2010  onwards,  there  is  virtually  no  EMDE  that 
was both in a credit boom and in an investment surge. The number of EMDEs in a credit boom increased 
from  two  in  2010  to  ten  in  2015  (Azerbaijan,  Bolivia,  China,  Cote  d’Ivoire,  Kenya,  Kuwait,  Oman,  the 
Philippines,  Qatar,  and  Turkey)  while  the  number  of  EMDEs  in  investment  surges  dropped  from  eight  to 
four. 28  In  AEs,  both  the  number  of  countries  in  a  credit  boom  and  the  number  of  countries  in  an 
investment surge fell from around five to almost zero. 




26 The directly affected EMDEs include China, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mongolia, the Philippines, and Thailand. 
27 The results are similar when investment growth, instead of the investment‐to‐GDP ratio, is used. 
28 The four countries are Colombia, Namibia, the Philippines, and Saudi Arabia. The identification of Saudi Arabia is not supported 

by investment growth data. 

                                                                41 
In several countries, rapid credit growth fueled above‐average consumption growth (Bangladesh, Bolivia, 
India,  and  Ghana)  but  no  investment  surge.  During  the  period  between  2012  and  2015,  consumption  in 
EMDEs  was  about  0.5  percentage  point  of  GDP  above  trend,  near  or  above  its  median  expansion  during 
past credit boom episodes (Figure 1.1).  

Output during credit booms and deleveraging episodes  

In general, output has expanded during credit booms, but by less than investment (Mendoza and Terrones 
2012).  Before  the  median  credit  boom  peaked,  output  increased,  on  average,  by  about  3  percent  above 
trend in cases where there was an investment surge and by about 1 percent above trend before the peak 
years of credit booms in cases when there was no investment surge (Figure 1.3). As credit booms unwound 
from their peaks, output  dropped below trend  by more than 2 percent over  two years in the absence of 
investment surges, but by less than half as much when there were investment surges. The more disruptive 
unwinding of credit booms without investment surges may reflect the lack of a boost to potential output 
from  capital  accumulation  that  could  be  provided  by  an  investment  surge.  In  the  recent  wave  of  credit 
surges  since  2012,  EMDE  output  has  evolved  similarly  to  that  of  past  credit  booms  without  investment 
surges.  

During  the  median  deleveraging  episode,  output  fell  by  almost  2  percent  below  trend  (Figure  1.3).  If 
accompanied by an investment slowdown, the decline in output was sharper as output fell from about 1 
percent below trend in the run‐up to the deleveraging to about 3 percent below trend around its trough. 
It took about three years for output to move back to its trend after a deleveraging episode.  

Conclusion 

Since 2010, several EMDEs have experienced rapid private sector credit growth. In contrast to many pre‐
crisis episodes, however, these credit surges have typically not been accompanied by investment surges. 
Output growth during the most recent credit surges has also been lower than in previous episodes. While 
output  has  contracted  as  credit  booms  have  unwound,  it  has  contracted  more  when  credit  booms  have 
occurred without investments surges.  




                                                         42 
Figure 1.1 Investment growth during credit booms and deleveraging episodes  
In EMDEs, in the median credit boom, investment grew by about 1 percentage point of GDP above its long‐term trend 
until  the  credit  boom  peaked.  It  dropped  below  its  long‐term  trend  by  1‐2  percentage  points  of  GDP  before 
deleveraging episodes reached their troughs.  

A. Investment during credit booms                                           B. Investment during deleveraging episodes 
      Percent of GDP                  Median                                      Percent of GDP
                                       Upper and lower quartiles                                         Median   Upper and lower quartiles
       8                                                                          8
                                      Asian financial crisis
       6                              2012-2015                                   6

       4                                                                          4

       2                                                                          2

       0                                                                          0

      -2                                                                          -2

      -4                                                                          -4

      -6                                                                          -6

      -8                                                                          -8
             -3        -2   -1    0          1         2           3
                                                                                         -3         -2       -1      0         1         2    3
                                                                                                                                                   
C.   Consumption during credit booms                                        D. Consumption during deleveraging episodes  

      Percent of GDP             Median                                           Percent of GDP

       6                         Upper and lower quartiles                        6                Median         Upper and lower quartiles
                                 2012-2015

       4                                                                          4


       2                                                                          2


       0                                                                          0


      -2                                                                          -2


      -4                                                                          -4


      -6                                                                          -6
             -3        -2   -1    0          1         2           3
                                                                                         -3         -2       -1      0         1         2    3
                                                                                                                                                    
Sources: Bank for International Settlements; Haver Analytics; International Financial Statistics, International Monetary Fund; 
World Development Indicators, World Bank.  
Notes. The red lines show sample medians while the blue lines show the corresponding upper and lower quartiles. A credit 
boom is defined as an episode during which the cyclical component of the nonfinancial private sector credit‐to‐GDP ratio (using 
a Hodrick‐Prescott filter) is larger than 1.65 times its standard deviation in at least one year. The episode starts when the 
cyclical component first exceeds one standard deviation and ends in a peak year (“0”) when the nonfinancial private sector 
credit‐to‐GDP ratio declines in the following year. A deleveraging episode is defined correspondingly. To address the end‐point 
problem of a Hodrick‐Prescott filter, the dataset is expanded by setting the data for 2016‐18 to be equal to the data in 2015. 
Sample is for available data over 1980‐2015 for 55 EMDEs. 2015 data are not available for Gabon, Nigeria, Senegal, and 
Venezuela, RB. Data are not available for Argentina until 1994, Brazil until 1993, China until 1984, Hungary until 1989, Poland 
until 1992, Russia until 1995, Saudi Arabia until 1993, and Turkey until 1986. Please see the main text of World Bank (2016b) for 
a detailed description of the sample. 
A.B. The cyclical component of investment in percent of GDP (derived by Hodrick‐Prescott filter). The yellow dashed line is the 
median annual investment growth rate of the six EMDEs (China, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mongolia, the Philippines, and Thailand) 
that were affected by the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis (year 1997 is set to be t=0). The light blue dashed line for 2012‐15 shows 
the sample median for the corresponding period. 
C.D. The cyclical component of private consumption in percent of GDP (derived by Hodrick‐Prescott filter). The light blue 
dashed line for 2012‐15 shows the sample median for the corresponding period. 2015 data are not available for Bahrain, 
Bolivia, Costa Rica, Hungary, India, Jamaica (also for 2000‐01), Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Oman, Panama, Thailand, Tunisia, and data 
are not available for Zambia and Venezuela, RB (in 2014). 
 


                                                                           43 
Figure 1.2 Coincidence between investment surges and credit booms 
Before  the  global  financial  crisis,  about  40  percent  of  all  credit  booms  in  EMDEs  were  accompanied  by  investment 
surges around the boom’s peak. Only one quarter of credit booms since 2010 have been accompanied by investment 
surges (and virtually none by investment booms).  
A. Investment surges during past booms in EMDEs                       B. Investment surges during recent credit booms in 
                                                                           EMDEs 
        Percent of credit booms                                                                     Number of countries
        50                                                                                      30               Credit boom with investment surge
                             Investment surge                                                                    Credit boom without investment surge
                                      Investment boom                                           25               Investment surge
        40
                                                                                                20
        30
                                                                                                15

        20                                                                                      10
                                                                                                     5
        10
                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                          2002
                                                                                                          2003
                                                                                                          2004
                                                                                                          2005
                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                          2007
                                                                                                          2008
                                                                                                          2009
                                                                                                          2010
                                                                                                          2011
                                                                                                          2012
                                                                                                          2013
                                                                                                          2014
                                                                                                          2015
            0
                     until 2007            2010 onwards          1980‐2015                                                                                             
Sources: Haver Analytics; International Financial Statistics, International Monetary Fund; Bank for International Settlements; 
World Development Indicators, World Bank. 
Notes. Credit booms are defined as in Figure 1.1. Investment surge is defined as years when the cyclical component of the 
investment‐to‐GDP ratio is at least one standard deviation (1.65 for investment booms) above the HP‐filtered trend, while 
investment slowdown is a year when the cyclical component of the investment‐to‐GDP ratio is at least one standard deviation 
below the HP‐filtered trend. Data availability as in Figure 1.1. 
A. Investment surges during the peak year (t=0) or the following year (t=1). 
 
Figure 1.3 Output growth during credit booms and deleveraging episodes  
In EMDEs, output on average grew above its trend by 2 percent during credit booms and fell below trend by 2 percent 
during  deleveraging  episodes.  Output  growth  during  credit  booms  tended  to  be  stronger  when  accompanied  by 
investment  surges.  During  deleveraging  episodes,  declines  were  deeper  when  accompanied  by  investment 
slowdowns.   
A. GDP during credit booms                                  B. GDP during deleveraging episodes 
            Percent deviation from trend     All                                                    Percent deviation from trend
                                             With investment surge                                                                 All
                                             Without investment surge                                                              With investment slowdown
            3                                2012-2015 (countries in credit booms)                    2                            Without investment slowdown

            2                                                                                         1

            1
                                                                                                      0
            0
                                                                                                     -1
            -1
                                                                                                     -2
            -2

            -3                                                                                       -3

            -4                                                                                       -4
                   -3        -2        -1         0        1         2         3                            -3       -2       -1     0       1       2           3
                                                                                                                                                                       
Sources: Bank for International Settlements; Haver Analytics; International Financial Statistics, International Monetary Fund; 
World Development Indicators, World Bank. Notes. Credit booms and deleveraging episodes are defined as in Figure 1.1 
Investment surges and slowdowns are defined as in Figure 1.2. Data availability as in Figure 1.1. 
A. Group medians for the cyclical components of GDP in percent of its trend (derived using a Hodrick‐Prescott filter) for all 
credit booms (in blue), credit booms with investment surge (occurred in 1 year around t=0, in red), and credit booms without 
investment surge (in yellow). The mean cyclical components of GDP in percent of its HP‐filtered trend for the ten countries 
(including Azerbaijan, Bolivia, China, Cote d’Ivoire, Kenya, Kuwait, Oman, the Philippines, Qatar, and Turkey) in credit booms in 
2015 during 2012‐2015 are in light blue dashed line. B. Group medians for the cyclical components of GDP in percent of its 
trend (derived using a Hodrick‐Prescott filter) for all deleveraging episodes (in blue), deleveraging episodes with investment 
slowdown (occurred in 1 year around t=0, in red), and deleveraging episodes without investment slowdown (in orange).   


                                                                                          44 
Appendix 2. Implications of rising uncertainty for investment in EMDEs29 

Political and  policy‐related uncertainty  has increased since the global financial  crisis for most  EMDEs.  EU 
policy  uncertainty  has  reduced  investment  in  the  EU’s  EMDE  trading  partners,  and  domestic  policy 
uncertainty  has  weighed  significantly  on  investment  in  Brazil.  Global  financial  market  uncertainty  (as 
measured by the VIX) significantly affects EMDE investment.  

Elevated  macroeconomic  and  policy  uncertainty  after  the  crisis  has  contributed  to  weak  investment 
growth in AEs (Kose and Terrones 2015). However, less is known about the implications of uncertainty for 
EMDEs.  This  appendix  examines  the  effects  of  uncertainty  on  investment  growth  by  addressing  the 
following questions: 

        What are the basic sources of uncertainty? 

        How has uncertainty evolved in EMDEs since the 2008‐09 crisis? 

        How has uncertainty affected investment in EMDEs?  

The  results  suggest  a  post‐crisis  rise  in  political  and  policy  uncertainty  in  EMDEs  and  bouts  of  financial 
market  uncertainty  amidst  ample  global  liquidity.  Policy  uncertainty  in  the  European  Union  (EU)—
including that associated with the Euro Area crisis—has weighed on investment in the EU’s EMDE trading 
partners in Europe and Central Asia. Domestic policy uncertainty has sharply curtailed investment in Brazil.  

Basic sources of uncertainty 

Although  uncertainty  is  often  discussed  in  policy  debates,  there  is  no  universally  agreed  measure  of  it. 
This appendix uses three measures for EMDEs, the United States, as well as the EU.  

        Financial  market  uncertainty.  Financial  market  uncertainty  is  measured  by  a  quarterly  financial 
         market  volatility  measure,  which  is  constructed  using  the  realized  standard  deviation  of  daily 
         changes  in  stock  price  indexes  (Bloom,  Bond,  and  Van  Reenen  2007;  Bloom  2009;  Gilchrist,  Sim, 
         and Zakrajsek 2014). The VIX index of implied volatility of the S&P 500 stock market index in the 
         United States is used as an indicator of global financial market volatility. 

        Economic  Policy  Uncertainty.  The  Economic  Policy  Uncertainty  (EPU)  Index  is  a  news‐based 
         measure to capture policy‐related uncertainty developed by Bloom, Baker, and Davis (2016). The 
         EPU  index  is  constructed  from  counts  of  terms  related  to  policy  uncertainty  appearing  in 
         newspapers  in  each  country.  This  measure  is  available  for  four  EMDEs:  Brazil,  China,  India,  and 
         Russia. 

        Political uncertainty. Political uncertainty is measured by the political risk rating developed by the 
         Political  Risk  Services  Group’s  (PRS)  International  Country  Risk  Guide  (ICRG).  The  rating  simply 
         summarizes  expert  judgment  on  each  economy’s  political  environment.  As  used  here,  a  higher 
         value of the index reflects greater political risk. For the four EMDEs with available data, the ICRG 
         risk scores are positively correlated with the EPU Index, suggesting overlap between political risk 
         and policy uncertainty. 



Note: This appendix was prepared by Jongrim Ha, Raju Huidrom and Congyan Tan. 

                                                           45 
Evolution of uncertainty in EMDEs since the 2008‐09 crisis 

In most EMDEs, political and policy uncertainty were higher post‐crisis (2010‐2015) than pre‐crisis (2003‐
2008),  as  indicated  by  the  ICRG‐based  political  uncertainty  and  EPU‐based  policy  uncertainty  measures 
(Figure 2.1). Political risk increased in more than four‐fifths of EMDEs and policy uncertainty increased in 
all four major EMDEs for which data are available. In contrast, financial market volatility, as measured by 
the standard deviation of domestic stock market indexes, declined in most EMDEs, reflecting exceptionally 
accommodative  monetary  policies  and  record‐low  interest  rates  globally.  The  generally  low  post‐crisis 
financial market volatility was disrupted by several bouts of global financial market uncertainty. The VIX, 
which  in  normal  circumstances  tends  to  fluctuate  in  the  10‐30  range,  surged  to  above  40  basis  points 
during periods of intense market concerns about the future of the Euro Area (March‐June 2010 and May‐
September  2011)  and  about  the  stability  of  Chinese  equity  markets  and  growth  prospects  (July‐August 
2015).   

Impact of uncertainty on investment in EMDEs  

To  assess  the  effects  of  uncertainty  on  investment  during  1998Q1‐2016Q2,  a  series  of  vector 
autoregressive  models  were  estimated  for  18  EMDEs.  Two  sources  of  uncertainty  were  distinguished: 
domestic  and  global.  Global  financial  market  uncertainty  was  captured  by  the  VIX.  Global  policy 
uncertainty  was  captured  by  the  EPU  for  the  United  States  and  the  EU.  Domestic  policy  uncertainty  was 
captured by the EPU for Brazil. Details of the estimation are presented in Annex 1B.   

        Global  financial  market  uncertainty.  Global  financial  market  uncertainty  shocks,  as  measured  by 
         spikes  in  the  VIX,  significantly  reduced  EMDE  investment,  in  line  with  findings  of  earlier  studies 
         (Carriere‐Swallow  and  Cespedes  2013).  Specifically,  a  10  percent  increase  in  the  VIX  reduced 
         average  EMDE  investment  growth  by  about  0.6  percentage  point  within  a  year  (Figure  2.2). 
         Financial market uncertainty was the key source of the slowdown in EMDE investment growth in 
         2008‐09.  Bouts  of  global  financial  market  uncertainty  (such  as  during  the  Euro  Area  crisis,  the 
         2013 Taper Tantrum, and the 2016 Brexit) also weighed on EMDE investment. 

        Global policy uncertainty. Policy uncertainty in major AEs could also generate significant spillovers 
         to EMDE investment. Policy uncertainty in the EU had an especially sizable impact on investment 
         in EMDEs in Europe and Central Asia: a 10 percent increase in EU policy uncertainty reduces their 
         investment growth by 0.6 percentage point within a year (Figure 2.3). During the Euro Area crisis 
         in 2010‐12, EU policy uncertainty may have reduced investment growth in EMDEs in Europe and 
         Central Asia by 0.6‐1.3 percentage points with a certain time lag.  

        Domestic  policy  uncertainty.  For  those  EMDEs  for  which  the  EPU  is  available,  domestic  policy 
         uncertainty  also  appears  to  have  been  accompanied  by  significantly  lower  investment:  a  10 
         percent increase in Brazil’s EPU may have reduced investment growth by around 0.8 percentage 
         point within a year.  

Conclusion 

The post‐crisis rise in political and policy uncertainty in most EMDEs has contrasted with a decline in 
financial market uncertainty amidst benign global financing conditions until late 2016. Low global 
financial market uncertainty has supported EMDE investment. In contrast, increased policy uncertainty 
in the EU has significantly reduced investment in EMDEs in Europe and Central Asia.

                                                           46 
    Figure 2.1 Evolution of uncertainty in EMDEs 
    While financial market uncertainty, defined in terms of stock market volatility, has declined in most EMDEs, 
    policy and political uncertainty increased from the pre‐crisis to the post‐crisis period for most EMDEs. Generally 
    low post‐crisis financial market volatility was interrupted by several bouts of global financial market volatility.   
    A. Share of EMDEs with higher uncertainty in post‐           B. Evolution of uncertainty 
    crisis than pre‐crisis.  
        Percent                                                           Index, 2002Q1=0
        100                                                                           Financial market uncertainty
                                                                          6           Political Risk
         80                                                                           EPU
                                                                                      VIX
         60                                                               3

         40
                                                                          0
         20

          0
                                                                          -3




                                                                               2002

                                                                                           2004

                                                                                                         2006

                                                                                                                   2008

                                                                                                                             2010

                                                                                                                                           2012

                                                                                                                                                         2014

                                                                                                                                                                  2016
              Financial market   Political risk       EPU
                 uncertainty
                                                                                                                                                                          
    Sources: Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016); Bloomberg; Haver Analytics; International Country Risk Guide; World Bank 
    estimates. 
    Notes: 33 countries for measure based on standard deviation of daily stock market changes; 102 countries for ICRG political 
    risk score; and 4 countries (Brazil, China, India, and Russia) for the EPU measure. Financial market uncertainty refers to 
    realized standard deviation of daily changes in stock price changes. Political risk refers to the ICRG political risk index 
    (adjusted such that higher index denotes higher risk). 
    A. Pre‐crisis and post‐crisis refer to 2003‐08 and 2010‐15, respectively. To exclude data for the spike in global financial 
    market uncertainty in the wake of the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, pre‐crisis average for financial market uncertainty 
    excludes 2008. Last observation is for Q1 2016.  
    B. All series are normalized to standard deviation of 1. 
 
    Figure 2.2 Financial market uncertainty and investment in EMDEs 
    Rising global financial market uncertainty, as captured by the VIX, reduces EMDE investment. Accommodative monetary 
    policy by major central banks has reduced financial market uncertainty. 
    A. Investment response to a 10 percent increase in the VIX   B. Contribution of the VIX to EMDE investment growth 

    Percentage points                                                                 Percent
        0.0                                                                           16                                  VIX              Others                Actual

                                                                                      12
    -0.5
                                                                                       8

    -1.0                                                                               4
                                                                                       0
    -1.5                                                                              -4
                                                                                      -8
    -2.0
                                                                                                  2008

                                                                                                            2009

                                                                                                                   2010

                                                                                                                           2011

                                                                                                                                    2012

                                                                                                                                                  2013

                                                                                                                                                          2014

                                                                                                                                                                  2015

                                                                                                                                                                             2016




                  1   2     3      4     5        6   7     8
                                 Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Sources: Bloomberg, Haver Analytics, World Bank estimates. 
Note: Vector autoregressions are estimated with sample for 1998Q1‐2016Q2. The model includes, in this order, the VIX, MSCI 
Emerging Markets Index (MXEM), J.P.Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index (EMBIG), aggregate real output and investment 
growth in 18 EMDEs with G7 real GDP growth, U.S. 10‐year bond yields, and MSCI World Index as exogenous regressors and 
estimated with two lags. Estimates for 2016 are based on the first half in 2016 (annualized). 
A. Shows cumulative responses of EMDE investment to a 10 percent increase in the VIX. Solid lines indicate the median 
responses and the dotted lines indicate 16‐84 percent confidence intervals. B. Indicates historical decomposition to EMDE 
investment. “Others” indicates other EMDE and global factors, including stock and bond price index.

                                                                    47 
 Figure 2.3 Policy uncertainty and investment in EMDEs 
 Elevated policy uncertainty in Europe set back investment in ECA. Policy uncertainty has been a significant cause of the 
 investment slump in Brazil since 2013.  

 A. ECA investment response to 10 percent increase in EU                              B. Investment response to 10 percent increase in policy 
 policy uncertainty                                                                   uncertainty in Brazil 

 Percentage points                                                                    Percentage points
  0.5                                                                                 0.0


 -0.5
                                                                                      -1.0
 -1.5


 -2.5                                                                                 -2.0
          1       2          3     4     5             6      7       8                        1       2          3       4    5           6       7        8
                                 Quarter                                                                                 Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                   
 C. Contribution of EU policy uncertainty to ECA investment                           D. Contribution of domestic policy uncertainty to Brazil’s 
 growth                                                                               investment growth 

 Percent                                                                              Percent
 15                                     EPU     Others        Actual                  20                          EPU           Others            Actual
  10
   5                                                                                  10
   0
                                                                                        0
  -5
 -10                                                                                  -10
 -15
 -20                                                                                  -20
                                                                                             2008

                                                                                                    2009

                                                                                                           2010

                                                                                                                      2011

                                                                                                                             2012

                                                                                                                                    2013

                                                                                                                                           2014

                                                                                                                                                   2015

                                                                                                                                                           2016
        2008

               2009

                      2010

                                 2011

                                         2012

                                                2013

                                                       2014

                                                              2015

                                                                     2016




                                                                                                                                                                   
Sources: Bloomberg, Haver Analytics, World Bank estimates. 
A.C. Vector autoregressions are used for estimation on a sample of aggregate EMDE variables for 1998Q1‐2016Q2. The model 
includes the EPU for the Euro Area, emerging market stock price (Euro Area) index, emerging market bond index, aggregate real 
output and investment growth in 6 ECA countries, with G7 real GDP growth, U.S. 10‐year bond yields, and MSCI World Index as 
exogenous regressors and estimated with two lags. 
B.D. Country‐specific autoregressions are estimated for Brazil for 1998Q1‐2016Q2. The model includes the domestic EPU, 
domestic stock market index, domestic short‐term interest rates, and real output and investment growth, with G7 real GDP 
growth and VIX as exogenous controls and estimated with two lags. 
A.B. Show cumulative responses of investment to a 10 percent policy uncertainty shock in the Euro Area and Brazil. Solid lines 
indicate median responses. Dotted lines indicate the 16‐84 percent confidence intervals. Figures C. and D. indicate historical 
decomposition to investment growths in ECA and Brazil, respectively. Estimates for 2016 are based on the first half in 2016 
(annualized).   




                                                                                48 
Appendix 3. Investment Slowdown in China 

Investment  growth  in  China  has  halved  since  2012,  in  a  rebalancing  towards  more  sustainable  growth. 
Private  investment  growth  slowed  sharply  amidst  a  policy‐driven  decline  in  investment  in  state‐owned 
enterprises.30 Most recently, stimulus‐driven infrastructure investment through share‐holding enterprises 
has  partly  offset  a  decline  in  private  and  SOE  investment.  Private  investment  weakness  has  reflected 
deteriorating  business  confidence  and  weak  return  prospects.  The  investment  slowdown  in  China  has 
weighed on output growth in other countries, especially commodity‐exporting EMDEs. 

China  is  deeply  integrated  into  the  global  economy.  Its  imports  account  for  one‐tenth  of  global  imports, 
its output for more than one‐tenth of global output, its investment for one‐fifth of global investment, and 
its investment growth for 42 percent of post‐crisis global investment growth (during 2010‐15).  

A policy‐driven rebalancing away from investment‐ and export‐driven growth towards a more sustainable 
growth model has been underway for several years (Hong et al. 2016). In the process, investment growth 
in  China  slowed  sharply  from  a  stimulus‐driven  21  percent  in  2012  to  10  percent  in  2015—with  global 
repercussions.31 China’s investment slowdown accounted for one‐third of the slowdown in global as well 
as  EMDE  investment  growth  from  2010  to  2015.  Given  the  role  of  China  in  the  global  economy,  it 
generated sizable adverse spillovers to other EMDEs.  

Monthly  data  available  for  nominal  fixed  asset  investment  (FAI)  suggests  a  further  slowdown  in  2016: 
growth  in  this  measure  fell  to  8  percent  (year‐on‐year)  in  October  2016  from  21  percent  in  the  year  to 
December 2012, with a sharp shift in composition from the private sector to the publicly controlled sector. 
FAI  by  state‐owned  enterprises  or  enterprises  with  majority  state  participation  grew  by  20.5  percent 
(year‐on‐year) while private investment growth slowed to 2.9 percent (Figure 3.1).32 Weak private sector 
investment adds to concerns about growth prospects as the private sector generates about 65 percent of 
total investment, around 50 percent of GDP, and 80 percent of employment.  

Against this backdrop, this appendix addresses the following questions: 

     1.    How has investment in China evolved since 2010? 
     2.    What has driven the slowdown in China’s investment growth?  
     3.    How large are the spillovers from China’s investment slowdown? 
     4.    Which policies can support an orderly rebalancing of investment in China?  
 
This appendix documents the slowdown in China’s investment growth as well as its shifting composition, 
with pronounced private sector investment  weakness. The slowdown in China’s investment  growth may 


Note:  This  appendix  was  prepared  by  Ekaterine  Vashakmadze,  Hideaki  Matsuoka,  and  Trang  Nguyen,  with  contributions  from 
Raju Huidrom. 
30 Private  investment  (“minjian”  investment)  is  defined  by  the  Chinese  National  Bureau  of  Statistics  as  the  sum  of  Fixed  Asset 

Investment (FAI) made by enterprises that are registered as collectively‐owned, cooperative, private sole proprietorship, private 
partnership,  private  limited  liability  company,  business  individual,  or  partnership  of  business  individuals.  Private  (“minjian”) 
investment also includes FAI by those enterprises in which the above‐mentioned entities hold a controlling ownership stake. 
31 Major stimulus was initiated in 2009. 
32 In  the  remainder  of  this  appendix,  investment  is  measured  as  FAI  (in  nominal  terms),  for  which  monthly  data  are  available. 

Unlike gross fixed capital formation (in real terms) in the national accounts, it includes purchases of land and other already‐owned 
assets. Real gross fixed capital formation from the national accounts is only available on an annual basis. 


                                                                      49 
have  reduced  commodity‐exporting  EMDEs’  growth  by  about  0.8  percentage  point  a  year,  on  average, 
during 2012‐15. Policy options to reinvigorate private investment include efforts to facilitate private firm 
entry and reduce administrative burdens.  

Evolution of fixed asset investment since 2010 

Sharp slowdown in investment, shift away from private and SOE investment. Overall investment growth 
has  slowed  sharply  to  9  percent  (year‐on‐year)  in  October  2016,  from  10  percent  at  end‐2015  and  24 
percent in 2010 (Figure 3.1). The slowdown was most pronounced in the private sector. In October 2016, 
private  investment  growth  slowed  to  2.9  percent  year‐on‐year—a  steep  slowdown  from  10.2  percent 
growth  a  year  earlier  and  30  percent  in  2012.33 Meanwhile,  state‐owned  enterprise  (SOE)  investment 
growth  also  continued  to  slow  to  ‐6  percent  (year‐on‐year)  in  October  2016  from  12  percent  in  the 
previous  year. 34  The  slowdowns  in  SOE  and  private  investment  were  partly  offset  by  state‐supported 
investment by state‐owned enterprises or enterprises with majority state participation. 

State‐supported  investment  by  state‐owned  enterprises  or  enterprises  with  majority  state 
participation.  To  stem  stock  market  volatility  in  August  2015,  state‐owned  companies  and  government 
units purchased private company shares on the order of 2 percent of stock market capitalization at end‐
2015.35 As  a  result,  the  state  became  the  major  or  controlling  shareholder  in  companies  that  previously 
were not state‐controlled. This reclassification of firms in the official data has exaggerated the divergence 
between SOE, mixed‐ownership enterprise, and private investment in 2016 (Lardy and Huang 2016; Kuijs 
2016; Coflan 2016).36  

Broad‐based  slowdown  in  private  investment  growth.  The  slowdown  in  private  FAI  growth  since  2010 
has  been  broad‐based  across  all  sectors.  Private  FAI  has  actually  contracted  sharply  in  overcapacity 
sectors,  especially  mining  and  construction.  FAI  growth  has  also  slowed  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  as 
weak  export  growth  and  eroding  profit  margins  have  discouraged  investment  spending  by  private 
companies.  Even  in  the  services  sector,  after  9.4  percent  growth  in  2015,  private  investment  growth 
declined to 2.1 percent (year‐on‐year) in 2016H1 and came to a virtual standstill in July 2016 as investment 
in the transport sector stalled.  

Drivers of the investment slowdown 

State‐controlled  enterprises:  Policy‐driven  cuts  in  overcapacity.  The  slowdown  in  SOE  investment 
growth has partly reflected policy‐driven capacity cuts or deleveraging in overcapacity sectors where SOEs 
predominate  (Xing,  Sun,  and  Zheng  2016).  Microeconomic  policy  interventions,  especially  since  2013, 

33 Narrowly  defined  private  investment  growth  that  refers  to  private  enterprises  also  slowed  from  30  percent  in  2012  to  9.7 

percent in October 2016. 
34 SOE refers to state‐controlled or non‐corporatized SOEs. 
35 The purchase happened in August 2015, but the reclassification started from 2016. The SOE assets reported by SOE jumped in 

August 2015 (Lardy and Huang 2016). 
36 State investment includes three components: state enterprises, government administrative units, and public institutions. State 

enterprises  include  1)  traditional  state‐owned  companies;  2)  state‐owned  companies  that  have  been  converted  to  a  corporate 
form of ownership, typically a limited liability or joint stock company, in which the state is the sole, majority, or dominant owner; 
3) companies, including joint ventures, in which the state and a non‐state firm or individual each contribute 50 percent of a firm’s 
capital; and 4) consultatively state‐controlled companies in which the state capital contribution is less than that of one or more 
other  shareholders  but  in  which  the  state  exercises  control  by  virtue  of  agreement  with  the  other  shareholders  or  capital 
contributors.  State  investment  also  includes  investment  by  government  administrative  units  and  public  institutions  (Lardy  and 
Huang 2016). 

                                                                     50 
have sharply reduced activity in officially designated “excess capacity” or polluting industries, such as coal 
and steel production. These cuts are likely to continue in the medium‐term. In February 2016, additional 
capacity reduction targets were announced for coal and steel and a fund was established to re‐employ or 
compensate  affected  workers.  Capacity  cuts  were  accompanied  by  other  measures  to  strengthen  SOE 
efficiency, including ten pilot programs for SOEs introduced in September 2015 and February 2016. Some 
provinces began in June 2016 to restructure unviable SOEs.  

Private  enterprises:  Falling  returns.  Just  over  a  third  of  the  deceleration  in  private  investment  growth 
thus far in 2016 can be attributed to the slowing manufacturing sector (Qu and Wang 2016). Weakness in 
manufacturing investment reflects deteriorating business confidence and rising funding costs amid weak 
return  prospects.  Slowing  export  and  domestic  demand  growth  and  persistent  producer  price  deflation 
have weighed on return prospects. Between 2011 and 2015, the  annual return on investment of  private 
industrial enterprises has been estimated to have fallen by 3 percentage points to 8.5 percent, according 
to  official  data.  Despite  recent  efforts  to  cut  red  tape,  private  enterprises  still  face  high  entry  barriers, 
sales taxes, and surcharges by comparison with other countries in the region (Ernst and Young 2016). 

Spillovers from China’s investment growth slowdown 

While the investment growth slowdown is an integral part of ensuring sustainable growth in China in the 
medium to longer term, it has had significant negative repercussions on activity both domestically, given 
investment’s large share in China’s GDP (about 43 percent in 2015), and globally because of China’s large 
role  in  the  global  economy.  A  slowdown  in  investment  spills  over  to  other  sectors  of  the  domestic 
economy through industry and financial linkages.37 Since investment is more import‐intensive than other 
components  of  demand,  adverse  external  spillovers  from  China’s  investment  slowdown  have  been 
particularly pronounced. For example, China imports large volumes of minerals and metals from countries 
in  Latin  America  and  Sub‐Saharan  Africa  (World  Bank  2015a,  c).  Thus,  about  40‐50  percent  of  China’s 
import growth slowdown from 2014‐15 has been attributed to weak investment (Kang and Liao 2016).  

The  GDP  growth  slowdown  triggered  by  an  investment  slowdown  can  generate  sizable  cross‐border 
spillovers  (World  Bank  2016a;  Huidrom,  Kose,  and  Ohnsorge  forthcoming).  A  structural  vector 
autoregression model was estimated for 1998Q1–2016Q2 for 18 EMDEs to assess the magnitude of these 
spillovers. Details of the estimation are described in Annex 2C. 

Since  much  of  investment  is  resource‐intensive,  the  impact  of  an  investment  slowdown  on  commodity‐
exporting  EMDEs  is  measured  to  be  twice  that  on  commodity‐importing  EMDEs.  A  1  percentage  point 
decline in Chinese annual investment growth reduces output growth in commodity‐exporting EMDEs, on 
average, by 0.3 percentage point over the following year, about one‐third the impact of a similarly‐sized 
slowdown  in  overall  output  growth  in  China.  In  2012‐15,  slowing  investment  growth  in  China  may  have 
reduced  commodity‐exporting  EMDEs’  annual  output  growth  by  as  much  as  0.8  percentage  point  on 
average (Figure 3.2). 

Policies to support an orderly rebalancing of investment  

A  slowdown  in  China’s  investment  growth  has  been  necessary  to  ensure  sustainable  growth.  However, 
the concentration of the slowdown thus far in private investment raises concerns about growth prospects. 

37For example, real estate investment in China, which accounts for 25 percent of FAI, has extensive industrial and financial linkages 

with other sectors of the domestic economy (Ahuja and Nabar 2012a). 

                                                                 51 
Weak private investment lowers prospects for potential output growth, which is already under pressure 
from a shrinking working‐age population and slowing total factor productivity growth. Potential growth is 
expected to slow from 10.6 percent in 2010 to 6 percent in 2020.  

In rebalancing the economy from investment‐led towards more sustainable growth, the authorities face 
two challenges: to sustain private investment growth and to limit adverse spillovers from slowing private 
investment  growth  to  other  parts  of  the  economy.  Following  an  in‐depth  study  in  seven  provinces,  the 
government  announced  a  range  of  measures  over  the  past  two  years.  These  include  efforts  to  facilitate 
entry  by  private  firms  in  a  broader  range  of  sectors;  and  to  promote  public‐private  partnerships  in 
activities accounting for 14 percent of 2016 GDP. To ease concerns about the inefficiency of public‐private 
partnerships and limited access for private firms to such projects, the government is drafting regulations 
to protect private investors in the partnerships. In the short term, this may be complemented by monetary 
stimulus and tax reductions to encourage private investment.  

Conclusion 

A policy‐driven slowdown in investment growth has been underway in China since 2012. This has weighed 
on  global  output  growth,  especially  in  commodity‐exporting  EMDEs.  China’s  investment  slowdown  has 
been accompanied by a particularly sharp decline in investment growth in private enterprises, reflecting 
deteriorating business confidence and weakening return prospects. The slowdown in private investment 
raises  concerns  about  potential  growth  prospects,  against  the  backdrop  of  an  aging  population  and 
slowing  productivity  growth.  Policies  to  rekindle  private  investment  include,  in  particular,  measures  to 
facilitate market access by private firms. 




                                                        52 
Figure 3.1. Investment growth in China 
Investment growth has slowed sharply since 2012, especially private investment (or “minjian” investment) growth. 
The  slowdown  in  private  investment  growth  has  been  broad‐based,  with  only  a  modest  part  explained  by  data 
reclassifications.  The  private  investment  slowdown  reflects  deteriorating  business  confidence  and  weakening 
returns prospects, partly as a result of weaker demand prospects but also because of rising impediments to firms’ 
startup and exit, contract enforcement, and tax payments. 

A. Fixed asset investment (FAI) growth                                             B.  Sectoral  contribution  to  private  (“minjian”) 
                                                                                   investment growth 
    Percent,                  Enterprises with state participation                          Percentage points, year-on-year
    year-on-year,                                                                                               Service
    6mma                      Private ("minjian")
                                                                                                                Construction
                              Total                                                                             Electricity/ Gas/ Water production
    50                                                                                      25                  Manufacturing
                                                                                            20                  Mining
    40
                                                                                            15
    30
                                                                                            10
    20
                                                                                             5
    10
                                                                                             0
     0
                                                                                            -5
      2006        2008        2010           2012     2014          2016
                                                                                                                       2013                               2014                                               2015                           2016YTD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
C. Business confidence                                                             D. Change in doing business’ distance to frontier 
                                                                                   rankings from 2010 to 2016 
 Index                   Entrepreneurs Confidence                                      Index
90                       General Business Confidence                                   20
                                                                                                                                            Overall change in score
                         Profitability                                                 15
80                                                                                     10

                                                                                        5
70
                                                                                        0

60                                                                                     -5

                                                                                   -10
                                                                                               of Minority Investors




                                                                                                                                                                       Getting Electricity


                                                                                                                                                                                             Enforcing Contracts




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Paying Taxes
                                                                                                                       Getting Credit

                                                                                                                                        Registering


                                                                                                                                                      Trading across




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Starting a Business


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Insolvency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Resolving
50
                                                                                                                                         Property


                                                                                                                                                          Border
                                                                                                    Protection




40
         2008

                2009

                       2010

                               2011

                                      2012

                                               2013

                                                      2014

                                                             2015

                                                                      2016




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Sources: China Economic and Industry Data Database, China’s National Statistical Office, Haver Analytics, The Conference 
Board, World Bank. 
A.B. “Enterprises with state participation” includes enterprises that are state‐owned or those with state participation. 
Investment is defined as fixed assets investment, which differs from gross fixed capital formation in the national accounts by 
including land sales. Six‐month moving averages (6mma) of year‐on‐year growth rates. Latest observation is October 2016. 
See Footnote 30 for the definition of private (“minjian”) investment. 
C. China industrial enterprise survey of 5000 leading enterprises to rate their perception on selected topics. Index higher 
than 50 indicates improvement. Latest observation is 2016Q3. 
D. Distance of China to the “frontier”‐best performers whose score is 100. An increase in scores indicates improvement; a 
decrease deterioration.  




                                                                                 53 
Figure 3.2. Spillovers from China 
Since  investment  in  China  accounts  for  a  large  share  of  domestic  output  and  is  import‐intensive,  its  investment 
growth slowdown has weighed on output growth, both domestically and in other EMDEs.   

A. Import intensity of China’s investment, exports and  B. Share of investment in China’s GDP 
consumption, 2014 
    Percent                                                                      Percent of GDP
                                                                                 60
    20
                                                                                 50
    15                                                                           40

    10                                                                           30

                                                                                 20
     5
                                                                                 10
     0
              Private             Investment              Export                  0
            Consumption                                                                         2010                         2015                  
C.  Response  of  EMDE  output  growth  to  a  decline  in  D.  Contribution  of  China’s  investment  and  non‐
China’s investment, export and output growth                investment  movements  to  commodity‐exporting 
                                                            EMDE growth 
    Percentage point                                                         Percentage point

                    16-84 percent confidence bands      Median                   3
    0.2
                                                                                 2
    -0.2
                                                                                 1
    -0.6                                                                         0

    -1.0                                                                         -1

    -1.4                                                                         -2
                                                                                             Other
                                                                                 -3          China's growth excluding investment
    -1.8
                                                                                             China's investment
           Investment   Export   GDP    Investment   Export      GDP
                                                                                 -4          Actual
                Commodity exporters           Commodity importers
                                                                                 -5
                                                                                      2010      2011       2012      2013          2014   2015
                                                                                                                                                  
Sources:  Haver  Analytics,  International  Monetary  Fund,  Oxford  Economics,  World  Input  Output  Database,  World  Bank 
estimates. 
C.  Cumulative  impulse  response  of  weighted  average  EMDE  output  growth  after  1  year  to  a  1  percentage  point  decline  in 
growth  in  real  investment,  real  exports,  and  real  GDP  in  China.  Investment  spillovers  based  on  a  Bayesian  vector 
autoregression of world GDP growth (excluding China), the U.S. 10‐year sovereign bond yield, JP Morgan’s EMBI index, growth 
in the non‐investment component of China’s real GDP, China’s real investment growth, and real  GDP growth in the spillover 
destination  group.  Oil  price  is  exogenous.  Exports  and  real  GDP  replace  real  investment  in  models  that  estimate  spillovers 
from exports and output. Sample includes 18 EMDEs from 1998Q1‐2016Q2. Blue bars denote 16th‐84th percentile confidence 
interval, red dots denote median of posterior distribution. 
D. Historical contribution of China’s investment and non‐investment growth based on model used for Figure C. Line denotes 
unweighted average demeaned GDP growth. 




                                                                           54 
Appendix 4. Interactions between public and private investment38 

Both public and private investment have decelerated in EMDEs since the global crisis. Although the effect 
of public investment on private investment has been mixed, the impact is more likely to be positive in the 
presence  of  economic  slack,  accommodative  financial  conditions,  sizable  investment  needs,  sound 
institutions, and available skilled labor. The effect on private investment is uneven, but public investment 
generally does not “crowd out” private investment. 

Public  investment  accounted  for  31  percent  of  total  investment  in  EMDEs  and  15  percent  of  total 
investment in AEs, on average, over the period 2010‐15. Initiatives to boost public investment, including 
as part of a fiscal stimulus, could therefore directly lift GDP  considerably. In addition  to this  direct effect 
on activity, public investment has at times proven a catalyst for private investment.  

This appendix analyzes recent trends in public and private investment and the effects of public investment 
on private investment and growth. In particular, it addresses the following questions: 

        How have public and private investment evolved since the 2008‐09 crisis? 

        What are the macroeconomic implications of public investment? 

        Which policies can increase the benefits of public investment? 

The  appendix  documents  the  weakening  public  and  private  investment  growth  in  EMDEs.  An  extensive 
literature suggests that public investment can significantly raise output and trade and help support better 
infrastructure.  In  addition,  it  is  associated  with  lower  income  inequality.  The  evidence  on  the  impact  of 
public  investment  on  private  investment,  in  contrast,  is  mixed.  Policy  measures  can  be  implemented  to 
increase the benefits from public investment and mitigate fiscal pressures.  

Evolution of public and private investment since the 2008‐09 crisis 

Post‐crisis  public  investment  slowdown.  The  fiscal  stimulus  implemented  in  many  countries  in  2008‐09 
to  counter  the  economic  impact  of  the  financial  crisis  lifted  public  investment  growth  above  long‐term 
averages  in  both  AEs  and  EMDEs.  In  AEs,  this  boost  has  subsequently  reversed:  public  investment 
contracted  sharply  in  2011,  while  the  cumulative  growth  rate  after  2011  has  remained  negative  (Figure 
4.1).  In  EMDEs,  public  investment  growth  also  has  been  weak  and  has  remained  below  its  long‐term 
average, with the exception of 2012. From 2014‐15, it began to ease further. This pattern largely reflected 
sizable  initial  fiscal  stimulus  and  subsequent  policy  tightening  in  large  EMDEs,  especially  China,  which 
accounts for more than half of EMDE public investment.  

However,  in  the  majority  of  EMDEs,  public  investment  growth  was  below  its  long‐term  average 
throughout  2010‐15  (Figure  4.2).  In  most  regions,  public  investment  growth  slowed  from  pre‐crisis 
averages  but  remained  robust  above  long‐term  averages  in  2008‐09.  Thereafter,  investment  growth 
slowed  steadily  in  all  regions,  except  Sub‐Saharan  Africa  (SSA),  to  below  long‐term  averages.  This 
slowdown  may  partly  reflect  increasing  financing  constraints  as  fiscal  space  eroded  following  fiscal 
stimulus during the crisis.  




Note: This appendix was prepared by Yoki Okawa.  

                                                          55 
Private  investment  growth  slowdown.  In  AEs,  public  investment  moved  broadly  counter‐cyclically  with 
private investment: surging during the private investment collapse of 2008‐09 and contracting in the wake 
of  the  crisis  as  private  investment  stabilized  and  began  to  recover  from  its  deep  2008‐09  contraction.  A 
similar pattern occurred in EMDEs during the recession of 2008‐09, when surging public investment offset 
a halving in private investment growth to 7 percent (from 16 percent in 2006‐07). After the 2010 rebound, 
however,  private  investment  growth  slowed  in  synchronization  with  public  investment  growth.  In  more 
than half of all EMDEs, private investment growth during 2010‐15 remained below the long‐term average. 
It was weakest in ECA, mainly as a result of spillovers from the Euro Area crisis, and MENA, where political 
uncertainty in the wake of the Arab Spring weighed on sentiment.  

Macroeconomic implications of public investment 

An  extensive  literature,  summarized  in  several  recent  survey  papers  (Straub  2011;  Estache  and  Garsous 
2012;  Pereira  and  Andraz  2013;  Bom  and  Ligthart  2014),  has  discussed  the  macroeconomic  benefits  of 
public  investment.  These  benefits  have  included  higher  growth,  more  trade,  and  less  income  inequality. 
The effects of public investment on private investment and public finances appear to be more mixed.  

Growth. Investment to build public  capital lifts growth in AEs, although estimates vary widely. Estimates 
of  the  output  elasticity  of  public  capital  averages  0.14  but  ranges  from −1.7  for  New  Zealand  to  2.0  for 
Australia. Estimates of the long‐run effect are about three times estimates of the short‐run impact. Local 
government  capital  generates  somewhat  higher  output  gains  than  central  government  capital,  with 
considerable  cross‐regional  spillovers  (Pereira  2000;  Bom  and  Ligthart  2014).  Estimates  of  the  output 
elasticity  of  public  investment  are  typically  smaller  for  EMDE  than  for  AEs,  possibly  reflecting  the 
heterogeneity  within  the  former  group  (Straub  2011;  Kraay  2014).  Estimates  of  the  output  elasticity  of 
infrastructure  capital  are  somewhat  higher  than  those  for  general  public  capital.  In  EMDEs,  the  level  of 
infrastructure  capital  can  have  a  sizable  effect  on  labor  productivity.  The  higher  infrastructure  capital  of 
upper‐middle  income  EMDEs  (relative  to  lower‐income  EMDEs)  increases  output  per  worker  by  5.2 
percent in the long run (Calderon et al. 2015).  

Links  between  public  and  private  investment.  The  impact  of  public  investment  on  private  investment 
depends on the presence  of economic  slack, the stances of fiscal  and monetary policy, possible financial 
market  reactions,  the  magnitude  of  investment  needs  as  well  as  the  institutional  and  physical 
environment. Public investment that increases the fiscal deficit in an environment of tight monetary policy, 
large government debt, and limited economic slack  can “crowd out”  private investment  (Mankiw 2012). 
Such  crowding  out  has  been  demonstrated  in  AEs  (Erden  and  Holcombe  2005)  as  well  as  in  EMDEs  that 
are not open to trade and financial flows, have weak institutions, or small skilled labor forces (Cavallo and 
Daude 2011; Warner 2014; Presbitero 2016). In contrast, public investment has been found to “crowd‐in” 
private investment (through positive effects on prospective demand and activity, and increased investor 
confidence) in some EMDEs, including the lowest‐income countries and those with stronger institutional 
safeguards but sizable infrastructure needs (Cavallo and Daude 2011; Dreger and Reimers 2014; Eden and 
Kraay 2014; Bahal et al. 2015; Cerra et al. 2016).  

Trade.  Better  public  infrastructure,  especially  trade‐facilitating  infrastructure,  can  increase  international 
trade. Improved port and airport facilities and telecommunication quality raise export and import volumes 
significantly  (Nordas  and  Piermartini  2004;  Ismail  and  Mahyideen  2015).  By  one  estimate,  bringing  the 
trade‐facilitating  infrastructure  of  below‐average  member  countries  of  the  Asia  Pacific  Economic 


                                                           56 
Cooperation  Forum  (APEC)  to  half  the  APEC  average  increased  intra‐APEC  trade  by  about  10  percent 
(Wilson et al. 2002). 

Income inequality. Infrastructure capital and income inequality are negatively correlated in both AEs and 
EMDEs  (Calderon  and  Serven  2014),  although  the  presence  of  a  causal  relationship  is  still  debated. 
Enhanced public infrastructure may reduce income inequality as well as promote growth if it benefits the 
poor more than proportionally (Ferreira 1995; Getachew 2010; Fournier and Johansson 2016).  

Fiscal space. Increased public expenditure can put pressure on government finances, at least in the short‐
run and especially if  the government already has a sizable  deficit  or debt. In the long‐run, well‐executed 
high‐yielding  public investment  programs, including in low‐income  countries, can generate  tax revenues 
that  exceed  their  initial  cost,  especially  if  the  financing  cost  is  low  (Buffie  et  al.  2012).  For  AEs  with 
economic slack and accommodative monetary policy, infrastructure investment can also be self‐financing 
over the long‐run (Abiad et al. 2015; Holtz‐Eakin and Mandel 2015). However, if the productivity of public 
investment is low, for example because of an already‐high stock of public capital, it is likely to leave a long‐
term legacy of higher debt (Holtz‐Eakin and Mandel 2015; ECB 2016).  

Policies to increase the benefits of public investment 

Improve efficiency of public investment. The difference between the output and revenue gains associated 
with public investment and its fiscal cost can be made more favorable by strengthening the efficiency of 
public  investment.  Public  investment  is  generally  less  efficient  in  EMDEs  than  in  AEs  (Albino‐War  et  al. 
2014; Dabla‐Norris et al. 2012). Its efficiency can be increased in EMDEs through a strategically planned, 
well‐prioritized, rigorous and transparent project selection process and through strengthened institutions 
to  fund,  manage,  execute,  and  monitor  project  implementation  (Albino‐War  et  al.  2014;  IMF  2015; 
Rajaram et al. 2010). 

Mitigate short‐term fiscal pressure. Public investment and public infrastructure investment, in particular, 
is characterized by large initial expenses that need to be weighed against long‐term returns. Even efficient 
and, over the long‐term, self‐financing public investment projects may pose short‐term fiscal challenges. 
External  financing,  especially  through  concessional  loans,  can  mitigate  short‐term  domestic  financing 
constraints (Buffie et al. 2012). Well‐designed public private partnerships, particularly with foreign private 
sectors, can help reduce fiscal pressure as well. Developing and strengthening a pipeline of infrastructure 
investment projects can attract investors with lower costs (McKinsey Global Institute 2016).   

Conclusion 

Post‐crisis,  slowing  public  investment  growth  in  EMDEs  has  accompanied  a  steady  decline  in  private 
investment  growth.  Public  investment  can  raise  output  in  the  short  run  as  well  as  in  the  long  run,  and 
stimulate trade. Public infrastructure is negatively related to income inequality, although the presence of 
a causal relationship remains debated. Evidence on the effects of public investment on private investment 
is  mixed.  However,  public  investment  is  more  likely  to  crowd  in  private  investment  in  the  presence  of 
economic  slack,  accommodative  financial  conditions,  sizable  investment  needs,  well‐developed 
institutions,  and  a  sufficiently  skilled  labor  force.  Improved  project  selection  and  monitoring,  as  well  as 
better governance, may enhance the benefits from public investment.  




                                                            57 
Figure 4.1 Public and private investment growth 
In AEs, public investment growth has moved broadly counter‐cyclically to private investment growth since 2008. In 
EMDEs,  the  counter‐cyclical  public  investment  boost  of  2008‐09  offset  a  sharp  slowdown  in  private  investment 
growth,  but  was  followed  by  a  period  of  slowing  public  and  private  investment  growth.  Private  investment 
weakness was most pronounced in BRICS and commodity‐exporting EMDEs. 

A. Public investment growth                                          B. Private investment growth 

Percent           1990-2008 average                                   Percent                                    1990-2008 average
                  2003-08 average                                     20                                         2003-08 average
20
                                                                      15
15
                                                                      10
10                                                                      5
    5                                                                   0
    0                                                                  -5
    -5                                                               -10
-10                                                                  -15
         2008
         2009
         2010
         2011
         2012
         2013
         2014
         2015
         2008
         2009
         2010
         2011
         2012
         2013
         2014
         2015




                                                                                    2008
                                                                                    2009
                                                                                    2010
                                                                                    2011
                                                                                    2012
                                                                                    2013
                                                                                    2014
                                                                                    2015
                                                                                    2008
                                                                                    2009
                                                                                    2010
                                                                                    2011
                                                                                    2012
                                                                                    2013
                                                                                    2014
                                                                                    2015
               AEs                      EMDEs           
                                                                                                          AEs                                                      EMDEs                                      




C. Contributions to investment growth                                D. Contributions to investment growth 

Percentage points                                                    Percentage points
                                                                     16                                                            Public                   Private
12
10                 Public     Private                                12

 8                                                                       8
 6
                                                                         4
 4
 2                                                                       0

 0                                                                    -4
                                                                             2010
                                                                                     2011
                                                                                            2012
                                                                                                   2013
                                                                                                          2014
                                                                                                                 2015
                                                                                                                        2010
                                                                                                                                2011
                                                                                                                                       2012
                                                                                                                                              2013
                                                                                                                                                     2014
                                                                                                                                                            2015
                                                                                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                                                                                          2011
                                                                                                                                                                                 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                        2013
                                                                                                                                                                                               2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2015
-2
         2010
         2011
         2012
         2013
         2014
         2015
         2010
         2011
         2012
         2013
         2014
         2015
         2010
         2011
         2012
         2013
         2014
         2015




                                                                                     Commodity                                   Commodity                                       BRICS
                                                                                    exporters excl.                            importers excl.
          World             AEs           EMDEs                                        BRICS                                       BRICS
                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                      

Sources:  Eurostat,  General  Statistics  Office  of  Vietnam,  Haver  Analytics,  International  Monetary  Fund,  Ministry  of  National 
Economy of the Republic of Kazakhstan, OECD, Reserve Bank of India, Sri Lanka Ministry of Finance, World Bank. 
Note:  Public  and  private  investment  growth  rates  are  weighted  average  of  gross  fixed  capital  formation  growth  rates  in  the 
public  and  private  sectors,  respectively,  in  constant  2005  U.S.  dollars.  The  sample  includes  20  advanced  economies  and  99 
EMDEs for 1990 to 2015.    




                                                                    58 
Figure 4.2 Comparison of public and private investment growth with long‐term average 
In  the  majority  of  EMDEs,  both  public  and  private  investment  growth  since  2010  have  been  below  their  long‐run 
averages. 

A.  Countries  with  public  investment  growth  below  B.  Countries  with  private  investment  growth  below 
1990‐2008 average                                       1990‐2008 average 

Percent                                                              Percent
           2006-07      2010-13      2014-15                                    2006-07      2010-13      2014-15
100                                                                   80
                                                                      70
 75                                                                   60
                                                                      50
 50                                                                   40
                                                                      30
 25                                                                   20
                                                                      10
   0                                                                   0
                AEs                  EMDEs             
                                                                                    AEs                    EMDEs             




Sources:  Eurostat,  General  Statistics  Office  of  Vietnam,  Haver  Analytics,  International  Monetary  Fund,  Ministry  of  National 
Economy of the Republic of Kazakhstan, OECD, Reserve Bank of India, Sri Lanka Ministry of Finance, World Bank. 
Note:  Public  and  private  investment  growth  rates  are  weighted  average  of  gross  fixed  capital  formation  growth  rates  in  the 
public  and  private  sectors,  respectively,  in  constant  2005  U.S.  dollars.  The  sample  includes  20  advanced  economies  and  99 
EMDEs for 1990 to 2015. Figures show the share of EMDE and AEs (in percent) in which public and private investment growth 
was below the 1990‐2008 average during the periods specified. Line indicates half of the sample.   

        




                                                                    59 
Appendix 5. Macroeconomic implications of foreign direct investment: A brief review.39 

This  appendix  reviews  a  large  literature  on  the  impact  of  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  on  growth  and 
domestic  investment.  FDI  can  boost  domestic  growth  and  investment  through  technology  transfers,  new 
managerial practices, new input‐output linkages, and easier access to international markets. However, the 
empirical  evidence  for  the  impact  of  FDI  is  mixed,  as  the  benefits  from  FDI  are  diluted  by  unskilled  labor, 
weak institutions, lack of financial development, and unfavorable compositions of FDI. The most important 
benefits  of  FDI  are  likely  to  be  collateral  ones,  such  as  pressures  for  improved  institutions  and 
macroeconomic stability, that buttress activity more broadly. 

Introduction 

FDI  can  benefit  home  and  host  countries  alike.  By  investing  abroad,  home  country  firms  benefit  from 
greater  and  more  diversified  growth  opportunities  and  lower  production  cost  (Herzer  and  Schrooten 
2008;  Desai,  Foley  and  Hines  2009).  The  host  country,  on  the  other  hand,  receives  investment,  and  the 
technological  upgrades  that  are  inherent  in  investment,  and  financing  (De  Mello  1997,  Barrell  and  Pain 
1997, Glass and Saggi 2002).  FDI is often accompanied by higher infrastructure investment that benefits 
domestic and foreign firms alike (Alfaro et al. 2004).  

This appendix summarizes the findings of an extensive literature to address the following questions. First, 
what is the impact of FDI on growth in EMDEs? Second, what is the impact of FDI on domestic investment 
in EMDEs? Third, how can policies help boost FDI and its benefits? 

This appendix documents the following findings in the literature. The literature has struggled to establish 
a causal, positive effect of FDI on growth or investment. The benefits from FDI for growth and investment 
are  most  pronounced  in  the  presence  of  a  conducive  initial  condition.  Such  initial  conditions  include  a 
sufficiently skilled labor force that can readily adopt new technologies; a developed financial system that 
readily finance productive new investment; sound institutions that facilitate firm startup and market entry 
and exit; and open trade regimes that encourage investment in industries with a comparative advantage. 
Moreover, greenfield FDI is more likely to generate positive spillovers than mergers and acquisitions and 
FDI in  manufacturing  more likely to  have beneficial  forward and  backward linkages. The  most important 
impact  of  FDI  may,  however,  be  collateral  benefits  that  support  activity  more  broadly,  such  as  greater 
pressure for improved governance, institutions and macroeconomic stability.  

What is the impact of FDI on growth in EMDEs? 

Mixed  evidence  for  the  impact  of  FDI  on  growth.  The  literature  has  struggled  to  establish  a  causal, 
positive effect of FDI on growth. This may reflect reverse causality from growth to FDI, third factors driving 
both FDI and growth, pooling of diverse data, or several offsetting effects of FDI on growth. Several studies 
have  attempted  to  disentangle  the  direction  of  causality  and  control  for  a  comprehensive  set  of  other 
factors. Many authors have found no robust causal effect of FDI on growth (Kose et al. 2009; Edison et al. 
2002); others have found a causal effect from FDI to growth (Hansen and Rand 2006; Driffield and Jones, 
2013); and yet others have found a causal link from growth to FDI (Chowdhury and Mavrotas 2006; Choe 
2003). Even for studies that have established a significant impact of FDI on growth, the estimated impact 



39Note: This appendix was prepared by Mai Anh Bui.  



                                                             60 
is  positive  in  some  studies  (Hansen  and  Rand  2006;  Cipollina  et  al.  2012;  Driffield  and  Jones,  2013)  but 
negative in others (Herzer 2012; Prasad, Rajan and Subramanian 2007).  

Offsetting effects. Offsetting effects could explain the lack of robust evidence for FDI benefiting growth. 
FDI could promote growth and increase productivity by encouraging technology spillovers (De Mello 1997, 
Barrell and Pain 1997), strengthening competition (Glass and Saggi 2002), fostering the acquisition of new 
human  capital  (Djankov  and  Hoekman  2000),  facilitating  access  to  new  export  markets  (Kneller  and  Pisu 
2007;  Kokko,  Zejan  and  Tansini  2001),  and  introducing  new  ideas  and  innovations  (Romer  1993).  On  the 
other  hand,  foreign  firms  may  protect  their  technology  or  domestic  firms  may  not  be  in  a  position  to 
absorb  the  new  technology  to  benefit  from  spillovers.  In  addition,  foreign  firms  that  compete  with 
domestic  firms  in  product  and  factor  markets  may  use  fewer  domestically  produced  inputs  than  the 
domestic firms they replace (Kose, Prasad, Rogoff and Wei 2009; Görg and Greenaway 2004).  

Country‐specific initial conditions. As a result of such offsetting effects, the impact of FDI on growth can 
be highly country‐specific. It depends on sectoral differences in FDI and interactions with initial conditions 
that  are  necessary  to  reap  the  benefits  from  FDI.  Such  initial  conditions  include  developed  financial 
markets, strong institutions, an educated workforce, and trade openness:  

        Financial development. Countries with well‐developed financial markets gain more from FDI since 
         their  domestic  firms  and  workers  can  access  financial  resources  to  retool  technologies  and 
         practices (Alfaro et al. 2004; Azman‐Saini, Law and Ahmad 2010; Edison et al. 2002).  

        Adequate human capital. Countries with a higher‐skilled workforce are better‐equipped to absorb 
         the  new  technology  that  is  brought  into  the  host  country  by  FDI  (Bengoa  and  Sanchez‐Robles 
         2003; Borensztein, Gregorio and Lee 1998) 

        Trade  openness.  If  trade  is  open,  FDI  is  more  likely  to  enter  industries  in  which  the  host  country 
         has a comparative advantage. Activity is likely to be subject to fewer restrictions that could slow 
         the transfer of new technologies to domestic firms (Balasubramanyam, Salisu and Sapsford 1996; 
         Makki and Somwaru 2004; Kohpaiboon 2003) 

        Sound  institutions.  Strong  institutions  encourage  spillovers  between  FDI  and  domestic 
         investment.  Excessive  regulations  may  discourage  the  firm  startups  and  exits  that  may  be 
         triggered  by  FDI  or  may  prevent  the  allocation  of  capital  to  sectors  in  which  FDI  is  encouraging 
         innovation (Bengoa and Sanchez‐Robles 2003, Alguacil, Cuadros and Orts 2011, Driffield and Jones 
         2013, Busse and Groizard 2008).  

        Sectoral composition of FDI. FDI in the primary and services sectors tends to have fewer backward 
         and  forward  linkages  to  other  domestic  sectors  and,  hence,  boost  growth  less  than  FDI  in  the 
         capital‐intensive  and  technologically  advanced  manufacturing  sector  (Aykut  and  Sayek  2005; 
         Cipollina et al. 2012; Chakraborty and Nunnenkamp 2008).  

What is the impact of FDI on domestic investment in EMDEs? 

Crowding  out  or  in?  Several  of  the  channels  that  would  ensure  that  FDI  lifts  growth  work  through 
domestic investment.  The absorption by domestic firms of the new technology introduced by FDI would 
stimulate  domestic  investment,  provided  financing  is  available.  New  forays  into  export  markets  by 



                                                            61 
domestic  firms  may  require  up‐front  investment.  Hence,  in  addition  to  directly  increasing  domestic 
investment, FDI would have spillovers to domestic investment by domestic firms.  

Mixed  evidence.  Just  as  for  the  link  between  FDI  and  growth,  the  literature  has  struggled  to  establish  a 
robust empirical link between FDI and domestic investment. Some studies find a positive effect of FDI on 
domestic investment (Bosworth and Collins 1999; Mody and Murshid 2005; Mileva 2008; Ang 2009; Desai, 
Foley and Hines 2009) but others find insignificant or mixed effects (Bonfiglioli 2008; Agosin and Machado 
2005; Kamaly 2014). The mixed results can be explained by a number of factors:  

        Industry  linkages  versus  competitive  pressures.  FDI  in  underdeveloped  industries  may  increase 
         demand for inputs from domestic suppliers, thus fostering domestic investment. In contrast, FDI 
         that competes with domestic firms in crowded product markets may drive domestic firms out of 
         business and reduce domestic investment (Arndt, Buch and Schnitzer 2010; Agosin and Machado 
         2005).  

        Greenfield FDI versus mergers and acquisitions. Since mergers & acquisitions are merely a transfer 
         of ownership of existing production, they may generate fewer benefits to activity than greenfield 
         investment (Mileva 2008; Agosin and Machado 2005).  

        Underdeveloped  financial  markets.  Even  if  FDI  invigorates  incentives  for  domestic  investment,  a 
         lack of funding in underdeveloped markets may prevent such investment (Pels 2010).  

        Endogeneity.  Empirical  studies  may  be  underestimating  positive  feedback  loops  from  synergies 
         between  FDI  and  domestic  investment,  where  FDI  fosters  domestic  investment  which,  in  turn, 
         signals  high  returns  to  investment  and  encourages  further  FDI  inflows  (Ndikumana  and  Verick 
         2008).  

Conclusion 

FDI inflows to EMDEs have tripled since 2000 and now account for about one‐third of global FDI inflows. 
The literature has found mixed evidence that FDI lifts growth or domestic investment. Weak benefits from 
FDI  may  reflect  a  number  of  country‐specific  issues,  including  the  industry  composition  of  FDI  inflows,  a 
lack  of  skilled  labor,  weak  institutions,  and  underdeveloped  financial  markets.  In  addition  to  these 
estimates  of  direct  benefits  of  FDI,  FDI  may  have  indirect,  productivity‐enhancing  “collateral”  benefits 
(Kose  et  al.  2009).  These  include  pressures  for  better  institutions,  financial  development,  and  more 
stabilizing macroeconomic policies.  

Policies  can  be  directed  at  both  attracting  more  FDI  and  increasing  the  benefits  from  FDI  inflows.  Such 
policies  include  investment  in  human  capital  to  ensure  a  skilled  labor  force  can  readily  absorb  new 
technologies.  A  financial  system  that  allocates  capital  efficiently  can  facilitate  domestic  investment  to 
absorb  new  technologies.  Deeper  trade  integration  can  allow  FDI  to  leverage  the  host  country’s 
comparative  advantage.  Encouraging  forward  and  backward  linkages  to  supplier  and  distribution 
networks can accelerate technology transfers.  




                                                           62 
References 
Abiad, A., D. Furceri, and P. Topalova. 2015. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment: Evidence 
from Advanced Economies.” Working Paper 15/95. International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Adhvaryu,  A.,  N.  Kala,  and  A.  Nyshadham.  2016.  “The  Light  and  the  Heat:  Productivity  Co‐benefits  of 
Energy‐Saving  Technology.”  Private  Enterprise  Development  in  Low‐Income  Countries  (PEDL)  Research 
Note 1775, Department for International Development, London. 
Aghion,  P.,  P.  Howitt,  and  F.  Murtin.  2011.  “The  Relationship  between  Health  and  Growth:  When  Lucas 
Meets Nelson‐Phelps.” Review of Economics and Institutions 2 (1): 1‐24. 
Agosin,  M.,  and  R.  Machado.  2005.  “Foreign  Investment  in  Developing  Countries:  Does  it  Crowd  in 
Domestic Investment?” Oxford Development Studies 33 (2): 149–162. 
Ahuja, A., and M. Nabar. 2012a. “The Spillover Effects of a Downturn in China’s Real Estate Investment.” 
Working Paper 12/266, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Ahuja,  A.,  and  M.  Nabar.  2012b.  “Investment‐Led  Growth  in  China:  Global  Spillovers.”  Working  Paper 
12/267, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Albino‐War, M., S. Cerovic, J. C. Flores, K. Javier, H. Qu, Y. Said, and B. Shukurov. 2014. “Making the Most 
of Public Investment in MENA and CCA Oil‐Exporting Countries.” IMF Staff Discussion Note. International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Alesina,  A.,  and  R.  Perotti.  1996.  “Income  Distribution,  Political  Instability,  and  Investment.”  European 
Economic Review 40 (6): 1203‐1228. 
Alfaro, L., A. Chanda, S. Kalemli‐Ozcan, and S. Sayek. 2004. “FDI and Economic Growth: The Role of Local 
Financial Markets.” Journal of International Economics 64 (1): 89–112.  
Alfaro, L. and E. Hammel. 2007. “Capital Flows and Capital Goods.” Journal of International Economics 72 
(1): 128–150. 
Alguacil  M.,  A.  Cuadros,  and  V.  Orts.  2011.  “Inward  FDI  and  Growth:  The  Role  of  Macroeconomic  and 
Institutional Environment.” Journal of Policy Modeling 33: 481‐496. 
Anand,  R.  and  V.  Tulin.  2014.  “Disentangling  India’s  Investment  Slowdown.”  Working  Paper  14/47, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Andrews,  D.,  C.  Criscuolo,  and  P.  N.  Gal.  2015.  “Frontier  Firms,  Technology  Diffusion  and  Public  Policy: 
Micro  Evidence  from  OECD  Countries.”  Productivity  Working  Paper  2015‐02,  Organisation  for  Economic 
Co‐operation and Development, Paris. 
Ang,  J.  2009.  “Do  Public  Investment  and  FDI  Crowd  In  or  Crowd  Out  Private  Domestic  Investment  in 
Malaysia?” Applied Economics 41 (7): 913‐919. 
Arena,  M.,  S.  Bouza,  E.  Dabla‐Norris,  K.  Gerling,  and  L.  Njie.  2015.  “Credit  Booms  and  Macroeconomic 
Dynamics:  Stylized  Facts  and  Lessons  for  Low‐Income  Countries.”  Working  Paper  15/11,  International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Arndt,  C.,  C.  Buch,  and  M.  Schnitzer.  2010.  “FDI  and  Domestic  Investment:  An  Industry‐Level  View.”  The 
B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 10 (1): 69. 
Aschauer, D. 1989. “Is Public Expenditure Productive?” Journal of Monetary Economics 23 (2): 177‐200. 
Azman‐Saini,  W.,  S.  Law,  and  A.  Ahmad.  2010.  “FDI  and  Economic  Growth:  New  Evidence  on  the  Role  of 
Financial Markets.” Economics Letters 107 (2): 211‐213. 
Azzimonti,  M.  2016.  “The  Politics  of  FDI  Expropriation.”  Working  Paper  22705,  National  Bureau  of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 
Aykut,  D.,  and  S.  Sayek.  2005.  “The  Role  of  the  Sectoral  Composition  of  Foreign  Direct  Investment  on 

                                                          63 
Growth.” (unpublished: Washington, World Bank). 
Baffes,  J.,  M.  A.  Kose,  F.  Ohnsorge,  and  M.  Stocker.  2015.  “The  Great  Plunge  in  Oil  Prices:  Causes, 
Consequences, and Policy Responses.” Policy Research Note 1, World Bank, Washington DC. 
Bahal, G., M.  Raissi, and V. Tulin. 2015.  “Crowding‐Out or Crowding‐In? Public  and Private Investment in 
India.” Working Paper 15/264. International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Bailey,  M.,  J.  Manyika,  and  S.  Gupta.  2013.  U.S.  Productivity  Growth:  An  Optimistic  Perspective. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 
Baker, S., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis. 2016. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 131 (4): 1593‐1636. 
Baker,  S.,  N.  Bloom,  B.  Canes‐Wrone,  S.  J.  Davis,  and  J.  Rodden.  2014.  “Why  Has  U.S.  Policy  Uncertainty 
Risen Since 1960?” American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings 104 (5): 56‐60. 
Balasubramanyam,  V.N.,  M.  Salisu,  and  D.  Sapsford.  1996.  “Foreign  Direct  Investment  and  Growth  in  EP 
and IS Countries.” Economic Journal 106 (434): 92–105. 
Banerjee,  R.,  J.  Kearns,  and  M.  Lombardi.  2015.  “(Why)  Is  Investment  Weak?”  BIS  Quarterly  Review, 
March. Bank for International Settlements, Geneva. 
Barkbu,  B.,  S.  P.  Berkmen,  P.  Lukyantsau,  S.  Saksonovs,  and  H.  Schoelermann.  2015.  “Investment  in  the 
Euro Area: Why Has It Been Weak?” Working Paper 15/32, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Barrell,  R.  and  N.  Pain.  1997.  “Foreign  Direct  Investment,  Technological  Change,  and  Economic  Growth 
within Europe.”  The Economic Journal 107: 1770–1786.  
Barro, R. J. 2013. “Health and Economic Growth.” Annals of Economics and Finance 14 (2): 329‐366. 
Barro,  R.,  and  J.‐W.  Lee.  2015.  Education  Matters:  Global  Schooling  Gains  from  the  19th  to  the  21st 
Century. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bengoa,  M.,  and  B.  Sanchez‐Robles.  2003.  “Foreign  Direct  Investment,  Economic  Freedom  and  Growth: 
New Evidence from Latin America.” European Journal of Political Economy 19: 529‐545. 
Blanchard,  O.  J.,  and  L.  Katz.  1999.  “Wage  Dynamics:  Reconciling  Theory  and  Evidence”.  NBER  Working 
Paper 6924, National Bureau of Economic Research, Boston. 
Bloom,  D.,  D.  Canning,  and  J.  Sevilla.  2004.  “The  Effect  of  Health  on  Economic  Growth:  A  Production 
Function Approach.” World Development 32 (1): 1–13. 
Bloom, N. 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks.” Econometrica 77 (3): 623‐685. 
Bloom, N., S. Bond, and J. van Reenen. 2007. “Uncertainty and Investment Dynamics.” Review of Economic 
Studies 74: 391‐415. 
Bloomfield, P. 2006. “The Challenging Business of Long‐Term Public–Private Partnerships: Reflections on 
Local Experience.” Public Administration Review 66 (3): 400‐411. 
Bom,  P.  R.  D.,  and  J.  E.  Ligthart.  2014.  “What  Have  We  Learned  From  Three  Decades  of  Research  on  the 
Productivity of Public Capital?” Journal of Economic Surveys 28 (5): 889–916. 
Bonfiglioli,  A.  2008.  “Financial  Integration,  Productivity  and  Capital  Accumulation.”  Journal  of 
International Economics 76 (2): 337‐355. 
Borensztein, E., J. D. Gregorio, and J.‐W. Lee. 1998. “How Does Foreign Direct Investment Affect Growth?” 
Journal of International Economics 45 (1): 115–135. 
Borio,  C.,  E.  Karroubi,  C.  Upper,  and  F.  Zampolli.  2015.  “Labour  Reallocation  and  Productivity  Dynamics: 
Financial Causes, Real Consequences.” BIS Working Papers 534. Bank for International Settlements, Basel. 
Bosworth, B. P., and S.M. Collins.  1999. “Capital Flows to Developing Economies: Implications for Saving 


                                                          64 
and  Investment.”  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity  1:  143–180.  Brookings  Institution,  Washington, 
DC. 
Bourreaua, M., C. Cambinib, and P. Doğanc. 2012. “Access Pricing, Competition, and Incentives to Migrate 
from ‘Old’ to ‘New’ Technology.” International Journal of Industrial Organization 30 (6): 713‐723. 
Brynjolfsson,  E.,  and  A.  McAfee.  2011.  Race  Against  the  Machine:  How  the  Digital  Revolution  is 
Accelerating  Innovation,  Driving  Productivity,  and  Irreversibly  Transforming  Employment  and  the 
Economy. Lexington: Digital Frontier Press. 
Buffie,  E.  F.,  A.  Berg,  C.  Pattillo,  R.  Portillo,  and  L‐F.  Zanna.  2012.  “Public  Investment,  Growth,  and  Debt 
Sustainability:  Putting  Together  the  Pieces.”  Working  Paper  12/144.  International  Monetary  Fund, 
Washington, DC. 
Busse,  M.,  and  J.  L.  Groizard.  2008.  “Foreign  Direct  Investment,  Regulations  and  Growth.”  The  World 
Economy 31: 861–886. 
Bussiere,  M.,  L.  Ferrara,  and  J.  Milovich.  2016.  “Explaining  the  Recent  Slump  in  Investment:  The  Role  of 
Expected Demand and Uncertainty.” IMF Research Bulletin 17 (1): 1‐3. 
Bussolo,  M.,  J.  Koettl,  and  E.  Sinnott.  2015.  Golden  Aging:  Prospects  for  Healthy,  Active,  and  Prosperous 
Aging in Europe and Central Asia. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
Calcagnini, G., A. Ferrando, and G. Giombini. 2015. “Multiple Market Imperfections, Firm Profitability and 
Investment.” European Journal of Law and Economics 40 (1): 95‐120. 
Calderón, C., and L. Servén. 2014. “Infrastructure, Growth, and Inequality: An Overview.” Policy Research 
Working Paper 7034. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Calderón,  C.,  E.  Moral‐Benito,  and  L.  Servén.  2015.  “Is  Infrastructure  Capital  Productive?  A  Dynamic 
Heterogeneous Approach.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 30 (2): 177–98. 
Carrière‐Swallow,  Y.,  and  L.  F.  Céspedes.  2013.  “The  Impact  of  Uncertainty  Shocks  in  Emerging 
Economies.” Journal of International Economics 90 (2): 316‐325. 
Caselli,  F.  2005.  “Chapter  9  Accounting  for  Cross‐Country  Income  Differences.”  Handbook  of  Economic 
Growth, Vol 1(A): 679‐741. 
Caselli,  F.,  P.  Pagano,  and  F.  Schivardi.  2003.  “Uncertainty  and  the  Slowdown  in  Capital  Accumulation  in 
Europe.” Applied Economics 35: 79‐89. 
Cavallo,  E.,  and  C.  Daude.  2011.  “Public  Investment  in  Developing  Countries:  A  Blessing  or  a  Curse?” 
Journal of Comparative Economics 39 (1): 65–81. 
Cerra,  V.,  A.  Cuevas,  C.  Goes,  I.  Karpowicz,  T.  Matheson,  I.  Samake,  and  S.  Vtyurina.  2016.  “Highways  to 
Heaven:  Infrastructure  Determinants  and  Trends  in  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean.”  Working  Paper 
16/185, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Chakraborty,  C.  and  P.  Nunnenkamp.  2008.  “Economic  Reforms,  FDI  and  its  Economic  Effects  in  India:  A 
Sector Level Analysis.” World Development 36 (7): 1192‐1212. 
Chinn, M. D. 2014. “Central Banking: Perspectives from Emerging Economies.” La Follette School of Public 
Affairs Working Paper Series, No. 2014‐006. 
Choe,  J.I.  2003.  “Do  Foreign  Direct  Investment  and  Gross  Domestic  Investment  Promote  Economic 
Growth?” Review of Development Economics 7 (1): 44–57. 
Chowdhury, A., and G. Mavrotas. 2006. “FDI and Growth: What Causes What?” World Economy 29 (1): 9–
19. 
Cipollina, M., G. Giovannetti, F. Pietrovito, and A.F. Pozzolo. 2012. “FDI and Growth: What Cross‐country 
Industry Data Say.” The World Economy 35: 1599–1629. 

                                                             65 
Citigroup. 2016. “Urbanization: A Major Driver of Infrastructure Spending.” Citigroup, New York. 
Coflan,  A.  2016.  “China’s  State  Investment  Surge:  Stimulus  or  Statistics?”  Rhodium  Group  Research. 
http://rhg.com/notes/chinas‐state‐investmentsurge‐stimulus‐or‐statistics. 
Colecchia,  A.,  and  P.  Schreyer.  2002.  “ICT  Investment  and  Economic  Growth  in  the  1990s:  Is  the  United 
States  a  Unique  Case?  A  Comparative  Study  of  Nine  OECD  Countries.”  Review  of  Economics  Dynamics  5 
(2): 408‐442. 
Comin, D., and M. M. Ferrer. 2013. “If Technology Has Arrived Everywhere, Why Has Income Diverged?” 
Working Paper 19010, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 
Constantinescu,  C.,  A.  Mattoo,  and  M.  Ruta.  2015.  “The  Global  Trade  Slowdown:  Cyclical  or  Structural?” 
Working Paper 15/6, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Constantinescu,  C.,  A.  Mattoo,  and  M.  Ruta.  2016.  “Does  the  Global  Trade  Slowdown  Matter?”  Policy 
Research Working Paper 7673, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Corcoran, A., and R. Gillanders. 2015. “Foreign Direct Investment and the Ease of Doing Business.” Review 
of World Economics 151 (1): 103‐26. 
Cowen, T. 2011. The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low‐Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got 
Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better. New York: Dutton. 
Czernich, N., O. Falck, T. Kretschmer, and L. Woessmann. 2011. “Broadband Infrastructure and Economic 
Growth.” The Economic Journal 121: 505–532. 
Dabla‐Norris, E., J. Brumby, A. Kyobe, Z. Mills, and C. Papageorgiou. 2012. “Investing in Public Investment: 
An Index of Public Investment Efficiency.” Journal of Economic Growth 17 (3): 235–66. 
Dasgupta, B., L. Somik, and N. Lozano‐Gracia. 2014. “Urbanization and Housing Investment.” World Bank 
Policy Research Paper 7110, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
De  Mello,  L.  1997.  “Foreign  Direct  Investment  in  Developing  Countries  and  Growth:  A  Selective  Survey.” 
Journal of Development Studies 34 (1): 1–34. 
Desai, M. A., F. Foley, and R. Hines. 2009. “Domestic Effects of the Foreign Activities of US Multinationals.” 
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (1): 181‐203. 
Didier,  T.,  M.  A.  Kose,  F.  Ohnsorge,  and  L.  S.  Ye.  2015.  “Slowdown  in  Emerging  Markets:  Rough  Patch  or 
Prolonged Weakness?” Policy Research Note 4, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Djankov,  S.  and  B.  Hoekman.  2000.  “Foreign  Investment  and  Productivity  Growth  in  Czech  Enterprises.” 
World Bank Economic Review 14 (1): 49–64. 
Dreger, C., and H. Reimers. 2014. “On the Relationship between Public and Private Investment in the Euro 
Area.” DIW Berlin Discussion Papers 1365. Berlin, Germany. 
Driffield,  N.,  and  C.  Jones.  2013.  “Impact  of  FDI,  ODA  and  Migrant  Remittances  on  Economic  Growth  in 
Developing Countries: A Systems Approach.” European Journal of Development Research 25: 173‐196. 
ECB  (European  Central  Bank).  2016.  “Public  Investment  in  Europe.”  ECB  Economic  Bulletin  (2):  1–14. 
European Central Bank, Frankfurt. 
Eden,  M.,  and  A.  Kraay.  2014.  “Crowding  in  and  the  Returns  to  Government  Investment  in  Low  Income 
Countries.” Development Research Group Working Paper 6781. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Edison,  H.,  R.  Levine,  L.  Ricci,  and  T.  Slok.  2002.  “International  Financial  Integration  and  Economic 
Growth.” Journal of International Monetary and Finance 21 (6): 749–76. 
Elekdag, S., and Y. Wu. 2013. “Rapid Credit Growth in Emerging Markets: Boon or Boom‐Bust?” Emerging 
Markets Finance and Trade 49 (5): 45‐62. 


                                                          66 
Erden,  L.,  and  R.  G.  Holcombe.  2005.  “The  Effects  of  Public  Investment  on  Private  Investment  in 
Developing Economies.” Public Finance Review 33 (5): 575–602. 
Ernst & Young. 2016. Worldwide Corporate Tax Guide. London: Ernst & Young. 
Estache, A., and G. Garsous. 2012. “The Impact of Infrastructure on Growth in Developing Countries.” IFC 
Economics Notes. 1. International Finance Corporation, Washington, DC. 
Everhart  S.,  J.  Martinez‐Vazquez,  and  R.  M.  McNab.  2009.  “Corruption,  Governance,  Investment  and 
Growth in Emerging Markets.” Applied Economics 41 (13): 1579‐1594. 
Feldstein,  M.  2008.  “Did  Wages  Reflect  Growth  in  Productivity?”  NBER  Working  Paper  13953,  National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 
Fernald,  J.  G.  1999.  “Roads  to  Prosperity?  Assessing  the  Link  between  Public  Capital  and  Productivity.” 
American Economic Review 89 (3): 619‐638. 
Ferreira,  F.  H.  G.  1995.  “Wealth  Distribution  Dynamics  with  Public‐Private  Capital  Complimentarity.” 
Discussion Paper TE/95/286. London School of Economics and Political Science, London. 
Field,  E.  2005.  “Property  Rights  and  Investment  in  Urban  Slums.”  Journal  of  the  European  Economic 
Association 3 (2‐3): 279‐290. 
Fournier, J.‐M., and A. Johansson. 2016. “The Effect of the Size and the Mix of Public Spending on Growth 
and  Inequality.”  Economics  Department  Working  Paper  1344.  Organisation  for  Economic  Co‐operation 
and Development, Paris. 
Freund, C. 2016. “The Global Trade Slowdown and Secular Stagnation.” Peterson Institute of International 
Economics  blog.  https://piie.com/blogs/trade‐investment‐policy‐watch/global‐tradeslowdown‐and‐
secular‐stagnation.  
G20. 2015. G20/OECD Report on G20 Investment Strategies. Vol 2. Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
and Development, Paris. 
______. 2016a. “Developments in Investment and Policy Challenges.” Paper for G‐20, June. Organisation 
for Economic Co‐operation and Development, Paris. 
______. 2016b. G20 Leaders’ Communique, Hangzhou Summit, Sept 4‐5. 
Getachew, Y. Y. 2010. “Public Capital and Distributional Dynamics in a Two‐Sector Growth Model.” Journal 
of Macroeconomics 32 (2): 606–16. 
Gilchrist,  S.,  J.  Sim,  and  E.  Zakrajsek.  2014.  “Uncertainty,  Financial  Frictions,  and  Investment  Dynamics.” 
Working Paper 20038, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 
Glaeser, E. L. 2008. Cities, Agglomeration and Spatial Equilibrium. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Glass,  A.  J.,  and  K.  Saggi.  2002.  “Multinational  Firms  and  Technology  Transfer.”  Scandinavian  Journal  of 
Economics 104: 495–513. 
Gollop,  F.  M.,  B.  M.  Fraumeni,  and  D.  W.  Jorgenson.  1987.  Productivity  and  U.S.  Economic  Growth. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Gordon,  R.  J.  2012.  “Is  U.S.  Economic  Growth  Over?  Faltering  Innovation  Confronts  the  Six  Headwinds.” 
Working Paper 18315. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 
Gorg,  H.,  and  D.  Greenaway.  2004.  “Much  Ado  about  Nothing?  Do  Domestic  Firms  Really  Benefit  from 
Foreign Direct Investment?” World Bank Research Observer 19 (2): 171–97. 
Griliches,  Z.  1988.  “Productivity  Puzzles  and  R  &  D:  Another  Nonexplanation.”  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives 2 (4): 9‐21. 
Hall,  R.E.,  and  C.  Jones.  1999.  “Economic  Growth:  A  Review  Essay.”  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics 
114 (1): 83‐116. 

                                                          67 
Hall,  R.E.,  and  D.W.  Jorgenson.  1967.  “Tax  Policy  and  Investment  Behavior.”  American  Economic  Review 
57 (3): 391‐414. 
Hall, R.E. 2016. “Macroeconomics of Persistent Slumps.” NBER Working Paper 22230. National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 
Hansen,  H.  and  J.  Rand.  2006.  “On  the  Causal  Links  between  FDI  and  Growth  in  Developing  Countries.” 
The World Economy 29 (1): 21–41. 
Hennessy, C. 2004. “Tobin's Q, Debt Overhang, and Investment.” Journal of Finance 59 (4): 1717–1742. 
Herrera, S., and G. Pang. 2005. Efficiency of Public Spending In Developing Countries: An Efficiency Frontier 
Approach. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
Herzer,  D.,  and  M.  Schrooten.  2008.  “Outward  FDI  and  Domestic  Investment  in  Two  Industrialized 
Countries.” Economics Letters 99 (1): 139‐143. 
Herzer,  D.  2012.  “How  Does  Foreign  Direct  Investment  Really  Affect  Developing  Countries’  Growth?” 
Review of International Economics 20: 396–414. 
Holtz‐Eakin,  D.,  and  M.  Mandel.  2015.  “Dynamic  Scoring  and  Infrastructure  Spending.”  McGraw  Hill 
Financial Global Institute, New York. 
Hong, G.H., J. Lee, W. Liao, and D. Seneviratne. 2016. “China and Asian Global Trade Slowdown.” Working 
Paper 16/105, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Hsieh,  C.‐T.  and  P.  Klenow.  2010.  “Development  Accounting.”  American  Economic  Journal: 
Macroeconomics 2: 207‐223. 
Huidrom,  R.,  M.A.  Kose,  and  F.  Ohnsorge.  Forthcoming.  “Spillovers  from  Major  Emerging  Markets.” 
Mimeo, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
IFC  (International  Finance  Corporation).  2016a.  “Global  Productivity  Slowdown  and  the  Role  of 
Technology  Adoption  in  Emerging  Markets.”  Note  6,  EMCompass.  International  Finance  Corporation, 
Washington, DC. 
IFC  (International  Financial  Corporation).  2016b.  “A  New  Look  at  the  Determinants  of  Investment  in 
Emerging Markets.” Mimeo, Sept. 30. International Finance Corporation, Washington, DC. 
IMF  (International  Monetary  Fund).  2015a.  “Private  Investment:  What’s  the  Holdup?”  Chapter  4,  World 
Economic Outlook, April. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. 
______. 2015b. People’s Republic of China: Staff Report for the 2015 Article IV Consultation. Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund. 
______.  2016.  “Global  Trade:  What’s  Behind  the  Slowdown?”  Chapter  2,  World  Economic  Outlook, 
October. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. 
Inderst,  G.  2016.  “Infrastructure  Investment,  Private  Finance,  and  Institutional  Investors:  Asia  from  a 
Global Perspective.”  ADBI Working Paper 555. Asian Development Bank, Manila. 
International Energy Agency. 2014. World Energy Investment Outlook – Special Report, Paris: International 
Energy Agency. 
Ismail,  N.  W.,  and  J.  M.  Mahyideen.  2015.  “The  Impact  of  Infrastructure  on  Trade  and  Economic  Growth 
in Selected Economies in Asia.” Working Paper Series 553, Asian Development Bank Institute, Manila. 
Jones,  C.  2003.  “Human  Capital,  Ideas,  and  Economic  Growth.”  In  Finance,  Research,  Education,  and 
Growth, edited by L. Paganetto, and E. Phelps. London: Palgrave McMillian. 
Jorgenson,  D.  1963.  “Capital  Theory  and  Investment  Behavior.”  American  Economic  Review  53  (2):  247‐
259. 
______. 1991. “Productivity and Economic Growth,” In Fifty Years of Economic Measurement: The Jubilee 

                                                        68 
of the Conference on Research in Income and Wealth. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, 
MA. 
Jorgenson,  D.,  and  C.  D.  Siebert.  1968.  “Optimal  Capital  Accumulation  and  Corporate  Investment 
Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy 76 (6): 1123‐1151. 
Julio,  B.,  and  Y.  Yook.  2012.  “Political  Uncertainty  and  Corporate  Investment  Cycles.”  Journal  of  Finance 
67 (1): 45‐83. 
Jurado,  K.,  S.  Ludvigson,  and  S.  Ng.  2015.  “Measuring  Uncertainty.”  American  Economic  Review  105  (3): 
1177‐1216. 
Kalemli‐Ozcan, S., L. Laeven, and D. Moreno. 2015. “Debt Overhang in Europe: Evidence from Firm‐Bank‐
Sovereign Linkages.” Unpublished paper, University of Maryland. 
Kamaly,  A.  2014.  “Does  FDI  Crowd  in  or  out  Domestic  Investment?  New  Evidence  from  Emerging 
Economies.” Modern Economy 5: 391‐400. 
Kang,  J.S.,  and  W.  Liao.  2016.  “Chinese  Imports:  What’s  Behind  the  Slowdown?”  Working  Paper  16/106, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Keefer,  P.  and  S.  Knack.  2007.  “Boondoggles,  Rent‐Seeking,  and  Political  Checks  and  Balances:  Public 
Investment under Unaccountable Governments.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (3): 566‐572. 
Kessides, I. 2004. “Reforming Infrastructure: Privatization, Regulation, and Competition.” Policy Research 
Report, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Klenow,  P.,  and  A.  Rodríguez‐Clare.  1997.  “Economic  Growth:  A  Review  Essay.”  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 40: 597‐618. 
Kneller,  R.,  and  M.  Pisu.  2007.  “Industrial  Linkages  and  Export  Spillovers  from  FDI.”  The  World  Economy 
30 (1): 105‐134. 
Kohpaiboon,  A.  2003.  “Foreign  Trade  Regimes  and  the  FDI‐Growth  Nexus:  A  Case  Study  of  Thailand.” 
Journal of Development Studies 40 (2): 55‐69. 
Kokko,  A.,  M.  Zejan,  and  R.  Tansini.  2001.  “Trade  Regimes  and  Spillover  Effects  of  FDI:  Evidence  from 
Uruguay.” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 137 (1): 124‐149.  
Kothari, S. P., J. Lewellen, and J. B. Warner. 2015. “The Behavior of Aggregate Corporate Investment.” MIT 
Sloan Research Paper 5112‐14, MIT, Cambridge. 
Kose,  M.  A.,  and  M.  Terrones.  2015.  Collapse  and  Revival:  Understanding  Global  Recessions  and 
Recoveries. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. 
Kose,  M.  A.,  E.  Prasad,  K.  Rogoff,  and  S.  Wei.  2009.  “Financial  Globalization:  A  Reappraisal.”  IMF  Staff 
Papers 56 (1): 8‐62. 
Kose,  M.  A.,  S.  Kurlat,  F.  Ohnsorge,  and  N.  Sugawara.  Forthcoming.  “A  Cross‐Country  Database  of  Fiscal 
Space.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Kraay,  A.  2014.  “Government  Spending  Multipliers  in  Developing  Countries:  Evidence  from  Lending  by 
Official Creditors.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (4): 170–208. 
Kuijs,  L.  2016.  “Credit  and  Investment  –Problems  and  Misunderstandings.”  Research  Briefing‐China, 
Oxford Economics. 
Lamont,  O.  2002.  “Macroeconomic  Forecasts  and  Microeconomic  Forecasters.”  Journal  of  Economic 
Behavior & Organization 48 (3): 265‐280. 
Lardy,  N.  R.,  and  Z.  Huang.  2016.  “China  Private  Investment  Softens,  But  Not  as  Much  as  Official  Data 
Suggest.” Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC. https://piie.com/blogs/china‐
economic‐watch/china‐private‐investment‐softens‐not‐muchofficial‐data‐suggest. 

                                                          69 
Leboeuf,  M.,  and  B.  Fay.  2016.  “What  Is  Behind  the  Weakness  in  Global  Investment?”  Staff  Discussion 
Paper 5, Bank of Canada, Ottawa. 
Lewis,  C.,  N.  Pain,  J.  Strasky,  and  F.  Menkyna.  2014.  “Investment  Gaps  after  the  Crisis.”  Economics 
Department Working Paper 1168, Organisation for Economic Co‐operation and Development, Paris. 
Li,  D.,  N.  Magud,  and  F.  Valencia.  2015.  “Corporate  Investment  in  Emerging  Markets:  Financing  vs.  Real 
Options Channel.” Working Paper 15/285, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Lim,  J.  2014.  “Institutional  and  Structural  Determinants  of  Investment  Worldwide.”  Journal  of 
Macroeconomics 41 (C): 160‐177. 
Magud, N., and S. Sosa. 2015. “Investment in Emerging Markets. We Are Not in Kansas Anymore...Or Are 
We?” Working Paper 15/77, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC. 
Makki, S., and A. Somwaru. 2004. “Impact of Foreign Direct Investment and Trade on Economic Growth: 
Evidence from Developing Countries.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 86: 795‐801. 
Mandl, U., A. Dierx, and F. Ilzkovitz. 2008. “The Effectiveness and Efficiency of Public Spending.” European 
Economy Economic Papers 301. European Commission, Brussels. 
Mankiw, N. G. 2012. Macroeconomics. New York: Worth Publishers.  
Mauro, P. 1995. “Corruption and Growth.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (3): 681‐712. 
McGowan,  M.  A.,  and  D.  Andrews.  2015.  “Labour  Market  Mismatch  and  Labour  Productivity:  Evidence 
from PIAAC Data.” Economics Department Working Paper 1209, Organisation for Economic Co‐operation 
and Development, Paris. 
McKinsey & Company. 2016. “Bridging Global Infrastructure Gaps.” McKinsey & Company, Brussels. 
McQuade,  P.,  and  M.  Schmitz.  2016.  “The  Great  Moderation  in  International  Capital  Flows:  a  Global 
Phenomenon?” ECB Working Paper 1952, European Central Bank, Frankfurt. 
Melzer,  Brian.  Forthcoming.  “Mortgage  Debt  Overhang:  Reduced  Investment  by  Homeowners  at  Risk  of 
Default.” Journal of Finance. 
Mendoza,  E.,  and  M.  E.  Terrones.  2012.  “An  Anatomy  of  Credits  Booms  and  their  Demise.”  Journal 
Economia Chilena 15 (2): 04‐32. 
Mileva, E. 2008. “The Impact of Capital Flows on Domestic Investment in Transition Economies.” Working 
Paper Series 0871. European Central Bank. 
Mishra, P., P. Montiel, P. Pedroni, and A. Spilimbergo. 2014. “Monetary Policy and Bank Lending Rates in 
Low‐income  Countries:  Heterogeneous  Panel  Estimates.”  Journal  of  Development  Economics  111:  117‐
131. 
Mody, A., and A. P.  Murshid. 2005. “Growing  Up with Capital Flows.” Journal  of International  Economics 
65 (1): 249‐266. 
Montenegro, C.  E., and  H.  A. Patrinos. 2014. “Comparable Estimates of Returns to  Schooling  Around  the 
World.” Policy Research Working Paper 7020, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Morrissey,  O.,  and  M.  Udomkerdmongkol.  2012.  “Governance,  Private  Investment  and  Foreign  Direct 
Investment in Developing Countries.” World Development 40 (3): 437‐445. 
Munemo,  J.  2014.  “Business  Start‐Up  Regulations  and  the  Complementarity  Between  Foreign  and 
Domestic Investment.” Review of World Economics 150 (4): 745‐61. 
Myers, S. 1977. “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing.” Journal of Financial Economics 5: 147‐175. 
Mutreja,  P.,  B.  Ravikumar,  and  M.  J.  Sposi.  2014.  “Capital  Goods  Trade  and  Economic  Development.” 
Working Paper 2014‐012B, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
Nabar,  N.,  and  J.  Joyce.  2009.  “Sudden  Stops,  Banking  Crises,  and  Investment  Collapses.”  Journal  of 

                                                         70 
Development Economics 90 (2): 163‐189. 
Naumov,  A.  2016.  “Global  Investment  –  The  Role  of  Emerging  Markets.”  Bank  Underground,  Bank  of 
England,  September  23.  https://bankunderground.co.uk/2016/09/23/globalinvestment‐the‐role‐of‐
emerging‐markets/. 
Ndikumana, L., and S. Verick. 2008. “The Linkages Between FDI and Domestic Investment: Unravelling the 
Developmental  Impact  of  Foreign  Investment  in  Sub‐Saharan  Africa.”  Development  Policy  Review  26  (6): 
713‐726. 
Nordås, H. K., and R. Piermartini. 2004. “Infrastructure and Trade.” WTO Staff Working Paper ERSD‐2004‐
04, World Trade Organization, Geneva. 
Occhino, F. and A. Pescatori. 2010. “Debt Overhang  and Credit Risk in a Business Cycle Model.” Working 
Paper 1003, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cleveland. 
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co‐operation and Development). 2015a. “Lifting Investment for Higher 
Sustainable Growth.” OECD Economic Outlook, 1: 205‐279. 
______.  2015b.  Mapping  Channels  to  Mobilise  Institutional  Investment  in  Sustainable  Energy.  Green 
Finance and Investment Series. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co‐operation and Development. 
______.  2016a.  Compendium  of  Productivity  Indicators  2016.  Paris:  Organisation  for  Economic  Co‐
operation and Development. 
______. 2016b. “Global Growth Warning: Weak Trade, Financial Distortions.” Interim Economic Outlook, 
September. Organisation for Economic Co‐operation and Development, Paris. 
______.  2016c.  “Using  the  Fiscal  Levers  to  Escape  the  Low‐Growth  Trap.”  Chapter  2,  OECD  Economic 
Outlook, Organisation for Economic Co‐operation and Development, Paris. 
Ohnsorge, F., and S. Yu. 2016. “Recent Credit Surge in Historical Context.” Policy Research Working Paper 
7704, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Ollivaud, P., Y. Guillemette, and D. Turner. 2016. “Links Between Weak Investment and the Slowdown in 
Productivity  and  Potential  Output  Growth  Across  the  OECD.”  Working  Paper  1304.  Organisation  for 
Economic Co‐operation and Development, Paris. 
Pang,  G.,  and  S.  Herrera.  2005.  “Efficiency  of  Public  Spending  in  Developing  Countries:  An  Efficiency 
Frontier Approach.” Policy Research Working Paper 3645. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Pels. 2010. “Capital Inflows and Investment.” The Institute for International Integration Studies Discussion 
Paper Series 330.  
Pereira, A. M. 2000. “Is All Public Capital Created Equal?” Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (3): 513–
18. 
Pereira,  A.  M.,  and  J.  M.  Andraz.  2013.  “On  the  Economic  Effects  of  Public  Infrastructure  Investment:  A 
Survey  of  the  International  Evidence.”  College  of  William  and  Mary  Department  of  Economics  Working 
Paper 108. Williamsburg, VA. 
Petri, P., and M. Plummer. 2016. “The Economic Effects of the Trans‐Pacific Partnership: New Estimates.” 
Working Paper 16‐2, Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC. 
Pongsiri,  N.  2002.  “Regulation  and  Public‐Private  Partnerships.”  International  Journal  of  Public  Sector 
Management 15 (6): 487 – 495. 
Prasad, E., R. Rajan, and A. Subramanian. 2007. “Foreign Capital and Economic Growth.” Brookings Papers 
on Economic Activity 38(1): 153‐230. The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC. 
Presbitero, A. F. 2016. “Too Much and Too Fast? Public Investment Scaling‐up and Absorptive Capacity.” 
Journal of Development Economics 120: 17–31. 

                                                          71 
Qu, H., and J. Wang. 2016. “China: Why is Private Investment Still Slowing?” In Asian Economics Quarterly 
Report 19‐24. HSBC Global Research, Hong Kong SAR, China. 
Qureshi,  Z.,  J.  L.  Diaz‐Sanchez,  and  A.  Varoudakis.  2015.  “The  Post‐Crisis  Growth  Slowdown  in  Emerging 
Economies and the Role of Structural Reforms.” Global Journal of Emerging Market Economies 7 (2): 179‐
200. 
Rajaram,  A.,  T.  M.  Le,  N.  Biletska,  and  J.  Brumby.  2010.  “A  Diagnostic  Framework  for  Assessing  Public 
Investment Management.” Policy Research Working Paper 5397, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Reinikka, R., and J. Svensson. 2002. “Coping with Poor Public Capital.” Journal of Development Economics 
69: 51‐69. 
Romer, P. 1993. “Idea Gaps and Object Gaps in Economic Development.” Journal of Monetary Economics 
32: 543‐573. 
Schivardi, F., and E. Viviano. 2011. “Entry Barriers in Retail Trade.” The Economic Journal 121 (551): 145‐
170. 
Sokoloff, K. L. 1988. “Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence from Patent Records, 1790–
1846.” The Journal of Economic History 48 (04): 813–850. 
St.  Aubyn,  M.,  A.  Pina,  F.  Garcia,  and  J.  Pais.  2009.  “Study  on  the  Efficiency  and  Effectiveness  of  Public 
Spending  on  Tertiary  Education.”  European  Economy  Economic  Papers  390.  European  Commission, 
Brussels. 
Straub,  S.  2011.  “Infrastructure  and  Development:  A  Critical  Appraisal  of  the  Macro‐Level  Literature.” 
Journal of Development Studies 47 (5): 683–708. 
Summers,  L.  H.  2014.  “Reflections  on  the  ‘New  Secular  Stagnation  Hypothesis’.”  In  Secular  Stagnation: 
Facts, Causes, and Cures, 27‐40. Center for Economic Policy Research. London: UK. 
Teulings, C., and R. Baldwin, eds. 2014. Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes, and Cures. Center for Economic 
Policy Research. London: UK.  
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 2014. “Investment in SDGs: an Action 
Plan.” World Investment Report. New York: United Nations. 
______.  2016.  “Investor  Nationality:  Policy  Challenges.”  World  Investment  Report.  New  York:  United 
Nations. 
Wacziarg,  R.,  and  K.  H.  Welch.  2008.  “Trade  Liberalization  and  Growth:  New  Evidence.”  The  World  Bank 
Economic Review 22 (2): 187‐231. 
Wagstaff, A., C. Bredenkamp, and L. Buisman. 2014. “Progress Toward the Health MDGs.” Policy Research 
Working Paper 6894, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Warner,  M.  A.  2014.  “Public  Investment  as  an  Engine  of  Growth.”  Working  Paper  14/148.  International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Wei, M., S. Patadia, and D. Kammen. 2010. “Putting Renewables and Energy Efficiency to Work: How Many 
Jobs Can the Clean Energy Industry Generate in the U.S.?” Energy Policy 38 (2): 919‐931 
Weil, D. 2014. “Health and Economic Growth.” Handbook of Economic Growth 2: 623–682. 
Whited,  T.  1992.  “Debt,  Liquidity  Constraints,  and  Corporate  Investment:  Evidence  from  Panel  Data.” 
Journal of Financial Economics 47 (4): 1425‐1460. 
Wilson, J. S., C. Mann, and Y. Pau. 2002. “Trade Facilitation: A Development Perspective in the Asia Pacific 
Region.” Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation, Singapore. 
Winthrop,  R.,  G.  Bulloch,  P.  Bhatt,  and  A.  Wood.  2013.  Investment  in  Global  Education:  a  Strategic 
Imperative for Business. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 

                                                            72 
World Bank. 2005. World Development Report 2005: Better Investment Climate for Everyone. Washington, 
DC: World Bank. 
______. 2007. World Development Report 2007: Development and the Next Generation. Washington DC: 
World Bank. 
______. 2009. World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic Geography. Washington DC: World 
Bank. 
______. 2015a. Commodities Markets Outlook. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
______.  2015b.  Having  Fiscal  Space  and  Using  It.  Global  Economic  Prospects  January  2015.  Washington, 
DC: World Bank. 
______. 2015c. The Global Economy in Transition. Global Economic Prospects June 2015. Washington, DC: 
World Bank. 
______.  2015d.  Development  Goals  in  an  Era  of  Demographic  Change.  Global  Monitoring  Report 
2015/2016. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
______. 2015e. Bangladesh—Public Expenditure Review Update: An Update of Fiscal Trends Based on the 
2010 Public Expenditure Review. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
______.  2015f.  Progress  Towards  Sustainable  Energy  2015.  Global  Tracking  Framework  Report. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
______. 2016a. Spillovers amid Weak Growth. Global Economic Prospects January 2016. Washington, DC: 
World Bank. 
______.  2016b.  Divergences  and  Risks:  Global  Economic  Prospects  June  2016.  Washington,  DC:  World 
Bank. 
______. 2016c. Ethiopia—Public Expenditure Review. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
______. 2016d. Mexico—Public Expenditure Review. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
______. 2016e. South Asia Economic Focus: Investment Reality Check. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
______.  2017.  Weak  Investment  in  Uncertain  Times.  Global  Economic  Prospects.  January  2017. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
Xing, R., J. Sun, and  J. Zheng. 2016. “Five Debates about the Private Investment Slump.”  Morgan Stanley 
Research. 
Zhang  J.,  J.  Zhang,  and  R.  Lee.  2003.  “Rising  Longevity,  Education,  Savings,  and  Growth.”  Journal  of 
Development Economics 70: 83–101.




                                                        73 
