                                                    WPS7951


Policy Research Working Paper                      7951




  Costing Household Surveys for Monitoring
   Progress Toward Ending Extreme Poverty
        and Boosting Shared Prosperity
                                   Talip Kilic
                                 Umar Serajuddin
                                 Hiroki Uematsu
                                  Nobuo Yoshida




Development Data Group
  &
Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
January 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7951


  Abstract
 On October 15, 2015, World Bank Group President Jim                                quality household survey data. The approach to the costing
 Yong Kim announced the World Bank Group’s commit-                                  exercise is unique, as it makes use of detailed data on actual
 ment to support the 78 poorest countries to implement                              survey implementation and technical assistance costs from
 a multi-topic household survey every three years between                           a group of countries, unlike previous attempts at costing
 2016 and 2030, for monitoring progress toward ending                               household survey data gaps. The required total budget, in
 extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. This paper                         accordance with the survey design features recommended
 estimates the resource requirements to achieve the objec-                          by the World Bank Household Survey Strategy, is esti-
 tives of implementing 390 surveys across 78 International                          mated at US$945 million for the period of 2016-2030.
 Development Association countries from 2016 to 2030,                               Of this, US$692 million is projected to cover the survey
 and providing direct technical assistance to the national                          implementation costs across 78 countries, and US$253
 statistical offices on all facets of survey design, implemen-                      million is projected to cover the costs of direct technical
 tation, and dissemination toward timely production of                              assistance to be provided to the national statistical offices.




  This paper is a product of the Development Data Group and the Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at tkilic@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                     Costing Household Surveys for Monitoring Progress
                Toward Ending Extreme Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity

              Talip Kilic†, Umar Serajuddin‡, Hiroki Uematsu* and Nobuo Yoshida**1




JEL Codes: C80, I32, O10.
Keywords: Household Surveys, Household Survey Costing, Poverty Measurement and Analysis,
Inequality and Shared Prosperity Measurement and Analysis, International Development
Association.




1†
  Corresponding author: tkilic@worldbank.org. Senior Economist, Development Data Group (DECDG), The World
Bank, Via Labicana 110, Rome, Italy. ‡Senior Economist, Development Data Group (DECDG), The World Bank,
Washington, DC (userajuddin@worldbank.org). *Economist, Poverty and Equity Global Practice, The World Bank,
Washington, DC (huematsu@worldbank.org). **Lead Economist, Poverty and Equity Global Practice, The World
Bank, Washington, DC (nyoshida@worldbank.org). This study was commissioned by the World Bank Household
Survey Working Group (HSWG) in March 2015, and served as an input into the “World Bank Shared Strategy for
Household Surveys: Tracking the Twin Goals and Informing Investment and Policy Decisions” and the “World Bank
Implementation Strategy for Household Surveys 2016-2030.” The authors would like to thank (in alphabetical order)
Amparo Ballivian, Raka Banerjee, Calogero Carletto, Andrew Dabalen, Gabriel Demombynes, Olivier Dupriez,
Geoffrey Greenwell, Dean Jolliffe, and Joao Pedro Wagner De Azevedo for their comments on the earlier versions of
this paper, and (in alphabetical order) Alejandro Medina Giopp, Elizaveta Perova, Espen Beer Prydz, and Renos Vakis
for their help in the compilation of the cost information.
I. Introduction

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as articulated through the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), has raised important questions regarding the readiness of countries
and the broader international development community to monitor progress. Tracking the SDG
targets and the associated indicators places even more pressure on national statistical systems than
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). For example, many SDG indicators rely heavily on
household survey data.2 However, the investments for enhancing country capacity to design,
implement, analyze and disseminate household surveys have often lagged behind the demands for
more and better data. Monitoring progress and development as part of Agenda 2030 will require a
concerted effort on the part of both countries and their international development partners to
improve the availability, quality, timeliness and relevance of the data needed to track the SDGs.

The influential United Nations Report titled A World That Counts discusses how nothing short of
a “data revolution” is one of the preconditions for achieving sustainable development (IEAG,
2014). Several studies have estimated the cost of monitoring the post-2015 development agenda,
arriving at divergent figures. Jerven (2014) estimates the total cost of monitoring the 17 SDG goals
and the associated 169 targets at US $254 billion. Demombynes and Sandefur (2014), on the other
hand, project the additional costs of monitoring the SDGs to be a more modest, at US $300 million
per year, given the existing international survey programs. Finally, Global Partnership for
Sustainable Development Data (GPSDD) (2016) projects the estimated total cost of an expanded
program of surveys and censuses, and improvements in administrative data in 77 IDA-eligible
countries over the period of 2016-2030 to amount to USD 17.0 to 17.7 billion.3 Within this agenda,
the report asserts the need for six additional surveys, at the scale of a Demographic and Health
Survey or a Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, per IDA-eligible country from 2016 to 2030 in
support of SDG monitoring. Each survey is priced at USD 1.3 million, and the total budget is
estimated at USD 600 million for 77 IDA-eligible countries.4 While these estimates have led to
public debate on the role and cost of data for development, there is widespread recognition that
the countries and the international development partners, including international organizations,
civil society, and academia, must be committed to an agenda to strengthen country statistical
capacity and to produce the required data based on international best practices, including emerging,
validated, innovative and cost-effective data collection solutions.

Linked closely to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in 2013, the World Bank Group
(WBG) adopted the Twin Goals of ending global extreme poverty by 2030 and promoting shared

2
  United Nations Economic and Social Council (2016) provides the final list of SDG indicators in the Annex IV of
their report.
3
  The GPSDD (2016) estimate is an update of the original United Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network
(2015) estimate of USD 14.2 billion.
4
  It is not clear whether the cost of USD 600 million captures both survey implementation and technical assistance
expenditures.

                                                        2
prosperity (defined as a sustainable increase in the income and well-being of the bottom 40 percent
of the population) in every country. Household surveys are key to monitoring the progress towards
the Twin Goals, and obtaining socioeconomic, behavioral, multi-sectoral information to deepen
the understanding of income poverty and inequality (Deaton, 1997, 2016). As aptly put by Deaton
(2016:1222), “[t]he documentation of how people live, how much they spend, and on what, has
long been used as a political tool, to make visible the living conditions of the poor to those in
power, to shock, and to agitate for reform… Today’s household surveys typically collect
information on household incomes and/or (often detailed) expenditures, as well as demographic,
geographical, and other characteristics of household members. Their official purpose is often to
collect weights for consumer price indexes, but they are also used to calculate national and global
estimates of poverty and inequality.” International poverty estimates computed by the World Bank
rely on household surveys from more than 130 developing countries (World Bank, 2016).
Frequent, inter-temporally comparable household surveys are critical for measuring and
monitoring shared prosperity (Narayan, et al. 2013; World Bank, 2015a; Atamanov et al. 2016).

Improvements over the past two decades notwithstanding, challenges in household survey data
availability for monitoring poverty and shared prosperity remain substantial. During the 10 year
period between 2002 and 2011, Serajuddin et al. (2015) document that 57 countries have zero or
only one poverty estimate. This implies that in over a third of the world’s developing or middle
income countries, there is no meaningful way of monitoring poverty or shared prosperity for that
period. Out of 35 countries that have two poverty estimates over the ten-year period, the poverty
estimates were more than five years apart for 20 countries, resulting in poverty monitoring efforts
being dated. Thus, among the 155 countries for which the World Bank monitors poverty data, a
total of 77 countries faced challenges in producing timely or any poverty estimates during the
period of 2002-2011. Serajuddin et al. (2015) refer to such lack of poverty data as “data
deprivation.”

On October 15, 2015, WBG President Jim Yong Kim announced the WBG’s commitment to
address this form of data deprivation by supporting the 78 poorest countries5 to collect the
household survey data needed to estimate poverty and shared prosperity every three years between
2016 and 2030:



                                                            
5
  The 78 poorest countries are those with IDA or Blend (i.e. IDA/IBRD) lending status that are eligible for World
Bank grants and concessional financing, inclusive of India. The list is available at:
http://ida.worldbank.org/about/borrowing-countries. Although India graduated from IDA in Fiscal Year (FY) 2014,
the country will receive transitional support on an exceptional basis through the IDA17 period (FY2015 through
FY2017). While the number of countries identified as data deprived by Serajuddin et al. (2015) is coincidentally close
to the number of countries in which the World Bank committed to support data production, their compositions are
somewhat different. The former identifies countries without sufficient number of data points to effectively monitor
poverty, regardless of income status, and it includes some upper middle income countries. See Section 2 for more
details.

                                                               3
 
       “We will not be able to reach our goal unless we have data to show whether or not people
       are actually lifting themselves out of poverty [.] Collecting good data is one of the most
       powerful tools to end extreme poverty. We pledge, working alongside our partners in
       countries and international organizations, to do something that makes common sense and
       is long overdue: to conduct surveys in all countries that will assess whether people’s lives
       are improving.”6

Alleviating data deprivation and collecting household survey data for the robust measurement of
living standards every three years in each of the 78 IDA countries imply that a total of 390 surveys
will need to be carried out over the period of 2016-2030. To achieve this, the WBG would need to
commit to working with the national statistical offices (NSOs) on existing household survey
operations that are already integrated into the national statistical systems (NSSs). The NSOs would
be supported in line with the recommendations of the “World Bank Shared Strategy for Household
Surveys: Tracking the Twin Goals and Informing Investment and Policy Decisions” (henceforth
referred to as the World Bank Household Survey Strategy).

Achieving this ambitious objective will require a significant infusion of financial and human
capital into the household survey agenda. The objective of this paper is to estimate the resource
requirements to implement 390 household surveys across 78 IDA countries from 2016 to 2030 for
monitoring and understanding the progress towards the Twin Goals and the SDGs, and to provide
direct technical assistance to national statistical offices (NSOs) on all facets of survey design,
implementation, and dissemination towards timely production of quality household survey data.
Our approach to costing household survey data production is unique, as it makes use of detailed
data on actual survey implementation and technical assistance costs from a group of countries
around the world, unlike previous attempts at costing household survey data gaps.7 The budget
envelope for achieving the objective laid out by WBG President Jim Yong Kim across the 2016-
2030 period is estimated at USD 945 million, of which USD 692 million is projected to cover the
costs of household survey implementation across 78 countries, and USD 253 million is projected
to cover the costs of direct technical assistance to be provided to the NSOs.8 These estimates imply
                                                            
6
  The press release is available at: http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2015/10/15/world-bank-new-end-
poverty-tool-surveys-in-poorest-countries.
7
  This paper is also different in scope from existing studies such as Jerven (2014) and Demombynes and Sandefur
(2014) in that it focuses on the resource requirements for implementing multi-topic household surveys (that collect
information to construct a comprehensive welfare aggregate for monitoring poverty and shared prosperity), and does
not focus on other data sources.
8
  Previously, United Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network (UNSDSN) (2015) have provided resource
needs for several lines of survey data production, including multi-topic household surveys. The differences in resource
need estimates between UNSDSN (2015) and our study can be traced back to assumptions regarding sample size per
survey, the scope of technical assistance, local survey implementation cost parameters, and increases in
implementation unit costs. In communication with Geoffrey Greenwell of Paris21, based on the work of UNSDSN
(2015) and following minor adjustments to their estimates to take into account local overhead costs, our total cost
estimate of 945 million for 390 surveys compares well with their estimate of 1,006 million for the same target. The
following may be traced as the main sources for the remaining discrepancy. The authors assume a sample size of 5,000
per survey while we assume 7,000. While, the total technical assistance estimate is 36 percent higher in our study

                                                               4
 
an annual allocation of 46.1 million for survey implementation and 16.9 million for technical
assistance.

The paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses data gaps that need to be filled for effective
monitoring of poverty and shared prosperity. Section III details the nature of the surveys to be
implemented for filling the data gaps as well as the assumptions that underlie our costing exercise.
Section IV provides the estimates of costs based on several scenarios and Section V concludes.


II. Defining data gaps: Why focus on surveys in IDA countries, every three years?

The starting point for monitoring progress in poverty reduction and enhancing shared prosperity
is to have household consumption survey data that are not only available at reasonably frequent
intervals, but that are also comparable over time. Alongside household consumption survey data,
complementary data are needed for tracking poverty, especially when comparing poverty across
countries in a given year (World Bank, 2015a). This includes data from population censuses, cost
of living adjustments across countries or Purchasing Power Parities (PPPs), inflation, and
economic growth. However, the main bottleneck for monitoring poverty and shared prosperity is
typically lack of household surveys (Serajuddin et al., 2015).

To assess a country’s ability to monitor poverty and shared prosperity, the frequency of poverty
data matters; however, setting a standard on the ideal interval is not straightforward. Though
valuable for decision making, surveys typically impose significant demands on financial and
human resources. The General Data Dissemination System (GDDS), developed as an attempt to
improve the quality of statistics, recommends that poverty statistics be updated in at least 3 to 5
year intervals.9 This can serve as a useful benchmark of household survey periodicity. For the
2002-2011 time period, Serajuddin et al. (2015) note that 63 of 155 countries had three or more
data points during those ten years, and another 15 countries met the GDDS minimum requirement
for data needs with two data points with 5 year intervals (Figure 1). Over time, the number of
countries with three or more data points in 10 years clearly increased, while countries with no data
points declined (e.g., from 50 in 1990-1999 to 29 in 2002-2011). Nonetheless, challenges remain,
in that approximately half of the countries (77 of 155) do not meet the GDDS minimum
requirement, and in 57 countries, it is not possible to monitor poverty or shared prosperity at all.

Additionally, two data points with 5 year intervals may not be sufficient for poverty monitoring
purposes, as poverty can be volatile. For instance, according to PovcalNet (as of October 2014),
the poverty headcount rate declined in India by 10 percentage points in rural areas and by 7

                                                            
likely due to the provisions for a resident advisor, our total survey implementation cost estimate is also 23 percent
lower.
9
  The Enhanced General Data Dissemination System is available at http://dsbb.imf.org/pages/GDDS/TableB.aspx.

                                                               5
 
percentage points in urban areas between 2009/10 and 2011/12. Conversely, in the middle of
Argentina’s debt crisis, the poverty headcount rate rose by nearly 10 percentage points in urban
areas within a single year. Therefore, in line with the GDDS upper bound for survey periodicity,
the World Bank Household Survey Strategy recommends that data on poverty and inequality be
produced every 3 years at a minimum. Given the requirement of reporting poverty and shared
prosperity statistics on an annual basis as part of global monitoring, increasing the frequency and
availability of household survey data in IDA countries becomes even more critical to improving
the reliability and precision of SDG monitoring by reducing reliance on projections.10

Furthermore, the IDA status of a given country is important to understanding the underpinnings of
the WBG’s commitment to alleviate data deprivation over the period of 2016-2030. Sixty-eight
percent of the countries that are classified as data deprived by Serajuddin et al. (2015) have a
lending status of either IDA (40 countries) or Blend (i.e. 12 IDA/IBRD countries). If a minimum
of 3 poverty data points in a 10 year window is considered a necessary condition for avoiding data
deprivation, we observe 82 percent of IDA-funding eligible countries to be data deprived. The
remaining countries with IDA or Blend lending status could easily fall into deprivation if any
funding problems were to arise. India, a special case which graduated from Blend to IBRD lending
status in FY14 but which can also borrow under IDA terms through FY17, would also be classified
as data deprived under the broadened definition of the concept.11 Since prior funding is no
guarantee of future funding, all 77 countries with either IDA (59 countries) or Blend (18 countries)
lending status as well as India constitute the focus of the WBG’s commitment to alleviate data
deprivation over the period of 2016-2030.12


III. Approach to survey implementation and technical assistance cost projections

                      a. Survey implementation unit cost compilation

The first step in our cost projections was to compile a comprehensive, cross-country database of
actual survey implementation unit costs (i.e. costs per sampled household). In compiling this
database, we focused on surveys that 1) have a multi-topic focus while collecting information
towards the construction of a comprehensive, often consumption-based, welfare aggregate and 2)
are implemented by NSOs and integrated into NSSs. This decision was informed by the World
Bank Shared Strategy for Household Surveys and its specific recommendations that Bank-

                                                            
10
   Since household consumption surveys for countries do not always coincide with the reference year for which global
poverty is estimated, the World Bank fills data gaps based on projections, which are far less reliable than poverty and
inequality statistics directly estimated from household survey data.
11
   The broadened definition would necessitate multi-topic survey data production every 3 years.
12
   Regarding the non-IDA countries that are considered data deprived under the broadened definition of the concept,
we assume that their data deprivation is not a result of a lack of funding but is instead due to other prohibitive factors
such as a lack of prioritization of data collection, and limitations to data access.

                                                               6
 
supported household surveys should 1) allow for the creation of a comprehensive welfare
aggregate to track poverty and shared prosperity, and 2) be multi-topic, building on the World
Bank’s intellectual leadership in setting standards in multi-topic household survey design and
implementation through the Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS) program.13 These
surveys are non-uniform across countries in terms of questionnaire design, sampling design,
fieldwork organization, and approaches to data entry and processing. Understanding the local
context, the institutional capacity for survey design, implementation and analysis, and the incentive
structures for headquarters- and field-based survey staff are therefore crucial for formulating
survey implementation budgets and understanding cross-country variation.

The first input into our database implementation unit cost estimates is a database of
implementation unit costs that was compiled by the LSMS team on the basis of the detailed survey
implementation budgets tied to selected surveys that are supported by the Living Standards
Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA) initiative in sub-Saharan
Africa.14 The detailed survey implementation budgets are sourced from 6 countries and are
associated with the Ethiopia Socioeconomic Survey (ESS) 2011/12, Malawi Third Integrated
Household Survey (IHS3) 2010/11, Niger Enquete Nationale sur les Conditions de Vie des
Menages et l’Agriculture 2011, Nigeria General Household Survey (GHS) – Panel 2010/11,
Tanzania National Panel Survey 2008/09, and Uganda National Panel Survey 2009/10.

Although these surveys are not used to estimate official poverty statistics, with the exception of
Malawi IHS3 2010/11, they match the multi-topic household survey design criterion
recommended by the World Bank Household Survey Strategy, and are integrated into the
respective country NSSs. The specific LSMS-ISA supported survey waves that inform our analysis
are the baseline for the respective panel survey programs; thus, their unit costs are applicable in
the context of the cross-sectional household surveys that will be supported by the World Bank over

                                                            
13
   As recommended by the World Bank Household Survey Strategy, the questionnaire should cover relevant
Classification of Individual Consumption According to Purpose (COICOP) categories with sufficient specificity and
should elicit information on quantities of food items that are consumed (in addition to expenditures). In doing so, the
surveys will continue to fulfill their traditional roles of providing vital inputs into constructing national accounts and
the consumer price indexes. Beyond the collection of consumption/income data, the multi-topic questionnaire should
also cover an integrated range of topics including demographics; education; health; housing; wage, non-farm self-,
and on-farm self-employment activities and income; non-labor income; asset ownership; food security; shocks and
coping strategies; social protection; and child anthropometry (World Bank 2015b). For instance, in line with the data
priorities articulated in the World Bank Gender Strategy, the recommendation is to gradually expand the scope of
individual-level data collection and to collect data not only on education, health and employment, but also on
ownership of and rights to physical and financial assets (World Bank 2015d). To the extent possible, the core modules
for the collection of key indicators for the SDGs are recommended to be harmonized across countries, taking into
account countries’ different starting points and capacity.
14
   The LSMS-ISA is a household survey program that was established with a grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation to provide financial and technical support to governments in sub-Saharan Africa in the design and
implementation of multi-topic, national, panel household surveys with a strong focus on agriculture. The program is
implemented by the Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS) housed in the Survey Unit of the World Bank
Development Data Group (www.worldbank.org/lsms).

                                                               7
 
the period of 2016-2030. The granular cost breakdowns of the LSMS-ISA database suggest that
there is considerable variation in terms of aggregate costs for specific budget categories,
inclusion/exclusion of line items in a given category, and unit costs for comparable line items. The
factors underlying the cross-country variations include:

    1) whether a given cost category/line item is absorbed through technical assistance outside
       the implementation budget (such as data analysis and dissemination, training and capacity
       building activities, and specialized equipment procurement outside the country),
    2) survey duration, sample size and spatial distribution,
    3) interview length and approach to respondent selection,
    4) survey mode (computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) versus pen-and-paper
       interviewing (PAPI) with field-based data entry and processing versus PAPI with
       centralized data entry and processing),
    5) required field staff and their organization (mobile teams versus resident enumerators, need
       for specialized staff),
    6) in-country salary and per diem structure for field-based and supervisory staff, and
    7) costs for vehicle purchase versus rental, maintenance and repairs.

The second step in our analysis was to expand the country coverage and the regional representation
of the survey implementation unit cost estimates, including as much as possible surveys that are
used for estimating official poverty and inequality statistics. While the advantage of this database
is that it includes actual implementation costs of household surveys that have been used for
estimating official poverty statistics, its disadvantage is that the design and quality of surveys differ
quite significantly across countries. To conduct a comparative review of the survey
implementation budgets tied to the LSMS-ISA activities, we first created templates for aggregate
and detailed implementation cost reporting for multi-topic household surveys to ensure to the
extent possible cross-country consistency in accounting, both within and across budget categories.
The templates, which are provided in the Appendix Tables A1 and A2, were in turn circulated
among World Bank staff to facilitate their intelligence gathering from their NSO counterparts. The
information that was received from the regional poverty economists was based on Appendix Table
A1, with Table A2 serving as a reference point for the types of expenditures that could be included
under the aggregate implementation cost categories in Table A1.

The final database of country-specific implementation costs per household (in USD 2014 prices)
is presented in Table 1, based on the inputs received as of June 2016, spanning 18 countries from
all six regions. Of the 18 countries, three are from South Asia, six from sub-Saharan Africa, two
from Middle East and North Africa, five from Latin America and the Caribbean and one country
each from Europe and Central Asia, and East Asia and Pacific. While nine out of 18 countries are




                                                   8
 
low income, there are five lower middle and four upper middle income countries in the mix as
well. Finally, four countries are classified as fragile and conflict-affected situations.15

There is significant cross-country variation in unit costs. While the average unit cost is about USD
170, the unit costs range from USD 36 to nearly USD 360. Some of the cost patterns are instructive:
for example, surveys in sub-Saharan Africa tend to be more expensive, while in three of the four
fragile countries unit costs are lower than the average. Since we do not have actual survey
implementation costs per household for all 78 countries of interest, to estimate the total costs of
implementing 390 surveys over the period of 2016-2030, we would need to compute average costs
from our sample of 18 surveys. The divergent costs across surveys suggest that the method for
calculating the average (by region, income group or fragility) will have a stated impact on the total
cost estimates. Furthermore, the large disparity in unit costs suggests the importance of gathering
detailed information from more countries. Currently, there is no representation from small island
countries, and Europe and Central Asia and East Asia and Pacific are represented by only one
country. If we restrict our focus to the estimation of survey implementation costs for IDA and
IDA/IBRD blend countries, this is less problematic. However, once we expand this costing
exercise to all countries facing data gaps, the lack of data on unit costs from small island countries
could cause a potential bias in our estimates.


                      b. Sample size formulation for implementation cost projections

The sample size of household surveys is another important determinant of survey implementation
costs. According to our database, the sample size of the household surveys varies largely from
slightly under 3,000 (Uganda 2009/10) to around 27,000 (Peru 2014). The average survey size is
about 11,000 households and the median is 9,000. While the required sample size can differ
significantly across countries, for the current exercise, we use a normative sample of 7,000
households. The sample size of 7,000 households within a two-stage cluster sampling framework
is envisioned to yield poverty and inequality statistics at national- and five to ten sub-national-
(regional) levels. The sample size is multiplied by the unit cost associated for each of the 78
countries and the number of surveys to be conducted by each country over the 15-year period (i.e.
5 surveys) while defining the total implementation budget envelope. Since the reliability of the
estimates depends on the variability of consumption or income data in each country, the robustness
of the survey implementation cost estimates is also assessed under alternative sample sizes of
5,000, 9,000 and 11,000.16

                                                            
15
   The list of “fragile situations” is available at: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTLICUS/Resources/511777-
1269623894864/FY15FragileSituationList.pdf. We refer to fragile and conflict-affected situations as “fragile states”
or “fragile countries.”
16
   The World Bank Household Survey Strategy notes that larger countries would consider larger sample size to produce
statistics at the sub-state level. For small area statistics, the use of model-based estimates could be promoted as an
alternative to increased sample sizes.

                                                               9
 
                      c. Technical assistance cost estimation17

The key bottleneck of survey implementation in data-scarce environments is not solely lack of
funding but also lack of technical capacity. Indeed, while many countries receive technical
assistance from international development partners in conducting household surveys, detailed data
on technical assistance expenditures are seldom available. Table 2 provides a breakdown of
technical assistance expenditures across major expenditure categories (i.e. staff time, consultant
expenditures, and travel and miscellaneous costs) for selected countries and their baseline (national
multi-topic household surveys that were supported by the LSMS-ISA program and that are among
the surveys in Table 1).

The figures are based on disaggregated expenditure records obtained from the LSMS-ISA trust
fund in support of the types of technical assistance activities detailed here. For each survey, the
activities spanned a 24-month period, cutting across two to three fiscal years depending on the
survey period of implementation. The cross-country average for technical assistance cost per
survey is USD 613,956, based on expenditures of USD 525,904 for Ethiopia ESS 2011/12, Malawi
IHS3 2010/11 and Nigeria GHS-Panel 2010/11.

For defining the budget envelope for technical assistance over the period of 2016-2030, our
analysis assumes an average cost of USD 540,000 (in 2014 prices) per survey to provide direct
technical assistance for survey design and implementation and for the dissemination of the
resulting unit-record data in an anonymized fashion (preferably within 6 months of completion of
fieldwork). This is closer to the lower bound in Table 2 and is anchored primarily in the LSMS
experience with providing hands-on technical assistance in 8 data-deprived settings in Africa as
part of the LSMS-ISA initiative since 2008.

Assuming 12 months of fieldwork, the budget would be allocated across a 24-month period that
includes a 6-month design phase, a 12-month implementation phase and a 6-month data
processing, editing, analysis and dissemination phase. Table 3 provides a template for a budget of
approximately USD 540,000 to finance technical assistance activities for a multi-topic household
survey with field-based data entry and a resident advisor stationed in the country. The budget
covers staff time, consultant expenditures, and travel and miscellaneous costs spread across a 24-
month period and the three distinct phases of implementation as described above.

As suggested by the World Bank Household Survey Strategy, in low-capacity, data deprived
settings, the chief part of the technical assistance budget of the budget would be allocated towards
                                                            
17
  This section details the types of activities that could be financed as part of the technical assistance provided to the
NSOs in data-deprived in support of the design, implementation and analysis of the household surveys of interest. The
choice of the elements of the technical assistance package is anchored in the recommendations of the World Bank
Household Survey Strategy. The financing arrangement for the technical assistance provision is one factor that would
mediate the way in which these services are provided to the countries.

                                                               10
 
the recruitment of a Resident Advisor to be stationed in-country for an extended period of time
who will support survey preparation, implementation and processing. Despite being an
arrangement that is envisioned to be rolled out gradually over the period of 2016-2030, we consider
this form of intensive engagement to be necessary to ensure that the surveys are implemented in
the expected timeframe, as well as to provide long-term capacity building which would ultimately
allow the countries to assume more of the technical responsibilities over time.

The Resident Advisor would work closely with the NSO survey management team to 1) aid in
questionnaire design, survey documentation and field staff manuals, 2) provide field staff training,
3) conduct supplementary fieldwork supervision, 4) support data entry, processing and quality
control operations, 5) carry out capacity building exercises for the NSO survey management team,
and 6) represent the World Bank in in-country meetings as necessary. The primary deliverable tied
to the Resident Advisor’s work program would be the cleaned, anonymized unit-record household
survey data, ready for public dissemination and with the accompanying survey basic information
document, finalized questionnaires, and field staff manuals.

Complementing the Resident Advisor, World Bank staff members (whether placed in the country,
region or Washington, D.C.) are envisioned to work on the survey work program on a part-time
basis, fulfilling a supervisory role and providing remote support as well as hands-on technical
assistance through extended missions on all facets of survey preparation and implementation,
including donor coordination, survey design, questionnaire design, fieldwork organization,
piloting, household listing, field staff training, establishment of a data quality control system,
fieldwork supervision, and data analysis. Following the completion of the fieldwork, this staff
member would also provide analytical support to the NSO team working on the survey report and
be responsible for quality assurance over the product.

Two specific aspects of a work program that typically need support in a data-deprived setting are
sampling design and development of a data entry and processing platform. On sampling, an
experienced sampler can be hired in-country, internationally, or from within the World Bank. On
the architecture, development, testing and maintenance/troubleshooting of a data entry and
processing platform, similar experts would be needed. Depending on the data entry platform for a
CAPI or a PAPI operation, Bank staff (especially if using the World Bank’s Survey Solutions CAPI
platform) or outside consultant costs may need to be covered.

Furthermore, the technical assistance budget would finance extended missions before, during and
following the fieldwork in each round of data collection to work closely with the NSO and field
teams and ensure 1) timely commencement of field activities, 2) systematic training and
supervision of field staff, 3) appropriate implementation of data entry, processing and quality
control protocols, and 4) adequate support towards a NSO analytical work program based on the
incoming data for facilitating faster dissemination of the survey report. A portion of the technical


                                                11
 
assistance budget could also be utilized for selected NSO staff to attend training workshops and
other international conferences/workshops relevant for the country-specific household survey
work program.

It is clear that the budgeted and accrued technical assistance expenditures may vary across
countries depending on 1) budget constraints, 2) overall survey design and complexity; 3) NSO
capacity for questionnaire and sampling design, prevailing approach to fieldwork management and
data quality control, capacity for data curation and analysis, and track record for data
dissemination; and 4) donor aspirations for long-term capacity building. The variation may depend
also on the fieldwork duration, which is assumed to be 12 months in Table 3, as well as whether
the resident advisor will be specific to a given country or could be assigned regionally in
circumstances when economies of scale could be achieved by implementing a regional household
survey initiative. The latter, for instance, is likely a more sensible approach to technical assistance
provision in the context of small island countries.


                      d. Projected growth in survey implementation and technical assistance costs

Will the costs of survey implementation and technical assistance increase in real terms over the
course of the 15-year period (2016-2030)?18 This is an empirical question for which there is little
data that can offer an answer.19 On the one hand, improvements in data capture, processing, and
dissemination can increase the cost-effectiveness of data production. Also, technological
improvements and improving training for enumerators might soften scarcity of qualified
enumerators, especially in Africa where the survey implementation cost per household is
significantly higher than in other regions. If technological improvements and improving training
enable average labor to conduct data collection, the survey implementation cost in Africa should
decline. On the other hand, survey costs could increase in real terms due to (i) increased complexity
of questionnaire instruments and fieldwork protocols to meet demands for more and higher quality
data collected at the individual-level on priority topics20 and at the parcel- and crop-levels for
minimum core agricultural data per the questionnaire design recommended in World Bank
(2015b); (ii) local currencies appreciating against the US dollar (increasing the costs expressed in
US dollars); and/or (iii) labor costs (e.g., costs of hiring enumerators, supervisors and trainers)


                                                            
18
   We assume away inflation as all cost estimates are presented in 2014 prices in US dollars.
19
   Of the 18 countries for which survey implementation cost is available, only one country has cost estimates from
more than one survey.
20
   Take, for instance, the demand for reducing the use of proxy respondents to collect in individual-level data on new
priority areas that are highlighted by World Bank (2015d) and that include employment, entrepreneurship and asset
ownership. Kilic and Moylan (2016) demonstrate that following the recommended practice of conducting private
interviews with the adults of the same household for collecting information on personal ownership of and rights to
physical and financial assets implies an increase of 31 percent in per household interview cost compared to the status
quo that allows for the use of proxy respondents.

                                                               12
 
increasing over time as more sophisticated survey instruments may require hiring a better educated
labor force.

This study assumes a constant annual increase of 2.5 percent in costs of survey implementation
and technical assistance. It is worth noting that even if the annual growth rate of costs is constant,
total survey costs may differ depending on the timing of survey implementation. For example, the
total cost of implementing five surveys within a country is much smaller if all surveys are
conducted in the first five years of the 15-year period between 2016 and 2030 than in the last five
years. Even if the five surveys were to be conducted every three years, costs would vary depending
on when the first survey starts.

In our analysis, we assume that all the 78 countries carry out surveys every three years, with the
implementation of the first surveys uniformly distributed between 2016 and 2018. Under this
assumption, 28 household surveys will be implemented every year. This assumption appears to be
strong; however, the global World Development Indicators database of poverty estimates shows
that the total number of household surveys conducted each year remained more or less the same
in the last 10 years. Under these assumptions, the total survey cost over the 15-year period is
estimated to be 20 percent higher than the total cost if there is no increase in costs of the survey
implementation and technical assistance.

To appreciate the impact of the assumption of 2.5 percent annual growth in costs, we further
estimate the increases in the total survey costs by assuming different growth rates such as 2 and 3
percent. The analysis suggests that a 1 percentage point increase in the growth rate increases the
total cost estimate by approximately USD 70 million, which accounts for about 7.5 percent of the
total costs if there is no growth in the survey cost.


IV. Total survey implementation and technical assistance costs

Building on our discussion in the previous section, a baseline total survey implementation cost
estimate is calculated assuming that 1) each country implements a multi-topic household survey
every three years, allowing for the estimation of official poverty and inequality statistics; 2) a
sample of 7,000 households is interviewed per survey; 3) each country’s estimated survey
implementation cost per household is identical to the regional average derived for that country
from our database of survey implementation costs; and 4) the survey implementation costs per
household grow at an annual rate of 2.5 percent. We will refer to these as our preferred
implementation cost assumptions. Under these assumptions, an estimated USD 692 million in
2014 prices would be needed for conducting multi-topic household surveys every three years in
the 78 countries of interest over the 15-year period between 2016 and 2030.



                                                 13
 
Table 4 provides a summary of the funding needs under these assumptions by regions and lending
categories. Sub-Saharan Africa and IDA countries explain the vast majority of the total estimated
cost, 76 percent and 82 percent, respectively, which supports the World Bank’s commitment to
supporting data production in the poorest countries. The total cost of technical assistance provision
in all countries in support of a total of 390 surveys across the 15-year period of interest will be
approximately USD 253 million, assuming a uniform technical assistance provision cost of USD
540,000 per survey that grows at the same rate as the survey implementation cost. The total survey
implementation and technical assistance costs amount to USD 945 million, of which survey
operation costs explain 73 percent.

A main challenge of this estimation exercise is that for most of the 78 countries, actual unit cost
estimates are not available and costs need to be imputed from our cost database of 18 countries.
There are at least three approaches that could be used for the imputation of the unit costs. For our
baseline estimates of USD 690 million for the cost of survey operations, we assumed that the unit
cost of a country is the same as the regional average unit cost. A clear concern here is that East
Asia and Pacific and Europe and Central Asia each have one actual unit cost estimate. Average
unit costs can be calculated by country income classification as well. Finally, the average of all 18
countries could be chosen as the unit cost for all of the 78 countries.

Table 5 includes total survey implementation and technical assistance cost estimates based on 1)
whether the region-specific, the income class-specific, and the global average unit cost is assigned
to each of the 78 countries of interest; and 2) different assumptions on sample size (5,000; 7,000;
9,000; 11,000) and annual growth rate of unit costs (0 percent; 2 percent; 2.5 percent; 3 percent).
Depending on the assumptions, the estimated total cost of survey operations varies from USD 371
million to over USD 1.1 billion. The median total cost of all the options presented in Table 5 is
USD 695 million, coincidentally very close to the paper’s preferred estimate of USD 692 million.
Using the income class-specific average unit costs or the global average unit cost that grow at an
annual rate of 2.5 percent and interviewing 7,000 households per survey, the total survey
implementation cost estimates decrease slightly to USD 651 million and USD 623 million,
respectively. These changes are mainly driven by the fact that the average unit cost in sub-Saharan
Africa is higher, and the region accounts for 39 of the 78 countries of interest.

Needless to say, these estimates based on different notions of average unit cost mask important
details. For example, while assigning regional average unit costs to countries, we assume the same
unit cost for Low Income (e.g., the Democratic Republic of Congo) and Lower Middle Income
(e.g., the Republic of Congo) countries in the same region. On the other hand, assigning income
class-specific average unit costs to countries implies that the unit cost in the Democratic Republic
of Congo is the same as in Tajikistan and Haiti, as they are also Low Income countries. Mindful
of these considerations, we still rely on regional averages for our baseline estimates to impute unit
costs. This is a simple and transparent measure that captures regional heterogeneity in survey costs.


                                                 14
 
Finally, Table 6 shows the same set of total survey implementation and technical assistance cost
scenarios depicted in Table 5 but for 102, as opposed to 78, countries, which includes all 78
countries of interest plus 24 countries that are either data deprived or vulnerable to data deprivation
according to Serajuddin et al. (2015). Raising the number of target countries by 30 percent, using
our preferred implementation cost assignments, and assuming a uniform technical assistance
provision cost of USD 540,000 per survey with an annual growth rate of 2.5 percent, the total
survey implementation and technical assistance costs rise to USD 890 million and USD 334
million, respectively. These estimates are 29 percent higher than the preferred total survey
implementation cost estimate of USD 692 million, and 32 percent higher than the preferred total
technical assistance cost estimate of USD 253 million.


V. Conclusion

While the evidence base for monitoring poverty and shared prosperity has been improving over
time, challenges remain. To address these challenges, the World Bank is committed to support 78
IDA and IDA/IBRD countries as well as India to collect the multi-topic household survey data
needed to estimate poverty and shared prosperity every three years between 2016 and 2030. This
translates to conducting 390 surveys over a 15-year period. This paper estimates the cost of filling
these gaps in household survey data to monitor the World Bank’s poverty and shared prosperity
goals. Once collected based on international best practices, the resulting multi-topic data would
capture not only the progress towards the Twin Goals but also the profiles of the poor, the multi-
dimensionality of household and individual welfare, linkages between poverty and other
socioeconomic outcomes and policies, and a host of SDG indicators.

Our analysis 1) uses unique country-level information on actual survey implementation and
technical assistance costs, 2) is anchored in the recommendations of the World Bank Household
Survey Strategy for Household Surveys regarding optimal questionnaire and sampling design, and
3) is anchored in the World Bank’s experience in supporting the NSOs in the production of multi-
topic household survey data through the Living Standards Measurement Study program and the
Poverty and Equity Global Practice. The budget envelope for delivering on the ambitious agenda
laid out by WBG President Jim Yong Kim is estimated at USD 945 million, of which USD 692
million is projected to cover the costs of household survey implementation across 78 countries,
and USD 253 million is projected to cover the costs of direct technical assistance provided to
NSOs. These estimates imply an annual allocation of 46.1 million for survey implementation and
16.9 million for technical assistance.

This is an estimate for overall resource requirements and is not indicative of costs for each specific
survey since the cost environment for surveys can differ significantly across countries. Moreover,
as mentioned earlier, these cost estimates may be subject to change as the database of countries


                                                  15
 
which underlie this paper’s estimates of unit costs of implementing surveys is expanded.
Moreover, costs will vary depending on the level of detail of a given survey.21 In order to improve
our understanding about the price of household survey data, it is important to systematically collect
both ex-ante cost estimates during the survey design phase as well as ex-post actual costs for survey
implementation and technical assistance.

Related to this, it is important to undertake further analyses to understand why the survey
implementation cost in Africa is so high. Our current database suggests that household survey
implementation in Africa costs at least USD 300 per household, which is easily five times more
than the comparable figure in other regions, such as Europe and Central Asia (ECA) and Latin
America and Caribbean (LAC), with more developed countries. One reason may be that the
selected surveys in Africa are more complex than those implemented in ECA and LAC. If this is
the case, an important question is what level of complexity we should aim to maintain. Increasing
the complexity of a survey may raise survey implementation costs and exert potentially adverse
effects on data quality if increased complexity is not met with commensurate resources for
technical assistance. Another reason may be that hiring of qualified and well-educated enumerators
in Africa may be costlier than in other regions.22 While the average enumerator compensation in
Africa may be lower, finding well-educated and highly qualified enumerators might be more
difficult. The scarcity of qualified enumerators might in turn increase labor costs and thus survey
implementation costs in Africa. If this is the case, improving training quality for enumerators and
simplifying data collection via new technologies will be critical for reducing survey costs and
increasing country’s ability to self-finance survey implementation.

Support to data production alone will not be sufficient to alleviate weaknesses in survey methods
underlying sustainable development data. The World Bank Household Survey Strategy notes that
if poor quality and limited comparability of the available survey data are considered, the cross-
country outlook of data deprivation would worsen. There are stark cross-country differences in the
methods for measuring household consumption expenditures, income, and a multitude of


                                                            
21
   The cost estimates include neither the resources that are required to strengthen the internal expertise at the World
Bank nor the resources required from the countries and the international development partners at large for financing
the expertise and ancillary data for statistical and economic analyses that need to be conducted with the data. Also
beyond the scope of this study is a discussion of funding mechanisms, which must include an over-time increasing
share of survey implementation costs covered by the countries, complemented by IDA funds, IBRD loans, trust funds
and other bilateral financing arrangements between the countries and the broader donor community. The required
funding could come from considering a soft commitment of 1% of each IDA replenishment towards data production,
as suggested by the World Bank Household Survey Strategy. The regional IDA loan to support the harmonization of
household surveys in West African Economic Monetary Union countries is a good example of securing funding on a
multi-annual basis to support the production of household surveys in a number of countries in a harmonized and cost-
effective fashion.
22
   In private communication, Geoffrey Greenwell of Paris21 indicated that in the study undertaken by UNSDSN
(2015), the transportation and personnel costs were highest in Africa, and were, respectively, 3 times and 2.4 times
above the average.

                                                               16
 
development outcomes (World Bank, 2015a), and these differences limit richer analyses that could
establish linkages across domains of household and individual welfare.

The quality, reliability, relevance and cost-effectiveness of household survey data depend on the
availability of well-documented, validated data collection tools and methods, which must be
continuously adapted to account for new data needs and to take advantage of new technologies
and linkages between data sources. Moreover, emphasis should be placed on promoting greater
harmonization in content and methodology used in cross-country household survey operations.
Establishing best practices and international standards for cross-country data collection requires
methodological research, which is an international public good that must be supported in a
systematic fashion by countries and their international development partners. The costing of the
direct and in-kind contributions of client countries, the World Bank and development partners
towards a global methodological research agenda coordinated by the Intersecretariat Working
Group on Household Surveys (IWGHS)23 are outside the scope of the current study. However, the
multi-topic, multi-purpose nature of the recommended questionnaire instrument and the need for
greater harmonization make it imperative to invest in methodological research, further develop
data production and analysis standards, as well as to work across sectors and institutions in order
to marshal the greatest expertise towards better harmonization of methodologies.




                                                            
23
     United Nations Economic and Social Council (2015) provides the terms of reference for the IWGHS.

                                                               17
 
References

Atamanov, A., Wieser, C. Uematsu, H., Yoshida, N., Nguyen, C. M., De Azevedo, J.P.W., and
        Dewina, R. (2016). “Robustness of shared prosperity estimates how different
        methodological choices matter.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 7611.
Deaton, A. (2015). “Measuring and understanding behavior, welfare and poverty.” American
        Economic Review 106.6, pp. 1221–1243.
Deaton, A. (1997). The analysis of household surveys: a microeconometric approach to
        development policy. Baltimore, Maryland: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Demombynes, G., and J. Sandefur. (2014). “Costing a data revolution.” Center for Global
        Development Working Paper No. 383. Retrieved from:
        http://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/demombynes-sandefur-costing-data-
        revolution_1.pdf
Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data (2016). “The state of development data
        funding 2016.” Retrieved from
        http://opendatawatch.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/development-data-funding-
        2016.pdf.
Jerven, M. (2014). “Benefits and costs of the data for development targets for the post-2015
        development agenda.” Post-2015 Consensus Working Paper. Retrieved from:
        http://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/sites/default/files/data_assessment_-_jerven.pdf
Kilic, T., and Moylan, H. (2016). “Methodological experiment on measuring asset ownership from
        a gender perspective (MEXA): technical report.” Washington, DC: World Bank. Retrieved
        from
        http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTLSMS/Resources/3358986-
        1423600559701/MEXA_Technical_Report.pdf.
Narayan, A., J. Saavedra-chanduvi, and S. Tiwari. 2013. “Shared prosperity links to growth ,
        inequality and inequality of opportunity.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.
        6649.
Serajuddin, U., Uematsu, H., Wieser, C., Yoshida, N., and Dabalen, A. (2015). “Data deprivation:
        another deprivation to end.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 7252.
United Nations Economic and Social Council (2016). “Report of the inter-agency and expert group
        on sustainable development goal indicators.” Retrieved from:
        http://unstats.un.org/unsd/statcom/47th-session/documents/2016-2-SDGs-Rev1-E.pdf.
United Nations Economic and Social Council (2015). “Intersecretariat working group on
        household surveys: report of the Secretary-General.” Retrieved from
        http://unstats.un.org/unsd/statcom/47th-session/documents/2016-21-ISWG-on-
        household-surveys-E.pdf
United Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network (2015). “Data for development: a
        needs assessment for SDG monitoring and statistical capacity development.” Retrieved
        from
        http://unsdsn.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/Data-for-Development-Full-Report.pdf.


                                              18
 
World Bank (2016). “PovcalNet an online analysis tool for global poverty monitoring.” Available
      at: http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/index.htm?2.
World Bank (2015a). “A measured approach to ending poverty and boosting shared prosperity:
      concepts, data, and the twin goals.” Policy Research Report. Washington, DC: World
      Bank.
World Bank (2015b). “World Bank shared strategy for household surveys: tracking the twin goals
      and informing investment and policy decisions.” Washington, DC: The World Bank.
World Bank (2015c). “World Bank implementation strategy for household surveys 2016-2030.”
      Washington, DC: The World Bank.
World Bank (2015d). “World Bank gender strategy (FY16-23): gender equality, poverty reduction
      and inclusive growth.” Washington, DC: The World Bank. Retrieved from
      http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/820851467992505410/pdf/102114-
      REVISED-PUBLIC-WBG-Gender-Strategy.pdf.




                                              19
 
                                          FIGURES AND TABLES

                                      Figure 1: Availability of Poverty Data




Note: For the details on the terminology associated with the legends, please see Serajuddin et al. (2015).




                                                          20
 
                                              Table 1: Country-Specific Implementation Unit (Per Household) Costs
                                                                                                Survey          Sample        Real      Regional Average
    Country              Region Fragility Status†       Income Class†     Survey                                                         Real Unit Cost‡
                                                                                                Year            Size      Unit Cost‡
    Afghanistan          SA        Fragile              LI                LCS                   2014            21,000      109.25            126.38
    Bangladesh           SA        Not Fragile          LI                HIES                  2010            12,240       64.00            126.38
    Colombia             LAC       Not Fragile          UMI               IHS                   2014            22,000       88.03            105.54
    Costa Rica           LAC       Not Fragile          UMI               LSS (Average of 7)    2006-2012       11,871      121.27            105.54
    Ethiopia             AFR       Not Fragile          LI                ESS                   2011/12         3,969       331.24            322.99
    Guatemala            LAC       Not Fragile          LMI               ENCV                  2014            11,554      134.71            105.54
    Iraq                 MENA Fragile                   UMI               HSS                   2012            26,000      149.23            223.82
    Kyrgyz Republic      ECA       Not Fragile          LMI               IHS                   2003            5,016        48.58             48.58
    Malawi               AFR       Not Fragile          LI                IHS                   2010/11         12,271      199.48            322.99
    Myanmar              EAP       Not Fragile          LI                IHS                   2015            3,600        82.27             82.27
    Nepal                SA        Not Fragile          LI                LSS                   2010            5,988       205.89            126.38
    Nicaragua            LAC       Not Fragile          LMI               EMNV                  2014            7,897        97.84            105.54
    Niger                AFR       Not Fragile          LI                ENCVA                 2011            4,000       296.74            322.99
    Nigeria              AFR       Not Fragile          LMI               GHS-Panel             2010/11         4,916       406.03            322.99
    Peru                 LAC       Not Fragile          UMI               NHS                   2014            26,456       85.86            105.54
    Tanzania             AFR       Not Fragile          LI                NPS                   2008/09         3,265       308.57            322.99
    Uganda               AFR       Not Fragile          LI                NPS                   2009/10         2,975       395.90            322.99
    Yemen                MENA Fragile                   LMI               HBS                   2014            14,400      298.42            223.82
    Notes: † World Bank FY2015 classification. ‡ Real unit cost is in USD 2014 prices. Abbreviations for Regions: AFR - Africa. EAP - East Asia and Pacific.
    ECA - Europe and Central Asia. LAC - Latin America and Caribbean. MENA - Middle East and North Africa. SA - South Asia. Abbreviations for Income
    Class: LI – Low Income. LMI – Low Middle Income. UMI – Upper Middle Income. Abbreviations for Surveys: LCS - Living Conditions Survey. HIES -
    Household Income and Expenditure Survey. IHS - Integrated Household Survey. LSS - Living Standards Survey. ESS - Ethiopia Socioeconomic Survey. ENCV
    - Encuesta Nacional de Condiciones de Vida. HSS - Household Socioeconomic Survey. EMNV - Encuesta de Mecicion de Nivel de Vida. ENCVA - Enquete
    Nationale sur les Conditions de Vie des Menages et l’Agriculture. GHS - General Household Survey. NHS - National Household Survey. NPS - National Panel
    Survey. HBS - Household Budget Survey.




                                                                              21
 
                    Table 2: Breakdown of Technical Assistance Expenditures for Selected Surveys
                                 Ethiopia ESS         Malawi IHS3         Nigeria GHS-Panel             Average
    Category                       2011/12*              2010/11†              2010/11‡
    Staff Time                      178,583               323,409               351,065                 284,352
    Consultants                     170,057               157,418               263,089                 196,854
    Travel, Miscellaneous           177,264               109,859               111,125                 132,749
    TOTAL                           525,904               590,686               725,278                 613,956
    Notes: * Ethiopia Socioeconomic Survey 2011/12. † Malawi Third Integrated Household Survey 2010/11. ‡ Nigeria
    General Household Survey - Panel 2010/11. The figures are based on the analysis of the disaggregated expenditures
    recorded in the Living Standards Measurement Study - Integrated Surveys on Agriculture trust fund database.




                                                         22
 
           Table 3: Technical Assistance Budget Template for a Multi-Topic Household Survey with Field-Based Data Entry - Total Budget of USD 540,225
                                             Pre-Field Work (6 Month Period)            Fieldwork (12 Month Period)          Post-Fieldwork (6 Month Period)
Personnel*                                 Unit Number         Unit      Total     Unit Number         Unit       Total    Unit Number        Unit       Total
                                                               Cost     (USD)                          Cost      (USD)                        Cost      (USD)
Survey Specialist (Resident)              Month       3       10,000    30,000    Month       12      10,000    120,000   Month       3      10,500    31,500
Survey Specialist (Remote)                Month       2       10,000    20,000    Month       4       10,000    40,000    Month       2      10,500    21,000
Senior Economist (Remote)                 Month       1       14,000    14,000    Month       2       14,000    28,000    Month       1      14,700    14,700
Sampling Expert (Remote)†                  Day       20        650      13,000
CSPro/Survey Solutions Programmer         Month       3       10,000    30,000
(App Design & Piloting & Revision)
CSPro/Survey Solutions Programmer                                                 Month       2       10,000    20,000    Month       1      10,500    10,500
(Maintenance & Troubleshooting)
Short Term Consultant                                                              Day        30       300        9,000    Day       30        310       9,300
(Quality Control & Analytical Support)
Travel & Accommodation Costs
  Survey Specialist (Resident)
  Round Trip (US-Country) Airfare          Trip       1       5,000      5,000                                             Trip       1       5,250      5,250
  Monthly Allowance                       Month       3       1,500      4,500    Month       12      1,500     18,000    Month       3       1,500      4,500
  Survey Specialist (Remote)
  Extended Missions‡                       Trip       2       6,500     13,000     Trip       4       6,500     26,000     Trip       2       6,825    13,650
  Senior Economist (Remote)
  Extended Missions‡                       Trip       1       6,500      6,500     Trip       2       6,500     13,000     Trip       1       6,825      6,825
  CSPro/Survey Solutions Programmer
  Extended Missions‡                       Trip       1       6,500      6,500     Trip       1       6,500       6,500
TOTAL                                                                  142,500                                  280,500                                117,225

Notes: * Personnel costs are inclusive of benefits and indirect costs.† Sampling expertise can be provided by an available staff member or a consultant. ‡ Projected extended mission
costs are meant to be inclusive of round-trip airfare, accommodation costs, per diem and other eligible expenditures.




                                                                                         23
         
      Table 4: Total Simulated Survey Implementation Costs for the Period of 2016-2030
        in 78 Countries by Region and Lending Status (USD Millions, in 2014 Prices)
                                                   Lending Status
               Region                                                                  TOTAL
                                         IDA           Blend          IBRD*
    East Asia & Pacific                   38            14                                52
    Europe & Central Asia                  6             4                                10
    Latin America & Caribbean             18            22                                40
    Middle East & North Africa            19                                              19
    South Asia                            27              11             5                42
    Sub-Saharan Africa                   461              68                             529
    TOTAL                                568              119            5               692
    Note: *The only IBRD country included in the calculation is India, for its provisional status to
    continue to receive transitional support through the IDA17 period (FY15-17).




                                                  24
 
      Table 5: Total Simulated Survey Implementation & Technical Assistance Costs under Different Scenarios for the Period of 2016-2030
                       in 78 Countries with IDA or Blend Lending Status, Inclusive of India (USD Millions, in 2014 Prices)
                                                                       Survey Implementation Costs
     Annual Growth Rate            Sample             Country-Assigned Unit Cost = Average Unit Cost Computed for…                   Technical
      in Unit Cost (%)              Size                                            Income                  All Available        Assistance  Costs*
                                                          Region
                                                                                 Classification              Countries
                                  5000                      412                       387                        371
                                  7000                      577                       542                        519
               0                                                                                                                        211
                                  9000                      742                       697                        668
                                 11000                      907                       852                        816
                                  5000                      474                       445                        426
                                  7000                      663                       624                        597
               2                                                                                                                        242
                                  9000                      853                       802                        768
                                 11000                     1,042                      980                        938
                                  5000                      494                       465                        445
                                  7000                      692                       651                        623
              2.5                                                                                                                       253
                                  9000                      890                       837                        801
                                 11000                     1,088                     1,022                       979
                                  5000                      511                       480                        460
                                  7000                      715                       672                        644
               3                                                                                                                        261
                                  9000                      920                       864                        828
                                 11000                     1,124                     1,056                      1,012
                                                                                      Median Cost                695
                                                                                        Mean Cost                716
    Notes: ** Assumed at USD 540,000 per survey, irrespective of sample size. Income Classification is according to Fiscal Year 2015 definitions.




                                                                          25
 
      Table 6: Total Simulated Survey Implementation & Technical Assistance Costs Under Different Scenarios for the Period of 2016-2030
        in 102 Countries with IDA Lending or Blend Lending or Data Deprived* Status, Inclusive of India (USD Millions, in 2014 Prices)
                                                                        Survey Implementation Costs
     Annual Growth Rate             Sample              Country-Assigned Unit Cost = Average Unit Cost Computed for…                 Technical
      in Unit Cost (%)               Size                                          Income                All Available           Assistance Costs**
                                                           Region
                                                                                Classification            Countries
                                    5000                    529                      474                      490
                                    7000                    741                      663                      686
               0                                                                                                                         278
                                    9000                    953                      853                      881
                                    11000                  1,165                    1,042                    1,077
                                    5000                    609                      545                      563
                                    7000                    852                      763                      788
               2                                                                                                                         320
                                    9000                   1,096                     980                     1,014
                                    11000                  1,340                    1,198                    1,239
                                    5000                    635                      568                      588
                                    7000                    890                      796                      823
              2.5                                                                                                                        334
                                    9000                   1,144                    1,023                    1,058
                                    11000                  1,398                    1,250                    1,293
                                    5000                    657                      587                      607
                                    7000                    919                      822                      850
               3                                                                                                                         345
                                    9000                   1,182                    1,057                    1,093
                                    11000                  1,444                    1,292                    1,336
                                                                    Median Implementation Cost                886
                                                                      Mean Implementation Cost                914

    Notes: * Data deprived status is according to Serajuddin et al. (2015). ** Assumed at USD 540,000 per survey, irrespective of sample size. Income
    Classification is according to Fiscal Year 2015 definitions.




                                                                           26
 
                                        APPENDIX

     Table A1: Template for Reporting Aggregate Implementation Cost Breakdown
    Implementation Cost Category                                       Amount
    Training & Piloting
    Fieldwork
         Fieldwork - Field Staff Per Diems
         Fieldwork - Field Staff Salaries
         Fieldwork - NSO Manager Per Diems
         Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other
    Data Processing, Analysis & Dissemination
    Equipment
    Expendables
    Administrative Costs
    TOTAL
    SURVEY COUNTRY
    SURVEY NAME
    PERIOD OF IMPLEMENTATION
         Start Month & Year
         End Month & Year
    NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLDS
    NUMBER OF INTERVIEWS PER HOUSEHOLD
    Notes. If the cost breakdown is unknown, the aggregate implementation could be
    reported, bearing in mind Table A2’s mapping of the budget line items to
    implementation cost categories. If there were vehicle purchases, the expenses should not
    be included in the "Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other" category. Instead, the
    estimated cost of renting the vehicle fleet used by the survey teams should be
    incorporated.




                                              27
 
                                             Table A2: Template for Detailed Implementation Cost Breakdown & Assignment to Aggregate Budget Categories in Table A1
                                                                                                                                                                               Amount       Amount
    Item No.                                     Item Description                            Aggregate Cost Category                     Unit      Number Cost/Unit Days
                                                                                                                                                                           (Local Currency) (US$)
          1 Development of Survey Instruments & Advocacy
               Stakeholder meetings per diems - TWC quarterly Meetings (1 day X 4times)      Administrative                            Persons
               Stakeholder meetings per diems - TWC quarterly Meetings (1 day X 4times)      Administrative                            Persons
               Fuel                                                                          Administrative
               Advocacy materials                                                            Administrative                            Materials
               Advocacy meetings per diems - participants                                    Administrative                            Persons
               Advocacy meetings per diems - drivers                                         Administrative                            Persons
               Fuel                                                                          Administrative                            Unit
               Refreshments                                                                  Administrative                            Unit
               Hire of Hall                                                                  Administrative                            Unit
               Total Development of Survey Instruments & Advocacy
          2 Piloting
               Training per diem - Enumerators                                               Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Training per diem - Data Entry Operator                                       Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Training per diem - Team Leaders                                              Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Training per diem - NSO Supervisors (Full-Time)                               Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Training per diem - NSO Managers                                              Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Training - Hall                                                               Training & Piloting                       Unit
               Training - Fuel                                                               Training & Piloting                       Unit
               Piloting per diem - Enumerators                                               Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Piloting per diem - Data Entry Operator                                       Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Piloting per diem - Team Leaders                                              Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Piloting per diem - Drivers                                                   Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Piloting supervision - NSO Supervisors (Full-Time)                            Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Piloting supervision - NSO Managers                                           Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Piloting supervision - Drivers - NSO Supervisors                              Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Piloting supervision - Drivers - NSO Managers                                 Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Piloting - Fuel                                                               Training & Piloting                       Unit
               Piloting supervision - Fuel - NSO Supervisors                                 Training & Piloting                       Unit
               Piloting supervision - Fuel - NSO Managers                                    Training & Piloting                       Unit
               Total Piloting




                                                                                                      28
 
                                                                                           Table A2 (Cont'd)
                                                                                                                                                                          Amount       Amount
    Item No.                                   Item Description                          Aggregate Cost Category                     Unit     Number Cost/Unit Days
                                                                                                                                                                      (Local Currency) (US$)
          3 Household Listing
               Per diems - Team members                                                  Fieldwork - Field Staff Per Diems         Persons
               Per diems - Team leaders                                                  Fieldwork - Field Staff Per Diems         Persons
               Per diems - Drivers                                                       Fieldwork - Field Staff Per Diems         Persons
               Per diems - Supervision - NSO Supervisors (Full-Time)                     Fieldwork - NSO Manager Per Diems         Persons
               Per diems - Supervision - NSO Managers                                    Fieldwork - NSO Manager Per Diems         Persons
               Per diems - Supervision - Drivers - NSO Supervisors                       Fieldwork - Field Staff Per Diems         Persons
               Per diems - Supervision - Drivers - NSO Managers                          Fieldwork - Field Staff Per Diems         Persons
               MV Hire - Daily charge                                                    Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Vehicles
               MV Hire - Mileage/day charge                                              Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Vehicles
               MV Hire - Insurance charge                                                Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Vehicles
               Fuel - Listing                                                            Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Unit
               Fuel - To&from NSO                                                        Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Unit
               Total Household Listing
          4 Recruitment of Staff
               Per diems - HR Officers                                                   Administrative                            Persons
               Fuel                                                                      Administrative                            Unit
               Communication costs                                                       Administrative                            Cards
               Total Recruitment of Staff
          5 Training & Field Practice
               Per diems - Enumerators                                                   Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Per diems - Data Entry Operators                                          Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Per diems - Data Editor                                                   Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Per diems - Field Supervisors                                             Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Per diems - Zone Supervisors                                              Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Fuel                                                                      Training & Piloting                       Unit
               Hall                                                                      Training & Piloting                       Unit
               Refreshments                                                              Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Per diems - NSO Supervisors (Full-Time; Includes Data Entry Supervisor)   Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Per diems - NSO Managers                                                  Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Per diems - Drivers - NSO Supervisors                                     Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Per diems - Drivers - NSO Managers                                        Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Per diems - Administrative support - Accounts                             Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Per diems - Administrative support - Logistics                            Training & Piloting                       Persons
               Total Training & Field Practice



                                                                                                  29
 
                                                                              Table A2 (Cont'd)
                                                                                                                                                             Amount       Amount
    Item No.                                  Item Description              Aggregate Cost Category                     Unit     Number Cost/Unit Days
                                                                                                                                                         (Local Currency) (US$)
          6 Field Work
               Monthly salary - Enumerators                                 Fieldwork - Field Staff Salaries          Persons
               Monthly salary - Field Supervisors                           Fieldwork - Field Staff Salaries          Persons
               Monthly salary - Data Entry Operators (In the Field)         Data Processing, Analysis, Dissemination Persons
               Monthly salary - Data Entry Operators (At the NSO)           Data Processing, Analysis, Dissemination Persons
               Monthly salary - Teams Drivers                               Fieldwork - Field Staff Salaries          Persons
               Per diem - Enumerators                                       Fieldwork - Field Staff Per Diems         Persons
               Per diem - Field Supervisors                                 Fieldwork - Field Staff Per Diems         Persons
               Per diem - Data Entry Operators                              Data Processing, Analysis, Dissemination Persons
               Per diem - Teams Drivers                                     Fieldwork - Field Staff Per Diems         Persons
               Per diem - Zone Supervisors                                  Fieldwork - NSO Manager Per Diems         Persons
               Monthly supervision per diem - NSO Supervisors (Full-Time)   Fieldwork - NSO Manager Per Diems         Persons
               Monthly supervision per diem - NSO Data Entry Supervisor     Fieldwork - NSO Manager Per Diems         Persons
               Monthly supervision per diem - NSO Managers                  Fieldwork - NSO Manager Per Diems         Persons
               Monthly supervision per diem - Drivers - NSO Supervisors     Fieldwork - Field Staff Per Diems         Persons
               Monthly supervision per diem - Drivers - NSO Managers        Fieldwork - Field Staff Per Diems         Persons
               Montly per diem - Accounts - Payment of salaries             Fieldwork - NSO Manager Per Diems         Persons
               Fuel - @7km/litre                                            Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Unit
               Fuel - @7km/litre - To & from NSO                            Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Unit
               Monthly salary - Fuel - Accounts                             Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Unit
               Fuel - NSO Supervisors                                       Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Unit
               Fuel - NSO Managers                                          Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Unit
               Field Vehicle - Maintenance                                  Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Vehicle
               Field Vehicles - Purchase of Tires                           Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Number
               Supervision Vehicles - Maintenance                           Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Vehicles
               Supervision Vehicles - Purchase of Tires                     Fieldwork - Fuel, Transportation, Other   Number
               Total Field Work




                                                                                     30
 
                                                                    Table A2 (Cont'd)
                                                                                                                                   Amount       Amount
    Item No.                                  Item Description     Aggregate Cost Category     Unit    Number Cost/Unit Days
                                                                                                                               (Local Currency) (US$)
          7 Purchase of Equipment
               Computers                                           Equipment                 Units
               Uninterrupted power supplies                        Equipment                 Units
               Laptops                                             Equipment                 Units
               Extra laptop batteries                              Equipment                 Units
               USB Drivers                                         Equipment                 Units
               Printers                                            Equipment                 Units
               GPS Units                                           Equipment                 Units
               Anthropometric measuring board                      Equipment                 Units
               Sorter Scales                                       Equipment                 Units
               Total Purchase of Equipment
          8 Printing & Stationery Costs
               Manuals printing paper                              Expendables               Rims
               Manuals printing ink                                Expendables               Bottles
               Manuals printing costs                              Expendables               Persons
               Questionaire printing costs                         Expendables               Units
               Tonner cartridge sets                               Expendables               Units
               Amonium map paper                                   Expendables               Rolls
               Map A3 paper                                        Expendables               Rolls
               Map tonner cartridge sets                           Expendables               Units
               Map printing costs                                  Expendables               Persons
               Map printer head sets                               Expendables               Units
               Map printing cleaner sets                           Expendables               Units
               Communication costs - Field Supervisors             Expendables               Cards
               Communication costs - Zone Supervisors              Expendables               Cards
               Communication costs - NSO Supervisors (Full-Time)   Expendables               Cards
               Communication costs - NSO Managers                  Expendables               Cards
               Communication costs - Data Entry Supervisor         Expendables               Cards
               Clip boards                                         Expendables               Units
               Note pads                                           Expendables               Units
               Flip charts                                         Expendables               Rolls
               Listing Stickers                                    Expendables               Boxes
               Listing Markers                                     Expendables               Boxes
               Chalk                                               Expendables               Boxes




                                                                           31
 
                                                                Table A2 (Cont'd)
                                                                                                                               Amount       Amount
    Item No.                                Item Description   Aggregate Cost Category     Unit    Number Cost/Unit Days
                                                                                                                           (Local Currency) (US$)
          8 Printing & Stationery Costs (Cont'd)
               Pens                                            Expendables               Boxes
               Labels & strings                                Expendables               Boxes
               Envelopes                                       Expendables               Boxes
               Rubber bands                                    Expendables               Boxes
               Staples wires & stapling machine                Expendables               Units
               Bags                                            Expendables               Units
               T-Shirts                                        Expendables               Shirts
               Rain coats                                      Expendables               Coats
               Gum boots                                       Expendables               Boots
               Mosquito nets                                   Expendables               Nets
               Identity cards                                  Expendables               Cards
               Bibs                                            Expendables               Units
               Total Printing & Stationery Costs
          9 Administrative Costs
               Fuel                                            Administrative
               Advertisement costs                             Administrative            Number
               Per deims                                       Administrative            Persons
               Total Administrative Costs
         10 TOTAL
         11 Contingency (If Applicable)
               GRAND TOTAL




                                                                       32
 
