                                                WPS7942


Policy Research Working Paper                 7942




 Can Media Interventions Reduce Gender
Gaps in Political Participation after Civil War?
      Evidence from a Field Experiment in Rural Liberia

                             Eric Mvukiyehe




Development Research Group
Impact Evaluation Team
January 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7942


  Abstract
  Five weeks prior to the 2011 general election in Libe-                             on female political participation both at a national and
  ria, women in randomly selected villages were allocated                            a local level. Communities that received the intervention
  radios and organized into groups to listen regularly to                            also exhibited smaller gender gaps across the majority of
  radio programs on the electoral process broadcast by the                           outcome indicators. The results suggest that UNMIL Radio
  United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). The field                               effects likely occurred through increased political efficacy
  experiment was designed to ascertain the direct effects of                         of women voters in the lead up to the elections. The study
  women’s access to politically-relevant information through                         concludes that women’s exposure to politically-relevant
  radio broadcasting on their political behaviors and attitudes                      information through mass-broadcasting, even if brief, can
  in a post-war context. Results point to positive significant                       boost their political efficacy and participation in public life.
  effects of access to United Nations Mission in Liberia Radio




  This paper is a product of the Impact Evaluation Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by the
  World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be
  contacted at emvukiyehe@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
     Can Media Interventions Reduce Gender Gaps in Political
Participation after Civil War? Evidence from a Field Experiment in
                           Rural Liberia∗
                                           Eric Mvukiyehe†




      JEL Classifications: D7, D8
      Keywords: Peacebuilding, mass-media, women’s political participation, UNMIL, Liberia.


   ∗This  study is based on a research project funded by the Folke Bernadotte Academy (FBA), a Swedish
government think tank. The study is not a formal evaluation of UNMIL Radio’s activities and has no
connections to UNMIL or UNMIL Radio. It was approved under Columbia University’s IRB-AAAI8753.
The views expressed in this report are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
funding agency. This study would not have been possible without the very able contribution of Varney
Kamara and Joseph Williams of Liberia Democracy Watch (LDW) as well as the many women and men
who participated in the program and my survey team to whom I am indebted. I thank Jack Snyder, Page
Fortna and Macartan Humphreys for their advise and support throughout my research as well as well as
participants in the Resolution 1325 workshop in Uppsala, Sweden. I also thank Cyrus Samii for his
collaboration on research tools for this and the broader Liberia peacebuilding study and Sarah Elven for
outstanding research assistance. All remaining errors are my own.
   †Economist,Development Economics Research Group, Impact Evaluation Unit, The World Bank, 1818
H Street NW, Washington DC 20433. E-mail: email: emvukiyehe@worldbank.org.
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War

1       Introduction

Despite recent policy efforts to increase women’s participation and representation in politics, signiﬁcant

gender gaps remain. Less than 10% of the world’s countries have a female head of state and fewer than 30

countries have reached the target of 30% female representation in parliament. Furthermore, women continue

to have lower electoral participation rates than men and their voting choices are often inﬂuenced by power-

brokers or household heads (Giné and Mansuri 2011; Tripp 2001; Geisler 1995).1 Gender gaps in political

participation are especially pronounced in war-torn settings, where women tend to disproportionately bear

the consequences of conﬂict (Buvinic et al. 2013; Sow 2012; Zuckerman and Greenberg 2004; Rehn and

Sirleaf 2002). While there are individual country cases where women’s representation in governing bodies

has increased in the aftermath of civil war, such representation has not necessary translated into their efﬁcacy

in voicing policy preference or interest (O’Connell 2011; Tadros 2011; Hogg 2009).

    Scholars and practitioners have pointed to a number of obstacles, including poverty, illiteracy, gen-

der roles and lack of access to information, among others, to explain gender gaps in political participation

(O’Connell 2011; Isacksson 2014; Bari 2005; Lorentzen and Turpin 1998). Women in war-torn countries

face similar barriers, in addition to signiﬁcant security and mobility constraints (Suthanthiraraj and Ayo

2010; Klot 2007; Sorensen 1998). While many of these barriers are embedded in existing power structures

and difﬁcult to eliminate in the short-term, others, such as information constraints, can be more malleable.

Since information provision can occur relatively quickly and at lower cost, interventions designed to provide

information can increase awareness and promote political participation efﬁciently (Gine and Mansuri 2011;

Kumar 2001). Motivated by this hypothesis, donors and development practitioners have increasingly sup-

ported media interventions in conﬂict and post-conﬂict situations. Some of these have speciﬁcally targeted

women, expecting knowledge to empower them to participate more effectively in public life (United Nations

2004; UNDP 2001). However, rigorous evidence about the relevance and efﬁcacy of media interventions in

promoting women’s political participation remains scant.

    This paper uses a ﬁeld experiment in rural Liberia to evaluate the effects of electoral information pro-
    1
    Evidence from recent public opinion surveys across African countries suggests that 36% of female
respondents are not interested in politics and that 39% never discuss politics. 22% and 24% were reported
for men, respectively (Afrobarometer, 2008, reported in Bleck and Michelitch 2011).



                                                       2
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


vided through mass media (radio) on the behaviors and attitudes of women voters in the context of the 2011

general election. It focuses speciﬁcally on the effects of information provided from the United Nations

Mission in Liberia’s (UNMIL) radio programming, an initiative that broadcast up-to-date and transparent

information about the election as well as details about the importance of participation. The experiment

involved providing women in randomly selected communities with direct access to a radio and organizing

them to participate in a series of weekly listening sessions to UNMIL Radio’s special electoral programs in

a group setting. It was hoped that through access to this independent source of political information, women

would become less reliant on men for political guidance, enabling them to participate in the way that was

most beneﬁcial for them. The intervention ran for ﬁve weeks in the two months preceding the 2011 general

election, at the end of which a survey was undertaken in treatment and control communities. The survey

collected a broad range of informational, attitudinal and behavioral outcomes in order to ascertain impacts

on political participation as well as the effects of the program on gender gaps.

    The study ﬁnds little evidence of a gender gap in media choice, since women in the sample were neither

more nor less likely than men to rely disproportionately on any given source of information. However, there

does seem to be a gender gap in political participation, with consistently higher male involvement across

a wide range of indicators. From a causality standpoint, the study ﬁnds evidence of increased political

participation amongst Liberian women as a result of exposure to UNMIL Radio: both local and national

forms of participation are enhanced and gender gaps are reduced in treatment communities. Further inves-

tigation of potential mechanisms at work, including political efﬁcacy, liberal norms and values and group

coordination reveals that UNMIL Radio likely inﬂuenced women’s political participation through increased

political efﬁcacy, especially in matters related to the electoral process and women’s willingness to protect

the integrity of the electoral process. On the other hand, (self-reported) subscription to liberal norms and

values is very strong at baseline and does not differ much in treatment and control communities. I conclude

that exposure to independently provided, politically relevant information in fragile settings, even if brief,

can boost women’s political efﬁcacy and participation in politics. Further work on ensuring effects persist

and in teasing out the relevant causal mechanisms are interesting routes for further study.

    The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, I discuss theoretical arguments and mecha-

nisms linking media interventions to political participation, focusing in particular on how such interventions


                                                      3
                      UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


can remove barriers to women’s political participation in fragile and conﬂict-affected settings. In Section

3, I provide some context of the intervention and discuss the design of the experiment. Section 4 discusses

measurement strategy and data sources of the key outcomes of interest. Sections 5 and 6 present empirical

results, while Section 7 discusses the results in detail. Section 8 concludes.



2         Theoretical Framework

2.1       Informational Barriers and Women’s Political Participation in Post-War Contexts

Much of the literature addressing the links between conﬂict and political engagement ﬁnds evidence for

increased citizen involvement in the wake of civil war (Blattman 2009; Bellows and Miguel 2009). However,

existing empirical evidence has largely failed to consider differential effects across genders (Garcia Ponce

2015). Since conﬂict affects women differently from how it affects men (Buvinic et al. 2013; Annan et

al 2011; Grimard and Laszlo 2010), it follows that impacts on political participation are unlikely to be the

same. Key examples of circumstances that might interact with conﬂict legacies to affect women’s political

participation in the aftermath of war include shifts in gender roles2 and changes in socio-economic status.3

      In this paper, however, my focus is on the impact of post-war informational constraints on female polit-

ical participation. In the wake of violent conﬂict, transparent and up-to-date information is often difﬁcult to

come across (Putzel and van der Zwan 2006), with any existing sources often offering partisan information

(Arsenault et al 2011; Bruce 2008) or purposefully manipulated by the elites (Platteau et al. 2014). Even

where public information is prioritized within peacekeeping operations, women are still frequently excluded

from the sources of this (UN 2003). Exclusion could be a result of gender norms restricting women’s control
      2
      With respect to gender roles, for example, conﬂict that is accompanied by high levels of sexual violence
or repress women has the effect of increasing gender gaps in political involvement. This could be as a result
of security concerns that limit female movement or their access to information. On the other hand, in
a recent empirical study in Peru, Garcia Ponce (2015) ﬁnds positive links between exposure to conﬂict
violence and greater levels of women’s political participation, suggesting that conﬂict may also present an
opportunity for evolution from traditional gender roles and lead to better political outcomes for women.
    3
      For instance, civil war can alter women’s roles, with female household heads becoming much more
common during conﬂict and average numbers of dependents increasing (if extended family members are
orphaned, for example) (Hughes 2009; Kumar 2001). These circumstances often lead to increased female
labor market participation, frequently in the informal sector, and reduced ﬁnancial security for families
(Kumar 2001). Financial pressure can also increase the propensity of families to take children (most often
female) out of formal education to help at home if their mother is working.


                                                       4
                      UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


over sources of media in the home, of socio-economic barriers which limit their access to information or

because of reduced security that makes seeking information outside of the home disproportionately dan-

gerous (Giné and Mansuri 2011). Restricted informational access leads to ignorance about current issues

and renders women vulnerable to manipulation or coercion from those with information at their disposal

(Isacksson 2014; Tripp 2001). Without consideration of the ways in which gender shapes access, the lack

of politically relevant information is likely to be a key limiting factor to women’s political participation in

post-conﬂict settings (UN 2003; Suthanthiraraj and Ayo 2010).

      Media interventions represent one of the key approaches to overcome informational barriers employed

by the international community in post-conﬂict settings (Puddephatt 2006; Spurk 2002; Kumar 2001). As

noted in a joint United Nations Education, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Swedish Inter-

national Development Agency (SIDA) strategy paper on media-best practices in conﬂict zones:

             Media plays a central role by being responsible for providing a population with relevant
        and credible information. This enables people to make well-informed choices and makes it
        possible for all parts of civil society to have access to and to participate in political governance.
        As such, media plays an essential role in ensuring accountable and transparent governance.
        It is the public arena for communication and can be used to promote freedom of expression
        and interaction between civil society groups and political decision-makers. Together, these
        functions can create more stable and sustainable political structures by promoting constructive
        communication and by decreasing perceptions of threat and zero-sum politics.


      Despite the presumed links between media and political participation, we have a limited understanding

of how media interventions might address post-war gender gaps in political participation. Below, I draw

on the social science literature to ﬁrst formulate hypotheses about the links between information provision

through broadcasting and political participation in general and then to draw implications for the political

participation of women in war-torn countries.


2.2    Linking Media Interventions to Female Political Participation in a Post-War Context

The claim that politically relevant information can inﬂuence political attitudes and participation is well es-

tablished in the political communication literature and supported by a growing observational and empirical

literature (Banerjee 2011; Beaman 2009; Dahlgren 2009; Lassen 2005; Wantchekon 2003). In the context

of US politics, Green and Gerber’s (2008) "Get out the Vote" study showed that providing voters with polit-


                                                         5
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


ically relevant information, through door-to-door canvassing, direct mail, newspapers, telephone calls, etc.,

substantially increased voter turnout. The theory of change implicit in existing empirical papers is presented

below. This structure applies speciﬁcally to informing voters about an upcoming election through the meth-

ods listed above, but could be adapted slightly to ﬁt other measures of political participation. The theory

is that access to information increases voter knowledge and provides individuals with an understanding of

the impact their vote can have, thereby increasing their political efﬁcacy (Carpini and Keeter 1993). As

well as boosting participation, information allows individuals to support candidates whose policies align to

their preferences (Bidwell et al. 2016). This use of political information to update preferences is likely to

induce a response from politicians, who are held more accountable by an informed and politically engaged

electorate. These arguments are summarized in the theory of change provided in the Appendix.

    If the above theory of change applies to post-conﬂict countries, contexts typically characterized by a

lack of independent media sources, we might expect attempts to strengthen these to be especially beneﬁcial.

Indeed, academics and policymakers, such as Kaltenborn-Stachau (2008), have suggested that an indepen-

dent media is central for efforts to foster positive citizen-state relationships in post-war environments. She

argues that the media can play an important role in addressing the civic consequences of conﬂict in places

where levels of trust are low. Likewise, Kalathil (2008) states that the media can enable citizens to shape

state-building processes and contribute to their own long-term development, politically or otherwise.

    Given the perceived importance of an independent media in post-war settings, the absence of local

provision in these contexts has often prompted external actors to intervene. Media interventions attempt to

"dissipate the rumors and propaganda disseminated by extremists, which feed social and political tensions...

and create a space for articulating diverse viewpoints, approaches, and opinions" (Kumar, 2001). They also

contribute to "transparency and accountability in public affairs, exerting pressure on political and social

leaders to behave in a responsible way."

    Existing empirical studies on the effects of informational interventions on social and political behaviors

suggest we should expect positive effects. For instance, Bidwell et al.’s (2016) randomized study investi-

gates the impact of broadcast candidate debates on voters’ political knowledge and participation in the lead

up to the 2012 parliamentary elections in post-war Sierra Leone. They estimate positive effects on voter

knowledge, further reﬂected in increased votes for candidates who performed well and for those whose poli-


                                                      6
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


cies aligned to voters’ own preferences. Giné and Mansuri (2011) speciﬁcally studied female participation

by providing politically relevant information to Pakistani women through a door-to-door campaign. Their

paper estimates a 12% increase in female political participation after links between the electoral process and

policy were explained and the importance of the secret ballot was described. Husbands of treated women

were also less able to predict their wife’s vote. Giné and Mansuri’s study was well-designed to combat is-

sues of female access to information in the context of a one-time informational campaign. However, where

it is beneﬁcial to provide information at regular intervals over a longer period, a door-to-door campaign is

not convenient.

    This study uses a group design to analyze the role of regular provision (over a short period) of politically-

relevant information by UNMIL radio.It is expected that the creation of female listening groups may result in

effects over and above simple informational impacts of a door-to-door campaign, since groups offer women

an opportunity for discussion and may even provide an arena for communal forms of political participation.

Paluck’s work offers some experimental evidence that providing political information to groups in fragile

contexts can have a positive impact on liberal social norms and on communal behavior. She uses group

broadcasts of radio soap operas in post-conﬂict contexts to promote reconciliation (Rwanda, 2009a, 2009b;

DRC, 2010; South Sudan, forthcoming). Though her research suggests that attitudes and beliefs are very

difﬁcult to alter, it estimates signiﬁcant impacts of radio soap operas on perceived social norms. These

changes are further reﬂected in participant behavior, such as in their propensity to cooperate and to express

their dissent to leaders. Paluck’s results suggest that political goals such as participation, cooperation and

reconciliation in fragile areas can be supported by media interventions in carefully-designed group settings.

    In the same vein, Bilali and Vollhardt (2015) test the effects of a radio soap opera on psychological

outcomes related to peace and community building in the context of eastern DRC and Burundi. In Burundi,

program listeners exhibited higher levels of trust, less social distance and greater trauma disclosure than

non-listeners, as well as lower in-group superiority and responsibility to other groups. In the DRC, the

authors ﬁnd mixed results: treated individuals exhibited greater inclusive victim consciousness (and lower

exclusive victim consciousness and social distance). However, they also displayed a higher propensity to

conform with leaders and less faith in the power of group discussion to overcome community division.

    As a study considering both women’s informational access and the relevance of communal engagement


                                                       7
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


in a post-war context, this study is a valuable addition to the literature described above. Our design allows

us to isolate causal effects, providing us with evidence about the importance of radio interventions for

eliminating women’s restrictions to politically-relevant information in a time when their participation is

especially important. We report a wide range of indicators in an attempt to capture a broader deﬁnition of

political participation than has typically been used in experimental work, combining national measures of

participation, such as electoral turnout and campaign involvement with indicators at the community level,

such as the attendance of and vocal participation in community meetings. Though group effects and pure

informational effects are difﬁcult to separate using this research design, I consider the possible contributions

of each after presenting the results.



3         Experimental Design

3.1       The Context and Intervention

This study assesses the impacts of exposure to electoral programming from broadcast radio on the women’s

political behaviors and attitudes in the context of the 2011 general elections in Liberia. The intervention

was motivated by growing concerns about the National Elections Commission (NEC)’s ability to educate

the Liberian public, 70% of whom are illiterate, about the electoral process.4 These fears were conﬁrmed

in the August 23 referendum, which suffered very low turnout (about 30%) and a signiﬁcant proportion

of invalid ballots (nearly 14%). There is little doubt that a large proportion of rural women were amongst

the most poorly informed. There were concerns that this scenario could repeat itself, this time with greater

risks for political unrest and even violence, given the high stakes of the election. Thus, local civil society

organizations decided that there was an urgent need to raise awareness about the electoral process. Mass

media, and in particular UNMIL Radio, seemed a promising option for doing this.5

      Established in 2003 at the end of Liberia’s 14 year civil war, UNMIL Radio is a popular and credi-
      4
      This was a frequent storyline in leading Liberian newspapers at the time of the referendum, including
the Democrat and the Observer.
    5
      The media environment in post-war Liberia was severely degraded ater the civil war. It is not surprising
that at the time of the study, UNMIL Radio was arguably the only media outlet with a comprehensive
electoral programming, covering issues such as education on electoral law and civic and voter education on
roles, rights and responsibilities. The radio also had wide coverage (two-thirds estimated coverage in terms
of population (author’s citation 2012).


                                                       8
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


ble source of information with the widest radio coverage in the country, and offered a variety of programs

and covers a wide range of issues, from children and young person’s issues, both the civilian and military

aspects of the work of the mission, humanitarian activities, current affairs, human rights, repatriation, rec-

onciliation, health (including HIV/AIDS), rule of law, security, women’s issues, journalism, civic education,

DDRR, among others. In anticipation of the November 2011 general elections, UNMIL Radio re-focused

its programming on the electoral process, covering issues such as education on electoral law, civic and

voter education on roles, rights and responsibilities, among others. While UNMIL Radio enjoys widespread

listenership and its credibility is high, listenership levels are uneven, with women having generally less

opportunity than men to access and engage with the radio’s programs (author’s citation, 2015)

    The "access to information" pilot program sought to overcome these informational barriers on the part

of women voters and enable equal participation in the political process.The intervention entailed providing

women in selected communities a radio and organizing them to participate in a series of weekly listening

sessions of UNMIL Radio’s special programs on elections, in group setting.6

    The intervention focused on ﬁve special election programs (See appendix A for a complete listing of

these.) Some of these programs, such as Dis Voting Ting, provided civic education such as the importance of

political participation, while others, such as Back to the Ballot Box, educated voters about the voting process

(e.g. how to cast the vote correctly or the importance of secret balloting). Political Happenings and Hot Seat

brought voters information about political campaigns or served as a forum for different political aspirants

to debate their agendas. Finally Around Town was an open mic program that allowed voters from different

towns to express their opinions about the elections on air.

    Listening groups of women were set up in randomly allocated treatment communities in order to isolate

any effects. They met on their own three times per week to listen to a speciﬁc electoral program in real time.

For the fourth weekly meeting, groups were joined by the staff from the implementing partner organization

to listen to and discuss a pre-recorded program. In total, the intervention consisted of at least 15 listening
   6
     UNMIL radio was aimed at listeners of any demographic country wide. Its programs were designed to
have as broad an appeal and usefulness as possible for this reason. The gender component of this study is
not centred on gender-speciﬁc content of programs therefore, but rather on the idea that women, especially
those from rural areas, were likely to have lesser access to radios than men and to lack people with whom
to discuss political matters. It is therefore the provision of access and the group setting of the listening
sessions that forms the gender component of this intervention rather than program content speciﬁcally.



                                                      9
                      UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


sessions over a period of ﬁve weeks. Weekly visits were conducted by the staff from our partner organization,

who monitored the implementation of the program.


3.2       Community selection and program implementation

The study targeted 40 rural communities and used a matched pairs design as a basis for selecting these. First,

the local partner organization selected 80 communities from two counties (Bomi and Rural Montserrado)

that were deemed potential beneﬁciaries of the program. The research team then carried out a community

assessment survey in each of these to gather demographic and socio-economic statistics based on the 2008

census by the Liberian Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information System (LISGIS). This information was

used along with the staff’s own knowledge of these areas to create community pairs that were similar in

terms of geographic and socio-economic characteristics: such as population size, number of adult women,

quality of dwellings, access to main roads, infrastructure quality, ethnicity, religion and economic activity.

The program was assigned to one community in each pair by rolling a dice. The project was then formally

launched in the 20 treatment communities, where it ran for ﬁve weeks before the ﬁrst round of elections on

October 11, 2011.7 Figure 1 depicts the forty towns by treatment status and the full list of study communities

is provided in appendix B. See appendix C for a picture of community road access and a radio handover

ceremony.

      Each week, the ﬁeld staff from the implementing partner organization visited each of the 20 "treatment"

villages at least once to observe the dynamics in group discussion sessions and play a tape of any of the

weekly UNMIL Radio programs that were missed. They recorded a wide range of information, including

number of women and men attending listenership group sessions, the topics discussed and level of enthusi-

asm for/engagement with the topics and participants’ opinions and reactions. See appendices D and E for

sample observation forms used by the ﬁeld facilitators.

      Data collection began shortly after the elections. Survey questionnaires were answered by a random

sample of 600 households drawn from the 40 communities targeted by the study (15 respondents per com-
      7
    The individual-level analysis is well powered (0.8) to detect effects above between 0.1 and 0.3 standard
deviations depending on the level of village intra-cluster correlation (this appears to be very low for the vast
majority of outcome variables). Such minimum detectable effects are sufﬁcient to determine the signiﬁ-
cance of the majority of our indicators. Standard errors are clustered at the village level in the analysis to
compensate for the fact that randomization took place at this level.


                                                      10
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


                                         Figure 1: Study Locations




munity). In each community, interviews in 10 of the 15 households were conducted with female respondents

and 5 were conducted with male respondents. Surveys also involved behavioral measurements of political

participation. The timeline for the intervention and data collection is provided in appendix F.


3.3   Randomization Checks

Did randomization work? The idea behind random assignment is that community characteristics should be

similar (in expectation) across treatment and control areas. This is important in order to be able to attribute

                                                      11
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


any differences post-implementation to treatment rather than to a priori characteristics. I test for balance

below. Table 1 presents coefﬁcient estimates from a basic logit model predicting the effects of relevant

observable community characteristics on the probability of receiving treatment. Data on these variables

was collected before the rollout of the program. Individual-level factors often associated with political

participatory behaviors, such as sex and schooling, are also included.

      Table 1 suggests that randomization worked successfully, since there is good balance between treatment

and control communities. With the exception of "schooling", which is signiﬁcant at the 10% level, com-

munity characteristics and individual-level factors are not statistically signiﬁcant for predicting treatment

status. This result provides a strong base for estimating causal effects in a more straightforward way (i.e.,

by running simple probit regressions of outcomes on treatment status).8



4         Data Sources and Measurement Strategy

4.1       Sample Selection

As mentioned above, a random sample of 600 households was drawn from the 40 communities targeted by

the study (15 respondents per community) to answer the survey questionnaire. In order for the sample to

be representative at the community level, a two-stage process was used in order to select respondents. First,

households were randomly selected by depositing enumerators at a random location in the community and

choosing households at a speciﬁed interval (e.g. every 10th or 5th house) moving in a random direction.

In each household, the respondent was then randomly selected using a roster and a deck of cards. In about

two-thirds of households, we interviewed a female respondent and these individuals make up the study’s

primary sample. However, since it was also necessary to have a male sample in order to investigate effects

on gender gaps, men were selected as respondents in one-third of the households consulted. The sample

comprises 400 females and 200 males.9
      8
      Though the study is well balanced, we use probit regressions rather than mere comparisons of means
due to the dummy nature of our dependent variables. This also allows us to control for pair characteristics
from the matching process in order to ensure that these are not determining our results and to cluster standard
errors at the village level.
    9
      While this study speciﬁcally targeted women, I thought necessary to also draw a male sample (i) to
provide additional information on women’s behaviors and attitudes; and (ii) to investigate how men perceive
women-focused interventions and to test any spillover effects of these programs.


                                                      12
  UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War




                     Table 1: Randomization Checks

                                               (UNMIL Radio)
Community-level characteristics
Town is on main road                                  -.49
                                                      (.8)
Town is accessible by car                             2.2
                                                     (1.6)
Town has women’s group                                .56
                                                     (.76)
Town has cell coverage                                -.75
                                                     (1.2)
Town has community radio                              .33
                                                     (.95)
Town has voting center                                -.54
                                                     (.75)
Town has political party ofﬁce                        .98
                                                     (1.3)
Individual-level factors
Sex (female)                                          .17
                                                     (.13)
Age (over 38)                                         -.19
                                                     (.19)
Marital status (married)                               -.3
                                                     (.34)
Some schooling                                         .4
                                                    (.21)*
Employment status                                     -.14
                                                     (.17)
Elections awareness before round1                     .04
                                                     (.23)
Constant                                              -3.4
                                                     (2.6)

Prob > Chi squared                                   0.29
N                                                    531

Note: Table displays standard errors clustered by village in parentheses.
*, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 90, 95 and 99
percent conﬁdence levels respectively.




                                   13
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


                                    Table 2: Demographics of the Sample


                                                     Female Sample                    Male Sample
                                                                 N         Percent              N        Percent
 1. Marital status   a. Married                                274            73%             156          83%
                     b. Unmarried                              101            27%              32          17%
 2. Age              a. 39-65                                  249            64%              88          45%
                     b. 18-38                                  140            36%             109          55%
 3. Education        a. No formal school                       247            63%              58          29%
                     b. Some schooling                         142            37%             139          71%
 4. Income           a. Household (average)                    362       3,158 LD             176      5,247 LD
 5. Employment       a. No paid work reported                  219            60%              94          49%
                     b. Some paid work reported                143            40%              98          51%




    I employed the same survey instruments in both the female and male samples. Survey interviews were

conducted by experienced, professional enumerators recruited and trained by the researchers and were for

the most part delivered in Liberian English, which most respondents understood and spoke. The question-

naire covers a wide range of issues, including a broad range of indicators relating to political participation,

which made up the outcomes of interest. These include national-level participation, such as voting, contact-

ing political leaders and protesting as well as measures of local participation, such as attending and speaking

in community meetings and contacting traditional leaders. The survey questionnaire also included questions

about respondents’ socio-economic background such as their age, ethnicity, religion, education, marital sta-

tus, income, conﬂict exposure (in terms of whether they had lost a family member or suffered any injuries)

as well as contextual information such as perceptions of security/insecurity, actual victimization, inter-tribal

tensions. Table 2 below provides basic demographic statistics of the two samples.

    Females represented in the sample are more likely to be older and married and less likely to have

any formal schooling or an occupation. Males are also more likely to be married, but unlike their female

counterparts, more of them are younger and have formal schooling or an occupation. Male respondents also

reported a slightly higher household income than females (5,247 LD and 3,158 LD, respectively).




                                                      14
                      UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


                   Table 3: Primary Source for National and Community News, by Gender


                                   National      Affairs                       Community       Affairs
                            N     Female (%)       N       Male (%)      N     Female (%)        N       Male (%)
 1. Radio/Television       187        9%          101       17%         188        3%           101        5%
 2. Newspaper              187       0%           101        0%         188        0%           101        0%
 3. Town Chief             187       1%           101        1%         188       20%           101       20%
 4. NGO staff              187       0%           101        0%         188        0%           101        0%
 5. Community radio        187       28%          101       32%         188       14%           101       15%
 6. UNMIL Radio            187       42%          101       41%         188       26%           101       25%
 7. Religious leaders      187       2%           101        0%         188        3%           101        2%
 8. Community gossip       187        5%          101        1%         188       15%           101       11%
 9. Family and friends     187       8%           101        5%         188       15%           101       15%
 10. Other sources         187       5%           101        4%         188        4%           101        9%




4.2     Exposure to UNMIL Radio’s Elections Programming

The intervention was assigned at the community level and treatment status with regard to individual-level

exposure to UNMIL radio is therefore determined by whether or not she or he resides in a community that

was assigned to the radio program. We collected information about respondents’ chosen sources of infor-

mation and favorite radio programs to provide insights into the initial extent of gender gaps in informational

access. Respondents were asked about the primary source from which they get information about goings

on in the country and the community. Answers were not prompted to see the extent to which UNMIL radio

was volunteered as response. Table 3 depicts the proportions of control respondents who mentioned each

source of information. The left panel presents ﬁgures for primary sources of national news and sources for

community affairs are displayed on the right. Proportions for each source are broken down by gender to

identify any differences in listenership patterns.

      The descriptive statistics presented in Table 3 reveal interesting insights. Over all, UNMIL Radio dom-

inates the local media market and was reported by most respondents as their primary source of news and

information about national and community affairs. The fact that UNMIL’s listenership is so widespread in

control communities suggests that its popularity has more to do with enduring factors than this intervention.

      Table 3 also challenges previously assumed notions about low levels of media diversiﬁcation in rural


                                                      15
                      UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


settings, though both female and male respondents seem to rely on fewer sources for national news than

they do for community news. For national news sources, community radio was a distant second source of

information, mentioned by 28% of female and 32% of male respondents, while national radio/television and

family/friends were even more distantly third and fourth. We see a greater diversity of information sources

with regard to community affairs. Closely behind UNMIL Radio, the town chief was the second most

popular primary source of information by both female and male respondents (20% for each). Community

radio, gossip and family/friends were also reported as primary sources of information about community

affairs by a sizeable share of respondents (at around 14%, on average, with little gender variation).

      These descriptive statistics cast doubt on the presumed gender gap in media choice: the evidence does

not suggest that women in this sample are any more or less likely than their male counterparts to rely

disproportionately on any given source of information. This seems to undermine the notion that women,

at least in Liberia, have unequal access to political information. However, the lack of gender differences

in informational sources does not necessary imply that women get - let alone utilize - relevant and quality

information that can enhance their propensity to participate in politics. Unfortunately, the survey is not so

detailed as to illuminate qualitative aspects of the information to which female (and male) respondents in

this sample had access.


4.3     Measuring Political Participation

As indicated earlier, the main objective of this experiment has been to ascertain the effects of political

information on women’s political attitudes and behaviors. These are broadly deﬁned in recognition of the

fact that there are many ways in which citizens can inﬂuence their country’s politics and policies. Modes of

political participation used in the survey were organized around dimensions established in the literature:


      • The voting mode, encompassing voting in the 2011 election;

      • The campaigning mode, including contributions in time and/or money to a political campaign and

        political rally attendance;

      • The contacting mode, including contact with one’s representative in the national assembly or senate,

        or contact with a government ofﬁcial or agency;

                                                     16
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


   • The communing mode, encompassing community meeting attendance, speech and the contacting of

       community leaders;

   • The protesting mode, encompassing a wide range of variables such as complaining to radio stations

       and riots/violent protest.


    Additionally, behavioral (or rather observable) measures of many outcomes were included as a cleaner

indicator of individuals’ propensity to participate.10

    What do the data say? Overall, descriptive statistics of key outcome indicators (not shown) suggest that

Liberians in the control sample rely on more than one activity to get involved in politics, but that there is

great deal of heterogeneity in the extent to which different methods are utilized. Voting is by far the most

common political activity in the sample, with an 89% reported (and veriﬁed) participation rate.11 Beyond

voting, however, there seems to be a dichotomy between rates of participation in national politics, which

tend to be negligible and participation in community affairs, which is relatively higher.

    For instance, only 9% of respondents in the sample reported having contributed to political campaigns

in time and money and 7% had contacted political ofﬁcials at the national level. By contrast, 86% of

respondents reported taking part in community meetings and another 61% had contacted a community leader

to raise an issue. However, it appears that lower reported rates of participation in national affairs have to

do with the lack of opportunity (e.g., weakness of political institutions; poor communication infrastructures,

etc.) rather than being an indication of political cynicism or apathy. In a behavioral activity designed to

capture individuals’ propensity to contact political leaders by sending them a message, 93% of respondents

that had a point to raise did send such messages.

    Table 4 below presents more detailed information about the measures of political participation that I use

in this report along with their summary statistics. We only present statistics for the control group in order

to ascertain baseline levels of participation as well as any initial gender gaps that may exist. Statistics for
  10
      The main reason for introducing behavioral measures is that existing survey questions such as "did
you contact or meet your representative or senator?" are not always understood consistently and are prone
to noise. Moreover, sometimes interviewees tend to respond to these attitudinal questions with answers
they think the researchers want to hear rather than answers that genuinely represent their preferences and
behaviors. These measurement problems can introduce signiﬁcant biases in the study.
   11
      Self-reporting of participation in the elections was veriﬁed by checking the voting stain on a respon-
dent’s index ﬁnger.


                                                         17
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


female and male respondents are presented separately (in the left and right panels, respectively.) The last

column displays differences in female and male proportions and is taken as an indicator of gender gaps in

the relevant measures of political participation.

                   Table 4: Descriptive Statistics for Indicators of Political Participation
       Indicators of Political Participation   N     Mean (F)    SD      N    Mean (M)         SD      Gap
       Electoral participation
       Voting in the 2011 election             181     .88      [.33]    98       .92          [.28]   -4%
       Contributed to campaigns                188     .09      [.28]   102       .12          [.32]   -3%
       Attended political rallies              182     .05      [.22]    95       .12           [.3]   -7%
       Contacting
       Contact political leaders               190     .07      [.25]   102        .1           [.3]   -3%
       Sending card to leaders                 120     .91      [.29]    73       .97          [.16]   -6%
       Protesting
       Attend violent protests                 182     .02      [.13]    99       .02          [.14]    0%
       Complaints on radio show                189     .03      [.16]   100       .05          [.22]   -2%
       Communing
       Attend community meetings               184     .82      [.38]    98       .95          [.22]   -13%
       Speak at community meetings             151      .7      [.46]    93       .91          [.28]   -22%
       Contact traditional leaders             190     .58      [.49]   102       .68          [.47]    -9%
          Source:Household survey (PBDPL)




    As can be seen from the last column of Table 4, there is evidence of a gap, but this is not uniform across

the different participation modes. Gaps are present but small for the electoral participation and campaigning

modes, with the indicator of participation in the election (i.e. voting) and that reﬂecting campaign contri-

butions exhibiting a 4% and 3% lead from male respondents. Likewise, the self-reported indicators of the

protesting and the contacting modes show small gender gaps, with a larger difference visible in the behav-

ioral measure of the contacting mode (e.g., sending a message card to political leaders) - a 6% difference

in favor of male respondents. More generally, the gender gap is wider with respect to measures of local

political empowerment. Measures of communal political activity such as attending or making a speech at

community meetings are starkest, with 13% and 21% more male participation, respectively.

    In sum, baseline patterns of political participation suggest multidimensional engagement. Moreover,

there is variation in the extent to which different activities are relied upon, with more respondents reporting

engagement in less resource-demanding activities and those oriented toward local rather than national pol-

itics. This pattern is consistent with the pattern of participation suggested in other studies of participatory


                                                      18
                         UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


behaviors in Liberia (e.g., author’s citation, 2016) and in other developing countries (e.g., Bratton 1999).

The data also provides evidence for the existence of a gender gap in favor of men, but suggests this gap is

not uniform across the different modes and speciﬁc outcome indicators.



5     Estimating UNMIL Radio’s Impact on Women’s Political Participation

The goal of this section is to ascertain any impacts of direct access to UNMIL radio programs on women’s

political participation in study communities. Our main hypothesis is that, all else being equal, women in

communities that received the intervention will be more likely to engage in political participation than their

counterparts in communities that did not receive an access intervention. I estimate the effects of listenership

to UNMIL Radio on individual indicators of political participation, as well as the overall measures, extracted

by averaging normalized means across relevant indicators.


5.1     Marginal effects of UNMIL Radio on individual outcome indicators

This subsection reports results from multivariate regressions of UNMIL Radio and several outcome indica-

tors of political participation. Since most of these outcome variables are dichotomous, I use probit estima-

tion techniques because all the dependent variables used are binary. Given the success of randomization, I

estimate a simple regression equation of the following general form:



                                   P r(Yit ) = β0 + β1 UNMIL Radiot + Xt δ +     it                           (1)

      Where:

      P r(Yit = 1) : is the probability of person i in town t engaging in the relevant political activity. Each of

the outcome indicators of political participation is binary and takes on the value of 1 if the person is engaged

in it and 0 otherwise.

      U N M ILRadio : is a dummy variable indicating whether the village received the intervention or not;

      X : accounts for the paring variable. We control for this to allow for the possibility that there are

differences between pairs that inﬂuence political participation.

       it   is an error term assumed to be clustered at the town level.


                                                          19
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War




    Table 5 (column 3) reports the marginal effect of the coefﬁcient β1 for impacts of UNMIL Radio on a

wide range of indicators of women’s political participation. The results reported are intent to treat effects

(ITT), since treatment was assigned at the village level. They can be interpreted as the percentage change in

the probability of participating in a particular way from mean levels in control communities (column 2).12

    The results in Table 5, column 3, suggest largely modest, but consistent positive effects of exposure to

UNMIL Radio’s elections programs on most outcome indicators (between 1 and 5 percentage points seems

to be the most common marginal effect on many outcome indicators, but others also have marginal impacts

as high as 9 and 10 percentage points). Only just under half of these estimates are statistically signiﬁcant at

conventional levels, most likely due to a relatively small sample size. Amongst the variables that describe

national participation, electoral turnout increased by 9 percentage points for treated women. This result

supports that of Giné and Mansuri (2011) by suggesting that female electoral participation is restricted by

lack of access to information and lends some evidence towards the theory of change presented above.

    Furthermore, perhaps as a result of the group nature of the intervention, the indicators which are most

consistently signiﬁcant are those associated with local participation. We estimate a 5 percentage point

increase in the attendance of community meetings and a 10 percentage point increase in the probability of

speaking out in such gatherings, the measures that displayed the largest gender gaps initially. These results

are signiﬁcant at the 10 and 5 percent levels, respectively. The variable predicting violent protesting also

emerges signiﬁcant as a result of the program. This result could be misleading however, since controlling

for community pairs for a binary variable with such a small proportion of ones leads to a large number

of observations to be dropped (the pairs in which there is no protesting). Removing the pairing dummies

reduces the signiﬁcance of the result to 10%. Though this result cannot be properly identiﬁed due to a small

sample, it suggests the need to concentrate on reinforcing positive political activity in communal spaces.

    As already indicated, in general, the direction and magnitude of the results for many outcome indicators

suggest UNMIL’s positive role in empowering and politically mobilizing the Liberian women represented.
  12
     Each number in the third column is a product of separate probit regression. Moreover, most of the
outcome variables are dichotomous, and probit is a more appropriate technique for such outcomes. It
estimates the probability that the latent variable Y*, representing the propensity of person i to engage in
political participation, is greater than zero. Marginal effects were extracted using the "mfx" command after
the regression. All statistical analyses were performed using Stata version 12.


                                                      20
                        UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


                   Table 5: Impact of UNMIL Radio on Women’s Political Participation

    Indicators of Political Participation      Mean (Control)        Marginal Impact         % Change
    Electoral participation
    Voting in the 2011 election                      .88                  .086***                10%
                                                                           (.027)
    Campaigning
    Contributed to campaigns                         .09                     .01                 10%
                                                                            (.02)
    Attended political rallies                       .05                    .028                 57%
                                                                           (.025)
    Contacting
    Contact political leaders                        .07                   -.006                 -9%
                                                                           (.022)
    Sending card to leaders                           .6                     .05                 8%
                                                                           (.044)
    Protesting
    Attend violent protests                          .02                  .062***               375%
                                                                           (.023)
    Complaints on radio show                         .03                    -.018               -69%
                                                                           (.032)
    Communing
    Attend community meetings                        .82                  .051*                  6%
                                                                          (.026)
    Speak at community meetings                     .57                 .103***                  18%
                                                                           (.04)
    Contact traditional leaders                     .58                   -.039                  7%
                                                                           (.03)
    Note: Each item in second column is a product of separate regression,
    Last column represents the ITT change (in %) from baseline levels in column 2
    Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by village: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




Since the intervention was designed to combine informational access and group engagement, the impacts

reported are in line with my intuition. A separation of the two different causal effects, purely informational

and group engagement, is considered in appendix H, but a more detailed treatment of this would be a useful

for further research.




                                                      21
                       UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


                              Table 6: Political Participation Mean Effects (overall)

                                          Including violent protests Excluding violent protests
               UNMIL Radio program                   .28***                        .18**
                                                      (.07)                         (.07)
                                                    (N=318)                       (N=327)
               Note: Each item in second and third columns is a product of separate regression,
               Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by village: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




5.2     Mean Effects of UNMIL Radio on Women’s Political Participation

Despite the positive effects of UNMIL Radio on a number of indicators of political participation, there is a

possibility that some results occur purely due to chance. To address this concern, I estimate the "overall"

effect of the program on "mean effects" index following the approach pioneered by Kling et al. (2007). I

distinguish between a mean effects index of political participation in national politics and a mean effects

index of participation in local or communal life and can be interpreted as the net participation score for each

community in the sample. I estimate a general equation of the following form:



                                   Yit = β0 + β1 UNMIL Radiot + Xt δ +          it                                (2)

      Where:

      Yit , an index measure calculated by averaging across standardized means of outcome indicators related

to national politics (i.e., national political participation) or local politics (i.e., local political participation.)

The subscript "it" represents person i in community/town t. The other terms in the equation are as speciﬁed

in equation (1). Table 6 presents mean effects of UNMIL Radio on women’s political participation estimated

with OLS regressions. I present a speciﬁcation that includes participation in violent protests in the mean

effect index (left hand-side panel) and a speciﬁcation that excludes it (right hand-side panel).13

      Results are positive, with an estimated mean effect of .28 standard deviations, statistically signiﬁcant
  13
     The sample sizes for tables 6 and7 decrease somewhat, reﬂecting the fact that not all observations have
values for all indicators of political participation. These observations are not included in the mean effects
indeces in order not to skew the calculation of average political participation across outcomes. Signiﬁcance
of exposure to UNMIL radio is not sensitive to these observations.


                                                         22
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


at the 1% level. However, it appears that this effect is partly driven by participation in violent protests on

which UNMIL Radio was shown to have a very strong positive effect.14 Nonetheless, I re-estimate the mean

effects of the intervention on an index outcome variables excluding participation in protests. As it can be

seen in Table 6, column 3, listenership to UNMIL Radio programs maintains a positive and statistically

signiﬁcant effect, but the magnitude is down to .18 standard deviations. Thus these effect sizes represent a

small to relatively large difference in participation rates between communities that did and did not receive

the intervention. They support the idea that listenership to UNMIL Radio did in fact have a positive effect

(overall) on participatory behaviors of women voters.

    Next, I examine whether listenership to UNMIL Radio had different effects on political participation at

the national level versus the local level. To do so, I construct 2 mean effect indices, one based on indicators

of political participation at the national level and another based on indicators of political participation at the

local level.15 The results are presented in Table 7.

                     Table 7: Mean Effects for National vs. Local Political Participation

                                                   National politics                           Local politics
   UNMIL Radio program                                  .23***                                    .16**
                                                         (.06)                                     (.07)
                                                       (N=326)                                   (N=376)
   Note: Each item in second and third columns is a product of separate regression,
   Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by village: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




    As can be seen, UNMIL Radio maintains positive and statistically signiﬁcant effects on political partic-

ipation both at the national level and local level (.23 standard deviations signiﬁcant at the 1% level and .16

standard deviations signiﬁcant at the 5% level, respectively). These results are consistent with the estimates
  14
      Again as noted above, the relationship between listenership to UNMIL Radio program and participation
in violent protests should be interpreted with caution. Only 3 percent of women in the entire sample stated
having participated in violent protests (i.e., 12 women respondents) and it so happens that 3/4 of these
women were in treatment communities. Thus it is not unlikely that this relationship could be spurious.
   15
      The former encompasses: voting in the 2011 elections; campaign contribution; political rally at-
tendance; meeting government ofﬁcials; sending a message card to elected ofﬁcials and participation in
protests, be it peaceful (e.g., calling into a radio show to complain about public ofﬁcials) or violent. The
latter encompasses: attending community meetings; speaking at community meetings; and meeting local
leaders to raise an issue.


                                                       23
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


reported in the previous section and provide ﬁrmer evidence for the inﬂuence of mass media broadcasting

on women’s political behaviors. The results for national participation support other studies of the effects

of UN programs on political participation of the Liberian population (author’s citation, 2016) , whereas the

signiﬁcant impact on local-level participation has not been found in previous studies.

     Taken together, these results suggest that UNMIL Radio’s elections programs were successful in mobi-

lizing women’s participation both in local affairs and national-level politics. Moreover, the positive effects

seem to be concentrated in the female sample, suggesting the program worked as intended (e.g., it was not

captured by men.)16 From a programmatic point of view, this is good news because it suggests that even

short term and logistically less-demanding broadcast interventions can lead to meaningful political change

on the part of women villagers.

     However, while these results are encouraging in terms of the program’s impact on rural women’s po-

litical participation, they say nothing about its impact on gender gap reduction, which is also important to

consider. In other words, it is possible that a radio broadcast intervention like this can have impacts on

women’s political participation without necessarily reducing the gender gap. I investigate this question in

the next section.



6        UNMIL Radio and the Gender Gap in Political Participation

The results presented in the previous section provide evidence of overall positive effects of UNMIL Radio

on the political participation of women voters in rural Liberia. In this section, I investigate the effect of

UNMIL Radio’s election programming on the gender gap in participatory behaviors of those represented

in the sample. Below, I examine any changes in gender gaps by observing the differences in the means

of individual indicators of political participation for female and male respondents in treatment and control

communities. Indicators of political participation were displayed for the control group in Table 4 and are

presented again in column 2, next to those for treatment communities (column 3). The last column displays

the differences in gender gaps between the two sets of communities - that is, gains or losses experienced by
    16
     I use capture to refer to a phenomenon whereby program beneﬁts intended for one target group are
diverted for private use by one individual (e.g., local chief) or a group of individuals. Mean effects estimates
for local political participation amongst males are negative and signiﬁcant.)



                                                      24
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


                     Table 8: UNMIL Radio and Gender Gap in Political Participation

        Indicators of political participation     Gap (Control)     Gap (Treatment)       % Change

        Electoral participation
        Voting in the 2011 election                     -4%                +2%               +6%
        Contributed to campaigns                        -3%                -2%               +1%
        Attended political rallies                      -7%                -2%               +5%
        Contacting
        Contact political leaders                       -3%                 -5%              -2%
        Sending card to leaders                         -6%                 -4%              +2%
        Protesting
        Attend violent protests                          0%                +1%               +1%
        Complaints on radio show                        -2%                -9%               -7%
        Communing
        Attend community meetings                      -13%                +3%               +16%
        Speak at community meetings                    -22%                -15%              +7%
        Contact traditional leaders                     -9%                 -8%              +1%
           Source:Household survey (PBDPL)




women in treatment communities in relation to men.

    The results from Table 8 (column 4) indicate that UNMIL Radio’s elections programming reduced gen-

der gaps on most indicators of political participation measured in the survey, suggesting that the intervention

allowed women to catch up or even overtake their male counterparts. Indeed, as can be seen from column

4, there were gains for women (i.e., reductions in gender gaps) more or less across the board, the most

notable of which are seen for attending and participating vocally in community meetings. There are no-

table exceptions relating to contacting political leaders and calling a radio show where women in treatment

communities seem to have lost more ground. This suggests some possible resistance to create space for

women’s genuine participation in these aspects of public and community life. The good news is that any

such resistance does not seem to deter more politically informed women (at least those represented in this

sample) from taking advantage of other means of political participation.




                                                      25
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


7     Discussion

In this section I tackle two issues in turn, I ﬁrst consider the results in the context of broader female empow-

erment and then investigate some of the possible mechanisms through which effects could be manifesting

themselves. I use both quantitative analysis and qualitative sources in order to shed light on these questions.

The qualitative evidence comes from reports elaborated by the project’s ﬁeld facilitators, present at commu-

nity listening sessions and during the subsequent discussion. It also draws upon feedback sheets completed

by the participants themselves.


7.1   Female Empowerment

Having found evidence for positive effects on female political participation, I analyze the extent to which

these increases reﬂect greater female empowerment more generally. I try to get at female empowerment

in two ways. First, by analyzing whether or not increased participation also reﬂects more informed, au-

tonomous voting choices and second, by considering the general attitudes towards women within communi-

ties. A description of the indicators and the empirics of this analysis can be found in appendix G. I ﬁnd some

evidence for reduced vote sharing as a result of the intervention, suggesting that women exposed to UNMIL

radio were not compelled just to vote but also to make their own decisions in the polls. However, from this

analysis, it does not appear that broad indicators of attitudes towards women were signiﬁcantly affected. It

is difﬁcult to tell whether or not the lack of results here reﬂect low power as a result of their likely small size

or the fact that baseline levels of these outcomes were very high to begin with.


7.2   Causal Mechanisms

I consider three potential channels through which this intervention could have affected female political

participation: (i) political efﬁcacy - women’s understanding of politics and their sense of empowerment to

inﬂuence political leaders; (ii) liberal orientations - support for liberal norms and values such as political

tolerance or non-violence; and (iii) group dynamics - providing a safe space for women in which to discuss

political and electoral matters. Below I discuss the political efﬁcacy channel in detail. The remaining

mechanisms are treated in appendix H, as they do not appear to be empirically relevant.



                                                        26
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


    Comparative research has long recognized a strong relationship between political efﬁcacy–the belief in

one’s competency in inﬂuencing the actions of politicians–and political participation (Bratton et al. 1999;

Verba et al. 1995). In their inﬂuential study, Almond and Verba (1963) noted:

           [T]he belief in one’s competence is a key political attitude. The self-conﬁdent citizen ap-
       pears to be the democratic citizen. Not only does he think he can participate, he thinks others
       ought to participate as well. Furthermore, he does not merely think he can take part in politics;
       he is likely to be more active. (257, cited in Kahne and Westheimer 2006).

    Thus, a key objective of civic education programs in post-war countries, and this was certainly the case

with UNMIL Radio programs, is to instill in citizens a sense of personal and political efﬁcacy in a bid

to foster greater political engagement and participation. This is especially important given that levels of

efﬁcacy tend to be low or lacking as the result of conﬂict legacies (Orr 2002).17 The idea is that if the

information provided to women voters can change their political beliefs and attitudes, this should translate

into greater levels of political participation. I investigate whether the effects of UNMIL Radio on women’s

political participation might in fact have occurred through this channel.

    I look at a number of indicators of political efﬁcacy with respect to the 2011 electoral process, the

more immediate concern of the intervention, as well as indicators of political efﬁcacy with respect to the

broader issues of politics and governance. The former include measures such as women voters serving as

electoral observers to ensure the fairness and integrity of the election, strategic voting - whether citizens

voted to achieve their policy preference rather than simply fulﬁlling their civic duty;18 and voter sanctioning

of elected ofﬁcials based on their performance.19

    Within the more general measures of political efﬁcacy, I include a measure of perceived "internal efﬁ-

cacy" - a respondent’s perceived personal ability to understand political issues and the extent to which they

are consulted by others on political matters - and one of "external efﬁcacy" - the strength of a person’s belief
  17
      For instance, in their research on local governance in DRC’s eastern provinces, for example, Vlassen-
root and Romkema (2007) found that many citizens did not believe they had personal capacity to inﬂuence
the behaviors of the administrative and political leaders.
   18
      My measure of strategic voting was constructed based on the survey question: "What was the main
reason for voting in the 2011 election?" Voters who responded that they voted to pick a candidate who share
their preference, for peace or some other reasons were coded as "strategic voters"; those who stated they
voted to fulﬁll their civic duties were coded as not voting strategically.
   19
      To code this variable, I took advantage of the fact an overwhelming majority of incumbents MPs and
Senators were voted out of ofﬁce and the most common reason provided was that these representatives did
fulﬁll electoral promise to the voters.

                                                      27
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


that they have the ability to inﬂuence political leaders (i.e. that leaders listen to issues that matter to him

or her). Given that political efﬁcacy presumes interest in politics and access to information, I also include

indicators "political interest" and "willingness to pay for political information".20

    I report results of probit estimations of the effects of exposure to this intervention on each of these

individual outcome indicators in Table 9. The table also displays the results from OLS estimation on the

mean effect index combining these different outcomes. The mean effects index is constructed, as in the

rest of the paper, by calculating the standardized outcome variables. Analysis of the effects of exposure to

UNMIL on the index is undertaken using OLS regression, since it is not a binary variable.

    The results reported in the table above indicate UNMIL Radio had meaningful and statistically signif-

icant effects on the mean effects index of political efﬁcacy as well as on individual outcome indicators.

Results on the mean effects index show an effect size of more than a third standard deviation (.37), which

is large and statistically signiﬁcant at the .01 level. Marginal effects on individual outcomes suggest that

this effect is driven by political efﬁcacy related to the electoral process. All three indicators of this di-

mension (e.g., serving as an electoral observer, strategic voting and vote sanctioning) show positive and

statistically signiﬁcant effects of listenership of UNMIL Radio, suggesting the program was successful in

making women voters feel their vote and voice in the electoral process mattered. On the other hand, none

of the outcome indicators associated with political efﬁcacy in general shows positive effects.

    The difference in the effects of the intervention on political efﬁcacy in the electoral process versus gen-

eral political efﬁcacy is not surprising, given that the program focused speciﬁcally on the electoral process

and due to the relatively short intervention period. It may be that general political efﬁcacy reﬂects an equi-

librium embedded in prevailing social norms and structures that is an outcome of long-run evolutionary

mechanisms and therefore slow to change (Bowles and Gintis 2004). The positive effects of the intervention

on political efﬁcacy related to the electoral process suggests that at least some dimension of political efﬁcacy

can be malleable to short-term information provision interventions, which is encouraging. The challenge

for research and policy is to understand how these short-term gains in political efﬁcacy related to an elec-
  20
     The former is measured with the typical survey question: "When you get together with friends/family,
how often do you discuss political matters?" For the latter, I use a behavioral measure that took advantage
of the fact that newspaper circulation was virtually absent in rural Liberia. The survey team brought the
latest news paper clips with information about the runoff elections and individuals were asked whether they
were willing to purchase it.


                                                      28
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


                                Table 9: UNMIL Radio and Political Efﬁcacy

                  Political Efﬁcacy                                  (UNMIL Radio)
                  Political efﬁcacy in the electoral process
                  Served as election observer                                .40
                                                                          (.17)***
                                                                           N=387
                  Strategic voting                                           .31
                                                                           (.14)**
                                                                           N=389
                  Vote sanctioning of incumbent                              .22
                                                                           (.13)**
                                                                           N=372
                  General Political efﬁcacy
                  Political competency (internal)                            .07
                                                                            (.13)
                                                                           N=367
                  Ability to inﬂuence political leaders                      .03
                                                                            (.11)
                                                                           N=371
                  Interest in politics                                       -.00
                                                                            (.13)
                                                                           N=352
                  Willingness to pay for information                         .10
                                                                            (.11)
                                                                           N=352
                  Mean effect index of political efﬁcacy                     .37
                                                                          (.08)***
                                                                           N=315

                  Note: Table displays standard errors clustered by village in parentheses.
                  *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 90, 95 and 99
                  percent conﬁdence levels respectively.




toral process can be translated into generalized political efﬁcacy, which is a necessary condition for political

accountability and good governance. We return to this issue in the conclusion.

    I do not ﬁnd evidence to suggest that increased political participation manifested itself through increased

support for liberal norms. Likewise, evidence for communal effects due to the group nature of the interven-

tion design is limited. Details of both these analyses can be found in appendix H.


                                                       29
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


8    Conclusion

This paper set out to experimentally investigate the effects of politically-relevant information provided

through mass (radio) broadcast on female political participation after civil war, using post-war Liberia as a

setting. It ﬁnds evidence for increased female political participation as the result of greater access to infor-

mation. Not only does female participation increase, but it seems that gender gaps are also reduced by the

program. Individuals in communities where women were provided with direct access to UNMIL Radio and

a safe space in which to listen to and discuss its programs were more likely to participate politically both

at a local and a national level. The paper also investigated a number of potential mechanisms underlying

these effects, ﬁnding evidence in support of increased political efﬁcacy related to the electoral process. By

contrast, I ﬁnd little evidence for increased political efﬁcacy pertaining to general issues of politics and

governance or for other potential mechanisms, including liberal orientation or collective capacity.

    The results presented here could have a number of possible implications for programing and future

research. From a program point of view, it seems that even a short-term broadcasting intervention can

have meaningful effects on female political participation, if appropriately timed and designed in a targeted

way. This implies that, depending on context, undertaking more informational interventions such the one

examined in this paper could be beneﬁcial. At the same time, the lack of positive effects on indicators

of political efﬁcacy related to broader issues of politics and governance suggests the limits of these brief

interventions. Indeed, to the extent that existing patterns of social interactions shape political beliefs and

attitudes, it is unrealistic to expect these to change quickly. Hence, there is a need to supplement short-

term targeted programs with deeper and more intensive interventions that focus on addressing not only the

broader problem of asymmetries in access to political information that plague many citizens in fragile states,

but also socio-economic constraints such as unequal access to power and resources that perpetuate gender

gaps in social and political participation.

    From a research standpoint, more research is needed to better understand the mechanisms underlying

media interventions and political change on the part of women voters. While this paper ﬁnds promising

only results for political efﬁcacy, other potential mechanisms cannot be ruled out. For instance, though it is

difﬁcult to separate group effects from pure informational mechanisms in this context, the idea that differ-



                                                      30
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


ent types of political participation are impacted by different intervention designs is important to consider.

Investigating the effects of differently designed informational interventions is also an important avenue for

further research. Deeper investigation is also needed to adjudicate between political attitudes and beliefs

mechanisms, on the one hand, and the group dynamics mechanism, on the other hand. Indeed, within the

latter mechanism, it would be interesting to understand whether the effects on political participation occur

through shifts in perceptions of social norms or through enhanced collective action.

    It is also important to understand the sustainability of effects from short-term media interventions such

as UNMIL Radio’s elections programs. If such effects are found to be sustainable, these interventions

provide a cost-effective way to promote women’s political efﬁcacy and activism, at least with respect to

elections. Ultimately, gender gaps in political participation, as in other realms, cannot be effectively closed

unless women in post-war countries are empowered to play a more active role not only in periodic elections,

but also in everyday politics and policy-making process.




                                                      31
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


9   References

Annan, J., Blattman, C., Mazurana, D. and Carlson, K. (2011). "Civil War, Gender and Reintegration in

    northern Uganda." Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 55 (6): 877?908.

Arsenault, A., Himelfarb, S. and Abbott, S. (2011) "Evaluating media interventions in conﬂict countries:

    toward developing common principles and a community of practice", United States Institute of Peace.

Banerjee, A., Kumar, S., Pande, R. and Su, F. (2011). "Do informed voters make better choices? Experi-

    mental evidence from urban India." Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University

Bari, Farzana. (2005). "Women’s Political Participation: Issues and Challenges." Paper presented at the

    United Nations? Expert Group Meeting on Enhancing Participation of Women in Development through

    an Enabling Environment for Achieving Gender Equality and the Advancement of Women, Bangkok,

    Thailand, 8-11 November.

Beaman, L., Chattopadhyay, R., Duﬂo, E., Pande, R. and Topalova, P. (2009). "Powerful women: female

    leadership and gender bias" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1497-1540.

Bellows, J. and Miguel, E. (2009). "War and local collective action in Sierra Leone." Journal of Public

    Economics, 93(11), 1144-1157.

Bidwell, K., Casey, K.E. and Glennerster, R. (2016). "Debates: Voting and Expenditure Responses to

    Political Communication", Working Paper 3066, Stanford University, Graduate School of Business

Bilali, R. and Vollhardt, J.R. (2015). "Do mass media interventions effectively promote peace in contexts of

    ongoing violence" Evidence from Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo.? Peace and Conﬂict: Journal

    of Peace Psychology, 21(4): 604.

Blattman, C. (2009). "From violence to voting: War and political participation in Uganda." American

    Political Science Review, 103(2):231-247

Bleck, J. and Michelitch, K.. (2011). "Good Morning Timbuktu! The Impact of Radio in Rural Islamic

    Africa" Working paper.

Bratton, Michael. (1999). "Political participation in a new democracy: Institutional considerations from

    Zambia." Comparative Political Studies, 32(5): 549-588.

Bruce, D. (2008) "Evaluating Media’s Impact in Conﬂict Countries", United States Institute of Peace



                                                    32
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


Buvinic, M., Das Gupta, M., Casabonne, U. and Verwimp, P. (2013). "Violent conﬂict and gender inequality:

    an overview." The World Bank Research Observer 28 (1): 110?138

Carpini, M.X.D. and Keeter, S., (1993). "Measuring political knowledge: Putting ﬁrst things ﬁrst." American

    Journal of Political Science, 1179-1206.

Coffe, H. and Geys, B. (2006). "Community heterogeneity: a burden for the creation of social capital?",

    Social Science Quarterly, 87(5): 1053-72.

Dahlgren, P. (2009). Media and political engagement Vol. 551, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Garcia Ponce, O. (2015). "Women’s Political Participation in the Aftermath of Civil War: Evidence from

    Peru", Job Market Paper, New York University

Geisler, Gisela. (1995). "Troubled sisterhood: women and politics in Southern Africa: Case studies from

    Zambia, Zimbabwe and Botswana." African Affairs 94(377): 545-578.

Gerber, A.S., Green, D.P. and Larimer, C.W. (2008). "Social pressure and voter turnout: Evidence from a

    large-scale ﬁeld experiment." American Political Science Review, 102(01): 33-48.

Giné, X. and G. Mansuri (2011). "Together we will: Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment on female voter

    turnout in Pakistan", World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2011; 5692

Grimard, Franque, and Sonia Laszlo. (2010). "Long term effects of civil conﬂict on women’s health out-

    comes in Peru." McGill University, Department of Economics Departmental Working Papers 2010-05.

Hogg, Carey Leigh. (2009). "Women’s Political Representation in Post-Conﬂict Rwanda: A Politics of

    Inclusion or Exclusion?" Journal of International Women’s Studies 11(3): 34-55.

Hughes, M.M. (2009). "Armed conﬂict, international linkages, and women’s parliamentary representation

    in developing nations." Social Problems, 56(1):174-204.

Isacksson, A.S., Kotsadam, A. and Nerman, M. (2014). "The Gender Gap in African Political Participation:

    testing Theories of Individual and Contextual Determinants", Development Studies, 50(2): 302-318

Kalathil, S., Langlois, J. and Kaplan, A. (2008). "Towards a new model: media and communication in post-

    conﬂict and fragile states." World Bank, Communication for Governance and Accountability Program

    (CommGAP), Development Communication Division, External Affairs.

Kaltenborn-Stachau, H. (2008). "The Missing Link: Fostering Positive Citizen-state Relationships in Post-

    conﬂict Environments." World Bank, Communication for Governance and Accountability Program


                                                    33
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


    (CommGAP), Development Communication Division.

Kling, J., Liebman, B., Katz, L. (2007). "Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects." Econometrica,

    75(1): 83-119

Klot, J.F. (2007). "Women and peacebuilding." Independent expert paper commissioned by UNIFEM and

    UN Peacebuilding Support Ofﬁce.

Kumar, Krishna. (2001). Women and civil war: Impact, organizations, and action. Lynne Rienner Publish-

    ers.

Lassen, D.D. (2005). "The effect of information on voter turnout: Evidence from a natural experiment."

    American Journal of Political Science, 49(1): 103-118.

Letki, N. (2003). "Explaining Political Participation in East-Central Europe: Social Capital, Democracy,

    and The Communist Past." Nufﬁeld College Politics Working Paper 23-W2. University of Oxford.

Lorentzen, Lois Ann and Jennifer Turpin (eds). (1998). The Women and War Reader. New York University

    Press.

O’Connell, Helen. (2011). "What are the opportunities to promote gender equity and equality in conﬂict-

    affected and fragile states? Insights from a review of evidence." Gender and Development 19(3): 455-

    466

Olken, B.A., 2009. "Do television and radio destroy social capital? Evidence from Indonesian villages."

    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4):1-33

Orr, R. (2002). "Governing When Chaos Rules: Enhancing Governance and Participation." The Washington

    Quarterly, 25(4): 139-152.

Paluck, E.L., Green, D.P. (2009b). "Deference, dissent, and dispute resolution: A ﬁeld experiment on a

    mass media intervention in Rwanda." American Political Science Review, 103(4): 622-644.

Paluck, E.L. (2009a). "Reducing intergroup prejudice and conﬂict using the media: A ﬁeld experiment in

    Rwanda." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96: 574-587.

Paluck, E.L. (2010). "Is it better not to talk? Group polarization, extended contact, and perspective-taking

    in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo." Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36: 1170-1185.

Paluck, E.L. (2012). "Media as an instrument for reconstructing communities following conﬂict." in K.

    Jonas and T. Morton (Eds.), Restoring civil societies: The psychology of intervention and engagement


                                                    34
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


    following crisis, Wiley-Blackwell.

Paluck, E.L., Blair, G., and Vexler, D. (in prep). "Entertaining, informing, and discussing: Behavioral effects

    of a post-conﬂict radio intervention in Southern Sudan."

Paxton, P. (2007). "Association Memberships and Generalized Trust: A Multilevel Model Across 31 Coun-

    tries." Social Forces 86: 47-76

Platteau, J.P., Somville, V. and Wahhaj, Z. (2014). "Elite capture through information distortion: A theoret-

    ical essay," Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 106(C): 250-263.

Puddeplatt, A. (2006), "Voices of War: Conﬂict and the role of the Media", International Media Support

Putzel, J. and van der Zwan, J. (2006). "Why templates for media development do not work in crisis states."

    Deﬁning and Understanding Media Development Strategies in Post-War and Crisis States London: LSE

    Crisis States Research Centre.

Rehn, E. and Sirleaf, E.J. (2002). "Women war and peace: The independent experts’ assessment on the

    impact of armed conﬂict on women and women’s role in peace-building", New York United Nations

    Development Fund for Women [UNIFEM]

Sorensen, B. (1998). "Women and post-conﬂict reconstruction." Issues and sources, Occasional Paper No.

    3, the War-torn Societies Project, Geneva, UN Research Institute for Development

Sow, N. (2012). "Women’s Political Participation and Economic Empowerment in Post-conﬂict Countries:

    Lessons from the Great Lakes Region in Africa", International Alert

Spurk, C. (2002). "KOFF: Media and Peacebuilding: Concepts, Actors and Challenges." Swisspeace.

Suthanthiraraj, K. and Ayo, C. (2010). "Promoting Women’s Participation in Conﬂict and Post-conﬂict

    Societies: How Women Worldwide are Making and Building Peace." Global Action to Prevent War,

    NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security and Women’s International League for Peace and

    Freedom.

Tadros, M. (2011). "Women engaging politically: Beyond magic bullets and motorways." Pathways Policy

    Paper, Brighton: Pathways of Women’s Empowerment RPC

Tripp, A.M. (2001). "The new political activism in Africa." Journal of Democracy, 12(3): 141-155.

Trujillo, M., and Paluck, E.L. (2011). "The devil knows best: Experimental effects of a televised soap opera

    on Latino trust in government and support for the 2010 Census." Analysis of Social Issues and Public


                                                      35
                   UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


   Policy, 12(1): 113-132

UNDP, 2001, "Gender Approaches in Conﬂict and Post-Conﬂict Situations", United Nations Development

   Programme

United Nations (2004). "Women and Elections: Guide to promoting the political participation of women in

   elections." United Nations Department of Public Information.

United Nations. (2003). Handbook on United Nations Multidimensional Peacekeeping Operations., New

   York: Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit, Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Verba, S., Schlozman, K. L., and Brady, H. (1995). Voice and equality. Civic voluntarism in American

   politics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press

Wantchekon, L. (2003). "Clientelism and voting behavior: Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment in Benin."

   World Politics, 55(3): 399-422.

Zuckerman, E. and Greenberg, M. (2004). "The gender dimensions of post-conﬂict reconstruction: an

   analytical framework for policymakers." Gender and Development, 12(3): 70-82.




                                                   36
     Can Media Interventions Reduce Gender Gaps in Political
Participation after Civil War? Evidence from a Field Experiment in
                            Rural Liberia
                                Supporting Information


                                           July 20, 2016


                                              Abstract

   This appendix includes supplementary information and supporting materials to illustrate the
   nature of the UNMIL Radio intervention as well as some extra analysis looking beyond the
   results presented in the main paper. Appendix A begins with a program schedule for the radio
   group listening sessions. Appendices B and C display a list of the treatment status of all the
   matched community pairs and some photos from implementation, respectively. Appendices D
   and E present examples of ﬁeld visit forms, completed by the ﬁeld facilitators who attended
   listening sessions to monitor the implementation process. In appendix F, the implementation
   timeline is detailed, while Appendix G depicts the theory of change. The ﬁnal two sections
   of the appendix are dedicated to some additional analysis which goes beyond the discussion
   presented in section 7 of the main paper. I consider the existence of any results on broader
   measures of female empowerment and investigate two mechanisms through which increased
   political participation could occur: a transfer of liberal norms and values and through communal
   effects of the group design.




                                                  1
                                                                  6

Appendix A:         UNMIL Radio’s Electoral Programmes Schedule



              !


                  UNMIL RADIO ELECTORAL PROGRAMMES
                               at 91.5 FM

                   1. BACK TO THE BALLOT BOX:
                      TUESDAYS, From 8PM to 9PM
                      (Night time)

                   2. AROUND TOWN:
                      THURSDAYS, From 9:30AM to 11AM
                      (Morning time)

                   3. DIS VOTING TING:
                      SUNDAYS, From 6PM to 7PM (Evening
                      time) or WEDNESDAYS, From 9AM to
                      10AM (Morning time)

                   4. POLITICAL HAPPENINGS / HOT SEAT
                      (SPECIAL SEGMENTS)
                      Pick your own time and we will bring
                      these programs to you ON TAPE!

                       Day:               Time:
                                                                                                        7

Appendix B:         Study’s community list




      UNMIL RADIO AND WOMEN'S POLITICAL PARTICIPATION STUDY

                               COMMUNITY LIST (FINAL )

      ID#        Town Name               Pair             Program Recipient?
             1   Bla-gai                              1   YES
             2   Golodee                              1   NO
             3   Amadu                                2   YES
             4   Missilla                             2   NO
             5   Gbah's                               3   NO
             6   Mambo camp                           3   YES
             7   Jawajeh                              4   NO
             8   Gwee                                 4   YES
             9   Jenneh                               5   NO
            10   Weajor                               5   YES
            11   Bowein                               6   YES
            12   Beafenay                             6   NO
            13   Kokolu                               7   NO
            14   Yeagbah                              7   YES
            15   Manjoe Farm                          8   YES
            16   Dowee Goll                           8   NO
            17   Mamigaye                             9   NO
            18   Jacke's                              9   YES
            19   Sackie                              10   NO
            20   Gobah's                             10   YES
            21   Bah's                               11   NO
            22   Dogba Lon                           11   YES
            23   Koon's                              12   NO
            24   Nyeh's                              12   YES
            25   Cleans'                             13   YES
            26   Woodee                              13   NO
            27   Vincent                             14   YES
            28   Dimes                               14   NO
            29   Zoen                                15   YES
            30   Gowein                              15   NO
            31   Todien                              16   NO
            32   Forley                              16   YES
            33   Bar-Mohn                            17   NO
            34   Monoh                               17   YES
            35   Zordee                              18   NO
            36   Gban-Jekeh                          18   YES
            37   Goyah's                             19   YES
            38   Ganor                               19   NO
            39   Gabla's                             20   NO
            40   Lua-Kor                             20   YES                  Need to get statistics
                                                                                      8

Appendix C:     Sample pictures from the launch of the program




                                                                                          !
!"#!$%&'!(&)$*+,-!./0!'$122!31+#,4!5161+1!7(*'%&#8!$%,!'$*)9!6:$:+)4);,<!&'!:#!%&'!
=14!$:!!!):#>*)$!):66*#&$4!1'',''6,#$!?,2:+,!$%,!;1*#)%!:2!$%,!(+:@,)$A!!
!




                                                                                          !
"#!$%&'!(&)$*+,-!0:6,#B'!;,1>,+'!&#!3&#),#$!C:=#!+,),&D,!1!+1>&:!2+:6!./0!'$122A!!
                                                     9

Appendix D: Sample Field Visit Form (Bla-Gai Town)
                                                       10



Appendix E: Sample Field Visit Form (Dogba-Lon Town)
Appendix F: Study Timeline
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War

1    Appendix G: Theory of Change

Figure 1 below depicts the Theory of Change summarizing the arguments about the links between informa-

tion provision and political participation.

                                         Figure 1: Theory of Change




                                                     8
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


2    Appendix H: Women’s Political Participation and Gender Equality

In the remainder of the appendix we elaborate upon the discussion by detailing the analysis of broader

impacts on female empowerment and the two mechanisms for results not expanded upon above.

    Alongside political participation, it is also interesting to consider whether access to UNMIL had any

effects on issues related to gender equality more generally. In the analysis that follows, we try to get

at female empowerment in two ways. First, by analyzing the extent to which increased participation also

reﬂects more informed, autonomous voting choices and second, by considering the general attitudes towards

women within communities.

    We ﬁrst test our theory of change by considering whether the increased electoral participation measured

also reﬂects greater female voting autonomy. That is to say, did increased access to information simply

encourage voting or did it encourage women to think for themselves about which candidate best represented

their policy preferences and interests? Though ‘political alignment’ is very difﬁcult to measure when voting

choices cannot be asked, we proxy this with voting freedom by asking a series of questions about the secret

ballot. The idea here is that women who voted autonomously are less likely to have been inﬂuenced by

friends or family members.

    The variables used to get at autonomous voting reﬂect whether or not an individual was told who to vote

for, whether their household knows their voting choice and if anybody else marked their ballot paper. We

run probit regressions of these outcomes on our treatment variable reﬂecting whether or not an individual

resides in a treatment village. In order to ascertain whether the group of balloting variables were affected by

treatment and to mitigate possible problems of multiple hypothesis testing, we then construct a mean effects

index for the hypothesis. This index resembles those used in the rest of the paper and pioneered by Kling et

al. (2007). Analysis of the effects of exposure to UNMIL on the index is undertaken using OLS regression,

since it is not a binary variable. The results of our analysis can be seen in Table 1.

    As can be seen in the table, the index measure shows a weak, but statistically signiﬁcant reduction of

the intervention on vote sharing, suggesting that women exposed to UNMIL radio were not compelled just

to vote but also to make their own decisions in the polls. However, individual indicators of vote sharing and

secret balloting are not individually signiﬁcant.



                                                       9
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


                          Table 1: UNMIL Radio and Women’s Secret Balloting

                 Women’s secret balloting                      (UNMIL Radio)
                 Told who to vote for                               -.08
                                                                   (.26)
                                                                  N=382
                 HH members knows vote                              -26
                                                                   (.17)
                                                                  N=328
                 Ballot marked by someone else                      -.26
                                                                   (.19)
                                                                  N=330
                 Secret balloting index                            -.12*
                                                                   (.07)
                                                                  N=384

                 Note: Table displays standard errors clustered by village in parentheses.
                 *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 90, 95 and 99
                 percent conﬁdence levels respectively.




    Secondly, and since gender equality cannot be achieved without support from all the members of a com-

munity, we investigate the effects of the intervention on attitudes towards women amongst male members of

the communities. The idea behind this analysis is that the provision of information, organization of women’s

listening groups and increased female political participation could lead to shifts in norms that have longer

lasting or more general effects on women within their community. In order to measure such effects, we

consider several questions posed to men about women’s rights in the survey questionnaire. For example, we

measure the degree of male respondent support for equal rights for men and women, for a woman’s right to

marry whomever she chooses and to divorce her husband amongst other indicators. Support for women’s

rights was already high in control communities (with an average of 90% of men in control communities

expressing support across the indicators) so any measured effects would have likely been small. The results

are presented in Table 2 below.

    From our analysis, it appears that these broad indicators of attitudes towards women were not signif-

icantly affected by exposure to UNMIL radio, except for the indicator about women’s right to divorce.

However, it is difﬁcult to tell whether or not the lack of results here reﬂect low power as a result of their


                                                     10
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


                            Table 2: UNMIL Radio and Men’s Gender Attitudes

                  Men’s Gender Attitudes                                (UNMIL Radio)
                  Women’s right to speak in community meetings               -.3
                                                                            (.46)
                                                                           N=194
                  Women equal rights to men                                  .25
                                                                            (.30)
                                                                           N=193
                  Girls’ right to go to school                              -.03
                                                                            (.53)
                                                                           N=193
                  Women’s right to refuse sex                               -.02
                                                                            (.18)
                                                                           N=193
                  Women’s right to divorce                                  .25*
                                                                            (.15)
                                                                           N=193
                  Women’s right to choose marriage partners                  .09
                                                                            (.16)
                                                                           N=192
                  Attitudes to women index                                   .04
                                                                            (.05)
                                                                           N=194

                  Note: Table displays standard errors clustered by village in parentheses.
                  *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 90, 95 and 99
                  percent conﬁdence levels respectively.




likely small size or the fact that baseline levels on these outcome measures is very high to begin with.



3    Appendix I: Alternative Causal Mechanisms

In the main discussion section we present a detailed account of the evidence for a political efﬁcacy mech-

anism for results. Below we present our investigation of a liberal orientations channel and the effects of

the group nature of the intervention. We cannot conclude that there are signiﬁcant effects through these

channels.




                                                     11
                      UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


3.1     Liberal Orientations

Liberal norms and values are at the heart of democracy promotion efforts, especially in the context of peace-

building interventions and are often presumed to underpin democratic participation, a key peace-enhancing

mechanism (Paris 2004). Like the political efﬁcacy mechanism, this mechanism also assumes information

provision to voters, but the kind of information provided is peculiar to liberal norms and values. The pre-

sumption is that if voters internalize these norms and values, this should result in changes in normative

priorities and heightened political participation.

      I investigate whether UNMIL radio may have sparked political participation by transmitting liberal

norms and values to the female electorate. Since UNMIL included programming which showed support for

liberal values, such as by condemning political violence and encouraging democratic values, it is possible

that such values themselves could inspire peaceful political participation. I test the extent to which treatment

and control communities subscribe to liberal norms and values such as non-violence and respect for human

rights. I use a number of attitudinal and behavioral indicators. Behavioral indicators are especially useful,

since there is less risk of individuals simply answering in a way they think will please their enumerator.

Examples of indicators used include rejection of electoral violence, rejection of parochial politics, among

others. The results are displayed in Table 3 below.

      Much like in the case of support for women’s rights, support for liberal values was high in the absence of

the intervention. Unsurprisingly, I do not ﬁnd evidence for changes in liberal norms and values as a result of

exposure to UNMIL radio. Though there is no systematic causal evidence that access to UNMIL radio en-

couraged political participation through the transmission of liberal norms and orientations, there is mention

of these channels amongst qualitative sources as motivation for increased political activity. For example, in

Gobahs Town, Montserrado, the importance of non-violent elections processes is cited by participants as a

main motivation for casting their vote wisely. Furthermore, residents from Bomi county cited insulting an

opponent’s personality in candidate debates as a negative trait for an aspiring politician and spoke out against

threats from candidates seeking to win debates by force. The broad outreach and coverage of UNMIL radio

was considered to contribute to political tolerance as well as to the accommodation of female participation

in the 2011 elections. Residents of Zoen Town in Bomi County cited the program as one of the reasons for

low electoral violence during the voting.

                                                       12
                    UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


                              Table 3: UNMIL Radio and Liberal Orientations

                  Liberal Orientations                            (UNMIL Radio)
                  Freedom of expression                               -.12
                                                                      (.17)
                                                                     N=382
                  Ethic prejudices                                     .01
                                                                      (.04)
                                                                     N=389
                  Parochial voting                                     .04
                                                                      (.15)
                                                                     N=366
                  Sent anti-violence petition to leader               -.08
                                                                      (.17)
                                                                     N=346
                  Gender equality under the law                        .25
                                                                      (.22)
                                                                     N=381
                  Liberal orientations index                           .01
                                                                      (.04)
                                                                     N=389

                  Note: Table displays standard errors clustered by village in parentheses.
                  *, ** and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 90, 95 and 99
                  percent conﬁdence levels respectively.




3.2       Group Mechanism: Perceived Social Norms and Enhanced Capacity

We next consider to what extent UNMIL Radio’s effects on female political participation are an artifact of the

intervention’s group design. Unlike the afore-discussed two mechanisms that put emphasis on information

and beliefs, the group mechanism puts focus on the group dynamics and social inﬂuences themselves as the

locus of political change. There are two ways in which this change may occur. On one hand, a group can

change individual perceptions about prevailing social norms (i.e., what other people think is appropriate and

and we know from social social science research that people tend to act in accordance with perceive social

norms, even if such action may be in opposition to their personal beliefs (Paluck 2009).1 This intervention
      1
     For instance, Paluck’s research in post-genocide Rwanda suggests that participation in violence did not
necessarily reﬂect killers’ personal prejudices; but rather, it was inﬂuenced by the perceived social norm
that made killing socially acceptable, a norm that was the authorities, the media, peers, etc.


                                                      13
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


provided women voters with a safe space for women in which to discuss political and electoral matters,

as a group. The hypothesis then is that the resulting group interactions might have affected perceptions of

prevailing norms, thereby inﬂuencing political behaviors of female voters.

    Alternatively, regular group discussions may have simply operated as a coordination mechanism to mo-

bilize female voters for collective action.2 Comparative studies have established a strong positive relation-

ship between membership in a group or associations and increases civic competency, political efﬁcacy and

greater political participation (Bratton et al. 1999). Indeed this association can exist "even if the individual

does not consider the membership politically relevant and even if it does not involve his active participation"

(Verba et al., 1995).3 To the extent that we consider women’s listenership groups "associations", albeit infor-

mal ones, we would expect participation in these groups to lead to positive effects in political participation,

independent of the information provided.

    The best way to test the existence of a group mechanism for effects would be to randomize treated

individuals to listen to UNMIL radio alone or in communal settings. Bidwell et al (2016) do this in rural

Sierra Leone and ﬁnd evidence of social mobilization effects, both when it comes to voter knowledge and to

policy alignment. They argue that such differences speak to the discussions sparked by candidate debates in

group settings, allowing individuals to better understand candidate positions and consider who most aligns

to their priorities. Since we cannot compare group and individual treatments in our case, we proxy for group

effects by considering the direct impact of attending UNMIL sessions on indicators of political participation

for community members who attended more radio listenership sessions (i.e., above the median) and those

who attended fewer (i.e., below the median). We also consider differences between individuals who attended

no sessions and those who attended at least one.
   2
      See Collier and Vicente (2014) for a similar argument about civic education campaigns and election
violence in the context of Nigeria.
    3
      One explanation for this relationship is the organizational capacity of associations to mobilize their
members for collective action. Another explanation is the ‘civic skills’ thesis, which suggests that associ-
ations can cultivate civic values and skills that can carry over into the political realm. However, as other
studies have suggested (see, from example, CoffÃl’ and Geys 2006; Paxton 2007), not all voluntary associ-
ations are alike: they do not matter in the same way, much less which less with the same weight for political
participation. In the case of Eastern and Central European countries, for example, Letki (2003) found that
membership in community associations had a relatively large impact on political involvement, whereas
membership in labor and professional associations was much less relevant for political participation. Hence
the necessity to investigate different types of associations.



                                                      14
                      UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


    The rest of the analysis in this paper has been done at the village level as this is the level at which

treatment was randomized. Since departing from this ITT analysis to consider only those who took up the

treatment offered (i.e. those who attended listening groups) increases the likelihood of selection bias, we

will not interpret the results of these regressions causally. The results are presented in Table 4 below.

                                            Table 4: Group Mechanism


 Political Participation             > median sessions attended                          >= one session attended
 Voting in the 2011 election                       -.29                                              .07
                                                 (.24)                                              (.37)
 Contributed to campaigns                          .18                                               -.04
                                                 (.20)                                              (.35)
 Sending card to leaders                          -.18                                              .-.26
                                                 (.18)                                              (.25)
 Attend violent protests                            .1                                               -.16
                                                 (.31)                                              (.49)
 Attend community meetings                        .-.16                                              -.07
                                                   .22                                              (.30)
 Call radio show                                   -.07                                             N/A
                                                 (.29)                                             (N/A)
 Attend political rally                           .75*                                              N/A
                                                 (.41)                                             (N/A)
 Speak at community meetings                       -.03                                              .46
                                                 (.19)                                            (.19)**
 Political participation index                     -.02                                              .08
                                                 (.05)                                              (.05)
 Note: Each item in second and third columns is a product of separate regression,
 Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by village: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 Probit results for calling a radio station and attending a political rally cannot be estimated in column 2 due to lack of variation
 in the explanatory variable (no individual who attended no sessions reported doing either of these activities)




    As the results in the table indicate, we ﬁnd suggestive evidence that those women who attended more

listening groups were more likely to partake in communal and discursive forms of political participation such

as speaking out in other types of community meetings and attending political rallies. Though these results

cannot be interpreted causally, they contain some suggestion that links between more solitary and communal

modes of participation might be encouraged by imparting information in different ways. A deeper analysis

of the effects of the design of informational interventions could be an interesting avenue for further research.

    Furthermore, the qualitative evidence provides a good deal of support for the signiﬁcance of the group


                                                           15
                     UNMIL Radio and Women’s Political Participation after Civil War


nature of the program for political participation effects. Firstly, the importance of interpretation and ex-

planation of the material provided by the ﬁeld facilitator or other participants is mentioned. It seems that

some of the material would have been challenging for some listeners to digest alone (one participant refers

to broadcasters using ‘big English’) and that groups were helpful for this reason. Furthermore, as well as

simply understanding the information provided, groups helped listeners to discuss, question and engage with

one another about their opinions after programs had ﬁnished. Many reports stress high levels of participant

engagement with the material provided.

    Finally, it seems that this group learning and discussion sparked political action. The women’s leader

from Amadu, Montserrado reported that the sessions brought about a sense of purpose and of belonging

within a community that had been very disorganized in past years. Women from Blagai Town organized

to canvass for a local (female) candidate and participants from Bowmein called to confront leaders about a

promised bridge that had not materialized. It seems that a junior senator lost his job as a result of being held

accountable for this.




                                                      16
