                                                      WPS7971


Policy Research Working Paper                        7971




      Government Guarantees, Transparency,
             and Bank Risk-Taking
                                 Tito Cordella
                             Giovanni Dell’Ariccia
                               Robert Marquez




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
February 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7971


  Abstract
 This paper presents a model of bank risk taking and govern-                        increasing the profits of the bank (franchise value effect).
 ment guarantees. Levered banks take excessive risk, as their                       The results extend to the case in which information dis-
 actions are not fully priced at the margin by debt holders.                        closure, and thus the portion of informed investors, is
 The impact of government guarantees on bank risk taking                            endogenous but costly. The model also shows that when
 depends critically on the portion of bank investors that can                       bank capital is endogenous, public guarantees lead unequiv-
 observe bank behavior and hence price debt at the margin.                          ocally to an increase in bank leverage and an associated
 Greater guarantees increase risk taking (moral hazard) when                        increase in risk taking. The analysis points to a complex
 informed investors hold a sufficiently large fraction of lia-                      relationship between prudential policy and the institu-
 bilities. Otherwise, greater guarantees reduce risk taking by                      tional framework governing bank resolution and bailouts.




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors
  may be contacted at tcordella@worldbank.org, gdellariccia@imf.org, and rsmarquez@ucdavis.edu.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
  Government Guarantees, Transparency, and Bank Risk-Taking
                 Tito Cordella                                      Ariccia
                                                      Giovanni Dell ’
                The World Bank               International Monetary Fund and CEPR
                                            Robert Marquez
                                     University of California, Davis




JEL Classi…cation Numbers: G1, G21, G28
Keywords: Bailouts, moral hazard, value e¤ect, transparency, leverage, risk pricing.
    The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the IMF,
the World Bank, or their Executive Boards. The authors would like to thank Oliver Masetti, Patricia Mosser, Pau
Rabanal, Damiano Sandri, and two anonimous reviewers for useful comments. Tito Cordella is an Adviser at The
World Bank (Development Economics), Giovanni Dell’   Ariccia is Deputy Director of the Research Department at the
IMF. Robert Marquez is a Professor of Finance at the University of California. Davis.
1    Introduction

The bailouts of banks and other …nancial intermediaries during the Global Financial Crisis led to a
regulatory backlash focused on limiting future public intervention in support of the …nancial sector.
In particular, the post-crisis regulatory debate has centered on how to eliminate too-big-too-fail
subsidies and reduce the moral hazard associated with implicit or explicit government guarantees.
With these objectives in mind, regulatory reforms have typically introduced new and higher hurdles
for government support to banks during crises. Cases in point can be seen in the new restrictions
on Federal Reserve Bank actions written into Dodd-Frank, or in the recently introduced bail-in
requirements in the EU.
    The primary rationale underpinning these reforms is that bailouts are inequitable and that the
expectation of public support a¤ects the behavior of bankers. In particular, part of the argument
is that public guarantees prevent the correct pricing of risk by market participants. This induces
ine¢ ciently reckless behavior by bankers who become less concerned about risk taking since their
actions are not re‡ected in their costs of …nancing. Removing the expectation of bailouts is then
expected to restore market discipline and thus prevent banks from taking socially excessive risk.
    Yet, the notion that the expectation of bailouts and other forms of public guarantees lead to
greater moral hazard relies on the assumption that banks are transparent and investors can price
risk at the margin correctly, or that a bailout is likely to bene…t shareholders/managers in addition
to creditors/depositors. Put di¤erently, the assumption is that, absent government guarantees,
implicit or explicit, competitive forces will be able to discipline bank behavior early enough to
prevent excessive risk taking, hence reducing the probability of …nancial crises.
    In contrast, our model shows that when banks are su¢ ciently opaque, or when the pricing of
liabilities cannot easily incorporate risk taking in interim periods (i.e., after the debt has been
issued), a public insurance scheme can improve banks’incentives by reducing the cost of liabilities.
While guarantees make the pricing of debt insensitive to risk, they also reduce the promised interest
rate that banks must o¤er their investors and depositors. Since bankers (or bank shareholders)
are residual claimants on the returns from loans on their portfolios, a reduced cost of funding
increases a bank’s payo¤ conditional on success. This greater payo¤ increases the bank’s incentives
to monitor its loans in order to guarantee repayment. Equivalently, it induces the bank to choose




                                                 1
safer portfolios than what would be individually optimal with higher deposit and bond rates. Thus,
public guarantees can curb rather than exacerbate banks’risk-shifting tendencies.
                                                                                     s incentives
   It is important to note, however, that the force described above improves the bank’
only when a large portion of the bank’s liabilities is already insensitive to risk at the margin. If all
the bank’s liabilities re‡ected the bank’s risk choices at the margin, then risk taking would be fully
internalized and guarantees would just create moral hazard.
   A second important distinction is between the bailout of bondholders and that of sharehold-
ers/managers (that is, agents that have full control over a bank’s risk taking activity). The e¤ects
discussed above pertain to the bailout of bondholders and depositors. In contrast, insuring an
informed party (shareholders/managers) against a risk over which it has full control can only lead
to worse incentives. Consistently, in the model we present in this paper, the promise or expec-
tation of bailing out shareholders has an unequivocally detrimental impact on bank risk taking,
irrespectively of the weight of shareholder claims in a bank’s liability structure.
   Also note that saying that a bank’s risk is “priced at the margin”is not the same as saying that
a bank portfolio is correctly priced in equilibrium. In the latter case, investors form conjectures
            s behavior and price its liabilities accordingly. The bank takes the cost of its liabilities
about a bank’
as given when it makes its risk taking choices. And, in equilibrium, deposit rates and yields on debt
correctly re‡ect the bank’s risk taking decisions. In the former case, the cost of a bank’s liabilities
is a function of its risk taking, and the bank takes it directly into account when it makes its choices.
   Empirical evidence on whether investors can price bank risk correctly (and in particular, at
the margin) is at best mixed. On the one hand, there is solid evidence that depositors and other
security holders are able to identify banks that are at risk of failure, either by running or by
demanding higher interest rates. On the other, this does not necessarily imply that depositors
are able to discipline e¤ectively bank managers’behavior ex ante. Indeed, there is similarly solid
evidence that events (such as regulatory audits) in which details about bank holdings are suddenly
revealed lead to sharp repricing of banks’liabilities (see Section 8, for a survey of the literature and
discussion).
   If our benchmark model looks at the incentive e¤ects of guarantees for given levels of trans-
parency/disclosure and leverage, we then relax such assumptions. First, we allow banks to exert
some control over the fraction of their liabilities that is priced at the margin. Think about this as
banks being able to make a (costly) investment in transparency/disclosure. Under these conditions,


                                                   2
bailouts may entail an additional form of moral hazard by reducing the bene…ts (to the bank) of
transparency, and hence lead banks to be more opaque, which everything else equal will tend to
increase their risk taking. Yet, even with this additional source of moral hazard, we show that if
the cost of information disclosure is su¢ ciently high, the net e¤ect of bailouts may still be reduced
risk taking.
   The second extension deals with leverage. In our model, capital is costly (there is an equity
premium) and observable; investors use it to infer a bank’s risk taking behavior (higher capital
means less risk). When allowed to choose their level of leverage, banks will choose capital as to
balance its higher cost with its bene…t in reducing the cost of debt and deposits in equilibrium.
Under these conditions, the expectation of a bailout will reduce the bene…ts of capital and, hence,
increase leverage. This, in turn, will unequivocally increase risk taking. This points to an important
interaction between bailout policies and capital regulation. For intermediaries subject to su¢ ciently
high capital requirements, our results with exogenous capital apply and the e¤ects of bailout on risk
taking depend on the proportion of liabilities priced at the margin. For the rest, the expectation
of bailouts leads to greater leverage and an excessive increase in risk taking.
   Finally a couple of caveats. First, most of the issues we discuss are relevant for other sectors
of the economy as well. Large non-…nancial corporations, which have sometimes been bailed out
because of their systemic nature, are often opaque and investors may have di¢ culty in pricing their
risk at the margin. Hence, to some extent, the model could apply beyond the …nancial sector. Yet,
there are obvious reasons to focus primarily on banks. First, the size and frequency of bailouts
(and the explicit guarantees) for the …nancial sector do not …nd a counterpart in other industries.
Second, by the very nature of their business, banks and other …nancial intermediaries …nd it easier
than non-…nancial …rms to modify their risk pro…le on a short-term basis. It is, then, likely more
di¢ cult for investors to price their risk at the margin (see Morgan, 2002). Finally, as a consequence,
the post-crisis reform debate has primarily focused on measures addressing issues related to the
bailout of banks.
   Second, in this paper, we abstract from the issue of whether a bank is systemic or not. This
is obviously a relevant issue when deciding whether or not to bail out an institution. However,
the issue is somewhat orthogonal to the point we are making in this paper. Most papers examine
the trade-o¤ between the ex-post aggregate welfare bene…ts from bailing out a systemic bank in a
crisis and the ine¢ ciencies (the increased risk taking) associated with the expectation or promise


                                                  3
of such action. Here we are interested in the conditions under which such a promise indeed leads
to increased ine¢ ciency. That said, it is worth noting that, in a related model (modi…ed to admit
contagion), the promise of bailout for systemic institutions may improve the incentives of banks
subject to the risk of contagion (see Dell’Ariccia and Ratnovski, 2013), providing an additional
counterbalance to standard moral hazard e¤ects.
   The paper relates to the literature on bailouts, deposit insurance, and moral hazard in banking.
Our model extends the simple framework used in Cordella and Levy Yeyati (2002), Dell’Ariccia
and Marquez (2006), Allen, Carletti, and Marquez (2011), and Dell’Ariccia, Laeven, and Marquez
(2014), where banks face quadratic monitoring costs, are protected by limited liabilities, and only
repay depositors when the project succeeds. In addition, we allow for part of a bank’s debt liabilities
to be priced at the margin and we consider government guarantees. The idea that insurance can
have a pro-incentive e¤ect is studied in Cordella and Levy-Yeyati (2003) and Dell’Ariccia and
Ratvnoski (2013). However, in both these papers insurance is provided against risks outside the
control of the bank (macroeconomic risk in the …rst case, and contagion risk in the second). The
mechanism at work in our paper is then more akin to the e¤ect of lower deposit rates explored in
Matutes and Vives (2000) and Hellman, Murdoch, and Stiglitz (2005). There a deposit rate ceiling
or deposit insurance increases a bank’s charter value and hence reduces agency problems.
   The paper contributes to the policy debate on bank resolution and intervention. Most of the
narrative of the post-crisis reform e¤ort has been on making crisis resolution more equitable and in
avoiding creating conditions conducive to moral hazard. From that standpoint, a trade-o¤ emerges
between the need to minimize the macroeconomic e¤ects of bank distress ex post (including through
generous bailouts) and avoiding policies that distort risk-taking incentives ex-ante. Here, we focus
on what conditions that have to be in place for such a trade-o¤ to exist; in the process we identify
an important relationship between capital regulation and bank resolution policies.
   The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a stylized model of bank risk taking
highlighting the forces discussed above. Sections 3 and 4 explore under what conditions bailouts
can improve rather than worsen a bank’s risk pro…le, when the fraction of liabilities with risk
priced at the margin is exogenously speci…ed or is endogenously determined, respectively. Section
5 presents a brief discussion of additional e¤ects that may arise if government guarantees (in the
form of a possible bailout) also have the potential to bene…t shareholders. Section 6 examines the
case with endogenous bank leverage and discusses the role of capital regulation. Section 7 presents


                                                  4
illustrative numerical simulations of the model. Section 8 summarizes the evidence on debtholder
discipline and bank risk taking. Finally, Section 9 concludes.


2        A model of bank risk taking

Consider a risk-neutral, pro…t-maximizing bank with a loan portfolio of size 1. The portfolio is
…nanced by equity, k , and a mass 1              k of debt (bonds and deposits). Risk-neutral debt holders
will invest in the bank as long as they are compensated for risk (i.e., as long as they break even
relative to the risk free rate). Further, we assume that a fraction                of debt holders is able to observe
the true riskiness of the bank’s portfolio, which, in turn, depends on the bank’s monitoring e¤orts;
consequently, they can price bank risk at the margin. The rest either cannot observe risk taking
or cannot easily condition the pricing on the actual, realized degree of risk, and hence it will price
debt based on the expected riskiness. These latter investors must break even in equilibrium, but
                                                          s marginal portfolio choices.1 Finally, we
they do not adjust the pricing of their claims to the bank’
assume, that, with probability , the government will intervene in case of bank failure and bail out
debt holders. One alternative interpretation is that a fraction                 of debt is protected by government
guarantees such as deposit insurance, so that                can be viewed as caps on the amount of deposits
that are insured.
        In our model, we assume that the bank is protected by limited liability and it repays depositors
only when successful. If the bank fails, the bank’s owners/managers lose the invested capital. More
precisely, we assume that the portfolio of the bank returns R with probability q 2 [0; 1] and zero
                                                                                  1 2
otherwise, where q is the bank’s choice of monitoring e¤ort, which entails a cost 2 cq . Note that one
can write an essentially identical model based on project screening/portfolio allocation.2 Denoting
by r the risk free rate, by rD the gross interest rate on bank debt, and by rE                       r the opportunity
cost of equity, the bank’s expected pro…ts can be written as:

                                                      r                                          1 2       1 2
              =q R         (1    k )r   (1      )       + (1      ) rD (1       k)      rE k       cq        ' :        (1)
                                                      q                                          2         2
    1
      This is equivalent to saying that for the fraction of debt holders, bank portfolio risk is contractible, so that
the pricing of their debt claim can be made contingent on the bank’     s choice of risk. Instead, for other debt holders,
the pricing of their claims cannot be made explicitly contingent on the bank’    s chosen level of risk, even if the risk is
correctly priced in equilibrium.
    2
      Equivalently, the framework can be seen as a portfolio choice problem for the bank: the bank chooses a portfolio
                                           c
on the e¢ cient frontier that repays R 2     q with probability q , and thus must trade o¤ greater returns with greater
risk.



                                                             5
The …rst term re‡ects the bank’s limited liability, which implies that the bank only repays debt
holders (bond holders and depositors) when its project succeeds, which occurs with probability q .
The cost of bank debt is a weighted average of interest rates that re‡ects the assumptions above:
given the expectation of government bailout of debt holders, , investors put the same weight on
the risk-free rate. Yet, with probability 1                 debt is subject to default and needs to be priced
accordingly. A fraction          is priced in a way that perfectly re‡ects the bank’s actual risk taking at
              r                                                                                                      r
the margin, ( q ), with the remaining portion, 1                 , re‡ecting the expected risk taking rD =          E [q ] .

The required return to equity, rE , is taken here as exogenous - all that matters for our purposes is
that rE      r.3


3       Equilibrium with exogenous priced-at-the-margin liabilities

For the moment, assume that , the fraction of debt that is correctly priced at the margin, is
                                                                                              s
exogenously given. Di¤erentiating (1) with respect to q , the …rst order condition of the bank’
problem can be written as

                             @
                                =R        cq     (1      k )(r + rD (1          )(1      )) = 0;                      (2)
                             @q

so that
                                      R     (1    k )r     rD (1         ) (1     ) (1    k)
                                 b=
                                 q                                                             ;                      (3)
                                                              c
where
                                                               r
                                                      rD =           :                                                (4)
                                                              E [q ]
First, note from (3) that a bank funded entirely with equity (thus without an agency problem)
                            R
                 e
would choose q = q          c,   which hence represents the socially optimal monitoring e¤ort. It is also
                                                  e: Second, the bank’
                                               b< q
immediate from (3) that generally we will have q                                         b, is
                                                                     s monitoring e¤ort, q
increasing in its gross return R and its capitalization, as is common in models that incorporate a
moral hazard on the bank’                                    b is also increasing in : the greater
                         s side. Note further, however, that q
the fraction of liabilities the price of which is risk-sensitive, the more discipline is imposed on the
bank through this channel. This e¤ect represents the depositor discipline channel discussed above,
which leads the bank to exert more e¤ort and choose a safer portfolio. Finally, note that whether
    3
    Since investors are all risk neutral, there is no risk premium associated with equity and hence rE need not be
a¤ected by leverage changes within the bank. Nevertheless, rE may be strictly greater than r to the extent that banks
face di¢ culties in raising capital due to asymmetric information, issuance costs, dilution of existing shareholders, etc.


                                                             6
b is increasing or decreasing in , the fraction of deposits that are insured, depends on how large
q
                                   @qb       ( r+rD (1    ))(1 k)
  is. To see this, note that       @     =            c             . For       large and close to 1, the bank’s level of
           b is decreasing in , while the opposite is true for
monitoring q                                                                            close to 0. We discuss this issue
further below given it represents one of the main aspects of the paper.
                                                              b, and use (3) and (4) to explicitly
       We now impose rational expectations, that is, E [q ] = q
characterize the equilibrium values (denoted by an asterisk) of monitoring e¤ort and the interest
rate on debt (i.e., deposits):
                                                p
                        R     (1     k )r +        (R     (1    k )r )2         4cr(1    k )(1   )(1    )
                  q =                                                                                       ;          (5)
                                                                 2c
                        r
                 rD =     :                                                                                            (6)
                        q

To ensure the existence of an internal solution, q 2 (0; 1), we further assume that4

                                                               (R        r)2
                                                   c2     R;                    ;                                    (A.1)
                                                                    4r

and, for the interval to be non empty, that5
                                                                     p
                                                     R > r(3 +            2):                                        (A.2)

       Having computed the equilibrium values for the monitoring e¤ort and the debt rate, we are
now in a position to study how changes in the institutional setting a¤ect the bank’s risk taking
incentives. Since, in our framework, the bank tends to take on excessive risk because is a levered
institution, which operates under limited liability and partial pricing at the margin, an increase in
equity necessarily makes the bank more prudent. Similarly, an increase in the fraction                          of the risk
sensitive non-insured debt also increases the equilibrium monitoring e¤ort of the bank. In both
cases, the force at work is greater market discipline through a larger share of the bank liabilities
priced at the margin. Put di¤erently, the bank’s behavior will re‡ect more directly on its cost of
funding.
       In contrast, the e¤ect of an increase in the probability of bailout has an ambiguous e¤ect on
bank risk taking. On the one hand, it increases bank pro…ts conditional on success by reducing
the average interest rate on debt; this makes the bank more prudent. On the other, it reduces the
   4
     The …rst condition ensures that q > 1; the second that the radicand in (5) and (6) is positive, and thus that a
rational expectations equilibrium exists.
   5
     This condition is, of course, a su¢ cient one.



                                                               7
weight of debt priced at the margin, thus, diminishing the bank’s incentive to “behave” to reduce
the cost of its funding.
   In order to better understand the di¤erent forces in action, we study the link between govern-
ment guarantees on the bank’s liabilities and risk taking incentives depending on how large the
fraction of the bank’s debt is risk sensitive. More precisely, we can show that:

Proposition 1 An increase in the share of debt liabilities covered by guarantees, ; decreases the
bank’s monitoring e¤ ort q if, and only if, the fraction   of risk sensitive uninsured deposits is large
enough.

Proof : See Appendix.

   The proposition establishes that o¤ering a guarantee on deposits and/or debt as a way of
increasing the bank’s return conditional on project success leads to greater moral hazard and more
risk taking only when a signi…cant portion of the bank’s liabilities is priced at the margin. In other
words, when most debt is priced in a way that re‡ects the bank’s risk taking decisions, we have
the classic moral hazard result: increases in government guarantees reduce the bank’s incentives to
monitor since it makes the interest it has to pay on debt less sensitive to its risk-taking decisions.
   Conversely, when most of the bank’                                                             s
                                     s liabilities earn a return that is …xed relative to the bank’
risk choices (even if they are correctly priced in equilibrium), providing greater government guaran-
tees, such as by increasing limits in the deposit insurance ceiling or extending coverage to uninsured
debtholders, is a way of improving incentives for the bank to exert e¤ort since it raises the margin
between its payo¤ conditional on success and its repayment to depositors, thus making it more
willing to exert more e¤ort in monitoring. The overall e¤ect of government guarantees on bank’s
monitoring e¤ort thus depends on the fraction of debt that is priced at the margin. The propo-
sition also highlights that the “mortal sin” that has been ascribed to the introduction of deposit
insurance, namely greater moral hazard, is highly dependent on the fact that, in the absence of
deposit insurance, bank creditors can price their claims in a way that is responsive and reacts to
        s risk choices. Otherwise, even if these claims are priced correctly to re‡
the bank’                                                                          ect risk taking,
o¤ering a government guarantee does not introduce a distortion, and indeed it helps alleviate those
moral hazard problems that stem from limited liability.
   Given much of the recent discussion concerning the role of bank capital in controlling risk taking
and absorbing losses when those materialize, it is useful to study how the degree of capitalization

                                                   8
a¤ects a bank’s optimal reaction to greater deposit insurance coverage. Since the focus here is
on controlling risk taking that may be induced by the introduction of a government guarantee, we
consider the case where           = 1, so that the distortion in favor of great risk taking induced by deposit
insurance is maximized. Given the equilibrium level of monitoring q speci…ed in (5), for                  = 1, that
                                                                                      R (1 k)r
is, when all depositors price risk correctly at the margin, we have q =                   c      , so that increases
                                                                                                     (1 k)r
in        clearly decrease monitoring, or in other words lead to more risk          taking: dq
                                                                                            d    =     c      < 0.
         Consider now an increase in bank capital k . This will have two e¤ects. First, more bank capital
will reduce risk-taking, by increasing the bankers’“skin in the game,” dq
                                                                       dk > 0. Second, it will have
                                        d2 q       r
the following marginal e¤ect:           dkd    =   c   > 0. In other words, an increase in k attenuates the e¤ect
of an increase in , and helps control the moral hazard problem induced by the introduction of
deposit insurance. It bears emphasizing, however, that capital is only needed to play this role when
large guarantees, such as a comprehensive deposit insurance, lead bank to take on too much risk.
Instead, when , the fraction of uninsured deposits that price risk at the margin, is lower, deposit
insurance leads to better incentives for the bank and thus to lower risk taking, so that there is less
need to use capital to provide a countervailing e¤ect.

Other instruments: it is useful to note that the e¤ects identi…ed here, which stem from the “pricing
at the margin” of debt instruments, are distinct from other mechanisms, which have also been
recently proposed as e¤ective ways to reduce bank risk taking and protect other claimholders at
the bank. A salient example is the use of contingent convertible bonds–“cocos”–that has been much
discussed recently, and which has been touted as an e¤ective way of dealing with undercapitalized
banks that may need additional capital exactly when they are in a downturn, having amassed
losses (or potential losses) that reduced their capitalization. In our model, introducing cocos would
have little e¤ect unless the bond part of the coco, to be repaid in “good times,” when the bank’s
                                                                                                    s risk
project is successful (i.e., with probability q ), has an interest rate which itself prices the bank’
correctly at the margin. If the interest rate is …xed up-front however, as for the fraction 1                        of
uninsured debt in our base model, then the same risk taking incentives as above arise. In the bad
                    s projects fail to pay o¤, the cocos would convert into equity, but since the
state, when the bank’
bank is defaulting anyway in that case, such conversion would also have no incentive e¤ects.6
     6
         It would, however, reduce the burden on the deposit insurance fund.




                                                               9
        This discussion suggests that the use of such instruments as cocos may be particularly valuable
when the primary purpose of capital is to create a bu¤er that acts as a …rst backstop against losses.
But, in order to be useful when the primary concern is bank moral hazard, cocos are subject to
the same conditions as standard bonds: they need to be priced at the margin. When this does not
happen, the solution may require increasing the payo¤ of the bank in the good states of the world,
rather than decreasing it in the bad states.


4        Endogenous information disclosure

In the previous section, we assumed that an exogenous fraction                     of uninsured debt was priced
at the margin. However, given its importance, a bank may like to exert some control over this
fraction, if at all possible. In that case, the existence of government guarantees is likely to a¤ect
also this aspect of a bank’s behavior. For instance, if debt pricing relies on information disclosure
and information disclosure is costly, government guarantees will reduce the bene…ts (to the bank)
from disclosure. Put di¤erently, when information disclosure is endogenous, a greater probability
of bailouts may entail an additional form of moral hazard. In this section, we examine this issue.
        We allow the bank to choose         by paying a cost 1
                                                             2'
                                                                   2   before deciding on the monitoring e¤ort
q . One may therefore interpret          as the degree of transparency of the bank’s balance sheet, with
greater transparency being more costly for the bank.               may also represent the fraction of debt to
which the bank agrees to o¤er pricing that is risk sensitive, and thus it is contingent on how much
risk is actually chosen.
        Note that it need not be that the bank faces an actual cost associated with transparency, but
rather that more transparent investments may earn lower returns than those the bank could earn
by investing in more specialized but also more opaque projects.7
        Solving by backward induction, the problem of the bank can be written as:

                                                   r                                          1      2   1 2
    max      =q     R     (1   k )r    (1      )     + (1        ) rD (1      k)      rE k      cq         ' ;    (7)
                                                   q                                          2          2
    7
     One could also imagine that investors/depositors can make investments in information acquisition about the bank,
or in monitoring the bank, and such decisions may well interact with the bank’  s decision of how much transparent to
make its balance sheet. We abstract from such considerations here in order to focus purely on the bank’   s incentives
to both disclose and monitor its portfolio.




                                                         10
where q is given by expression (5). Such a set-up allows us to study how an increase in the cost
                                                                                              s
of transparency ' a¤ects the relation between the degree of government guarantees and the bank’
monitoring e¤ort. Now consider the following Lemma:

Lemma 1 The individually optimal proportion of debt liabilities priced at the margin, b, is de-
creasing in the degree of government guarantees, .

Proof : See Appendix.

   This lemma establishes that once the fraction        of liabilities priced at the margin is under
the control of the bank, the promise of government guarantees entails an additional moral hazard
problem. Since, in our setup, information disclosure is costly, banks will choose a lower level of
disclosure when the bene…ts associated with pricing risk at the margin are reduced. Indeed, it is
immediate that when      = 1, the …rst order conditions from (7) will imply b = 0. Note, however,
that this does not mean that with       endogenous an increase in government guarantees always
implies an increase in bank risk taking (a decline in q ). As for the case with       exogenous, the
e¤ect of greater guarantees on risk taking will depend on the balance of their moral hazard (now
including their impact on b) and their “charter value”e¤ects. We demonstrate this in the following
proposition.

Proposition 2 There exists a ' such that for ' > ' a bank’s monitoring e¤ ort is always increasing
in the degree of government guarantees, :

Proof : See Appendix.

   The proposition establishes that more generous government guarantees (e.g., a comprehensive
deposit insurance) decrease bank monitoring and lead to more risk taking, as it has often been
argued, only when the cost of disclosure, or transparency, is relatively low. The intuition is similar
to that for Proposition 1: when the cost of transparency ' is low, the bank will optimally choose
to disclose a lot of information, implying that   will be high. In that case, as shown in Proposition
1, increases in   will lead to a reduction in monitoring e¤ort by the bank. Conversely, when ' is
relatively high, the bank …nds disclosure too onerous and will choose a low level of transparency
 . In that case, increasing government guarantees is good for incentives and leads the bank to
exert more monitoring e¤ort. Put di¤erently, since there is little pricing at the margin anyway, the

                                                  11
promise of bailout does not entail much moral hazard and the value e¤ect through bank pro…tability
prevails.
      The threshold level of the cost of transparency below which risk taking increases in     can be
solved for explicitly, and is given by

                                                         cr2 (1 k )2
                                 '                                               :                 (8)
                                         (c        R + (1 k )r) (R 2(1   k )r)

It is useful to study how such a threshold varies with di¤erent characteristics of the market, such
as the level of capital for a bank, the marginal cost of bank e¤ort/reduced risk taking. We state
the comparative statics of the threshold ' as the following corollary, which follows directly from
di¤erentiating (8) with respect to the c, k , and r:

Corollary 1 Comparative statics: The threshold level of the cost of transparency to the bank, ',
is decreasing:

  1. in the bank’s marginal cost of monitoring, c:

                                @'                  r2 (1 k )2 (R (1 k )r)
                                   =                                           < 0;                (9)
                                @c            (c    R + (1 k )r)2 (R 2(1 k )r)

  2. and in the bank’s degree of capitalization, k :

                         @'                          (1   k )r + 2 (R (1 k )r) (c R)
                            =     cr2 (1       k)                                     < 0:       (10)
                         @k                         ((c   R + (1 k )r) (R 2(1 k )r))2

      From (9), it follows that the condition for government guarantees to reduce the riskiness of the
bank’s portfolio get less stringent when agency problems become more severe (the cost of bank
monitoring c increases). This re‡ects the fact that, when e¤ort by the bank to control risk taking
is more costly, in equilibrium, the bank will exert less e¤ort and take more risk, all things equal.
As a result, there is greater value in aligning the bank’s incentives with what is socially bene…cial,
hence the threshold value ' decreases.
      The second part of the corollary, (10), implies that8 the higher the bank capital is, the more
likely it is that guarantees such as deposit insurance reduce risk taking incentives. The intuition
here is that       is decreasing in k , as the bene…ts from disclosure decrease with the proportion of
liabilities that is priced at the margin (with and without disclosure). This means that, for higher
  8
      Remember that from (A.1), c > R.


                                                           12
values of k , the decrease in        caused by higher guarantees is smaller, and thus the moral hazard
e¤ect is also smaller.


5    Insuring debt versus bailing out shareholders

In our analysis so far, we have focused on government guarantees that bene…t debt holders (e.g.,
depositors) but do not extend to shareholders. The primary reason for doing so has been to
narrow our analysis to the debate concerning how policies like deposit insurance or the extension of
guarantees to other (subordinated) bondholders may distort bank incentives and lead to increased
risk taking by attenuating the channel of “debtholder discipline.” In practice, however, concerns
have also been voiced that government intervention to provide funds to investors may also accrue
to the bene…t of shareholders, bailing them out along with depositors when the bank su¤ers losses.
For instance, by preventing a bank from going into liquidation, a rescue package may preserve
its long term charter value. Essentially, the concern is that often rescue packages end up leaving
signi…cant “crumbs on the table” for banks’shareholders and management.
    Such a bailout can be easily incorporated into the current framework and it is easy to show
that this kind of component of a rescue package is unequivocally bad for incentives.
    Consider the case where shareholders/managers also obtain some bene…t whenever government
guarantees protect debt holders and depositors. This means that in default states there is the same
probability    that shareholders will receive a payo¤ A. For instance, a bailout may allow bank
shareholders to recover a fraction of their equity, so that A =                        rE k , with              1. In that case,
pro…ts are

                                             r                                                                    1 2     1 2
    =q R      (1    k )r        (1    )        + (1            ) rD (1         k ) + (1    q) A          rE k       cq      ' :
                                             q                                                                    2       2
                                                                                                                            (11)
Maximizing (11), we obtain

                                R      (1      k )r        A        rD (1       ) (1   ) (1    k)
                           b=
                           q                                                                         ;                     (12)
                                                                    c
                                             r
and, as usual, after imposing rD =             b] ,
                                            E [q      we get
                                               q
         1
     q =       R     (1     k )r          A+          (R       (1    k )r )2     4cr (1       ) (1       ) (1     k) :     (13)
         2c



                                                               13
        Comparing equation (13) with (5), it is immediate to verify that bailing out management/
shareholders is bad for incentives, for any               > 0. Note, however, that if government guarantees
cannot easily be targeted to depositors/debt-holders only (so it is more like a bailout for political
reasons rather than a pure guarantee on deposits), then there are two o¤setting e¤ects: the bailout
probability      reduces rD , which is good for incentives, but increases the payo¤ to shareholders in
the default state, which is bad for incentives. If A is small, then the pro incentive e¤ect will still
dominate, whereas if A is large, the moral hazard e¤ect will.
        The result in this section is not surprising: A bailout of shareholders/managers amount to
insuring the informed party against a risk that it fully controls.9 The implication is that rescue
packages should be designed in a way that minimizes this e¤ect (with small A). Provisions to
wipe out existing shareholders and replace a bank’s top management and board following a bailout
would go in this direction.


6        Endogenous leverage

                                s liability structure (its debt/equity mix) as exogenous. In this
So far, we have treated the bank’
section, we relax that assumption and consider how government guarantees a¤ect a bank’s leverage.
We add to the model an initial stage in which banks choose their level of capital, k , which is then
observed by debtholders/depositors. Then, capital functions as a commitment device. Since k is
observable, it informs debtholders/depositors’expectations about a bank’s risk taking and debt is
                                            r
priced accordingly. Formally, rD =           bjk] ;
                                          E [q                  b decreases with leverage, higher capital implies
                                                      and since q
a lower interest rate on uninsured debt liabilities. This e¤ect is countered by the fact that, as in
most of the literature, we assume that capital is expensive (that is it requires a premium over debt).
                                                                                              r+
Formally, we assume a risk-adjusted constant equity premium so that rE =                       q   : For simplicity, in
this section, we will treat the proportion of debt priced at the margin, , as exogenous. Expected
pro…ts can be written as:

                                                          r                              r+           1 2
                =q R        (1    k )r   (1           )     + (1    ) rD (1    k)    k                  cq :
                                                          q                               q           2
    9
    This is di¤erent from what happens when public guarantees insure banks against risks that they cannot control.
In that case, strengthening the charter value of a bank can be bene…cial for incentives (see Cordella and Levy-Yeyati,
2003, and Dell’ Ariccia and Ratvnoski, 2015).




                                                            14
   We solve the model by backward induction. The second stage remains identical to what we
discussed in section 3. The equilibrium values of q and rD can be expressed as a function of k as
                                                               @q              @rD
in equations (5) and (6); from which it is immediate that      @k    > 0 and    @k    < 0: If we substitute
these equilibrium values into the expected pro…ts expression and take the …rst order conditions
with respect to k; we obtain:

                          d    @    @ @q   @ @rD   @    @ @rD
                             =    +      +       =    +        = 0;                                   (14)
                          dk   @k   @q @k @rD @k   @k   @rD @k
         @ @q
where    @q @k   = 0 from the envelope theorem. After some plumbing, this can be written as

                          d                         @q
                             =    (1   q) r     +      (R    (1     k )r   cq ) = 0                   (15)
                          dk                        @k

the solution to this equation gives b
                                    k: We can now state the following result.

Proposition 3 An increase in the share of debt liabilities priced at the margin, ; decreases a
bank’s individually optimal level of capital, b
                                              k.

Proof : See Appendix.

   The intuition for this result is straightforward. In this model capital is costly, but it provides
the bank with a commitment/signalling device to show that it behaves “prudently.” More capital
                s equilibrium monitoring, since shareholders price risk at the margin. Formally, a
increases a bank’
                         bjk ]; and thus a lower cost of debt. As
higher k means higher E [q                                                 increases, a greater portion of
the mass 1       k of debtholders also prices risk at the margin, reducing the pro monitoring e¤ect of
replacing debt with equity. Put di¤erently, since a larger portion of debtholders/depositors observes
                                                   bjk ] decreases. Indeed, note that for
b directly, the bene…t from being able to a¤ect E [q
q                                                                                                 = 1; the
bank obtains no bene…t from holding capital and the model only admits a corner solution with
b
k = 0:
   Government guarantees have a similar e¤ect, although for slightly di¤erent reasons.

Proposition 4 An increase in the share of debt liabilities covered by guarantees,             ; decreases a
bank’s individually optimal level of capital, b
                                              k.

Proof : See Appendix.


                                                    15
   The proposition establishes that, irrespectively of the portion of debt liabilities priced at the
margin, an increase in government guarantees will lead banks to increase leverage (decrease k ). The
intuition for this result is similar to that for the result above. The bene…t to the bank from holding
                                                                                  bjk ]; it reduces the
more capital is that, by increasing the expected probability of bank solvency, E [q
rate paid on liabilities that are not priced at the margin, rD . More government guarantees imply
that a larger proportion of those liabilities pays the …xed risk-free rate independently from the level
of bank capital; this reduces the incentive to hold capital.
   The question that arises from this proposition is whether the impact of bailout expectations
on bank leverage is su¢ ciently strong to imply an unequivocal net e¤ect on bank risk taking.
Remember that, in this model, more levered banks take more risk, since limited liability is at the
                                                                                                 b
                                                                                                @q
core of our agency problem. Indeed, it is immediate from equation 3 that, for any        < 1;   @k   > 0.
Finally, numerical simulations suggest that:

Claim 1 When a bank’s capital, b
                               k; is endogenous, an increase in the share of debt liabilities covered
by guarantees, ; unequivocally decreases the bank’                    b:
                                                  s monitoring e¤ ort q

Proof : See Appendix.

   This …nding means that, when leverage is endogenous, more pervasive guarantees always lead
to higher risk taking. Essentially, the additional channel of bank leverage tilts the balance of the
e¤ects against bank monitoring.
   The results in this section have important implications as they highlight the relationship between
prudential regulation and resolution policies. First, note that when bank leverage is constrained
by capital (or leverage) requirements, the result here applies only to the extent that banks hold
capital well in excess of regulation. Once the constraint binds, the relevant framework is that with
exogenous k: It follows that by imposing higher capital requirements regulators can extend the
region for which bailouts improve bank incentives. At the same time, this means that the promise
of bailouts is more detrimental to incentives for unregulated …nancial intermediaries.
   Second (and possibly more relevant in practice), the result that the individually optimal cap-
ital is decreasing in the probability of bailout suggests that banks will have greater incentives to
circumvent capital regulation when bailout policies become more generous. In contrast, when the
expectation of bailouts is low (such as, for instance, for hedge funds) intermediaries will tend to
operate with lower levels of leverage.

                                                  16
7         A numerical example

In this section, we present numerical simulations of the model. Our purpose is threefold. First, we
want to provide an intuitive graphical illustration of the e¤ects identi…ed in the analysis. Second,
we could not provide an analytical solution for the result (in Section 6) that, when capital in
endogenous, bank monitoring, q , is unequivocally decreasing in the expectation of a government
bailout,       : Here, we show that this result holds for a broad range of parameters. Finally, most
of our analysis relies on internal solutions for our main variables of interest, q ;              ; and k . The
example serves also to demonstrate that there is a broad set of parameter values for which such
solutions indeed exist.
         In the simulations, we set the risk-free rate r = 1, we assume an equity premium of 50 bps
(rE = 1:05), a capital requirement k = 15% (in the baseline scenario). As per the other parameters,
we assume that (A.1) and (A.2) hold, and we set R = 7, c = 10, and                 = 1.




                        Figure 1: Bank optimal monitoring, q , as a function of .


Using this parametrization,10 Figure 1 illustrates Proposition 1. The equilibrium probability of loan
repayment q is plotted as a function of the share             of debt liabilities covered by guarantees, for
di¤erent values of ; the fraction of risk sensitive uninsured deposits. According to the proposition, a
bailout guarantee decreases monitoring e¤ort only if the fraction of risk sensitive uninsured deposit
is large enough. In our parametrization, the threshold value is 38:5%.
    10
    We decided to keep the model simple and thus we did not introduce additional parameters, to be able to work
with more realistic rate of returns, which we could have done easily. Hence, the simulations have to be interpreted
only qualitatively.


                                                        17
   Next, following the discussion in Section 4, we endogenize information disclosure and allow
                                1   2)
the bank to choose (at a cost   2        the fraction of debt that is priced at the margin. As proved
in Lemma 2, Figure 2 shows that it is indeed the case that the fraction of debt that the bank
decides to price at the margin decreases with the share of guaranteed liabilities. When the latter
tends to one, there is no more scope for market discipline and thus for the bank to invest in
disclosure. Interestingly, Figure 2 suggests that capital requirements and optimal disclosure are
strategic substitutes. The higher the capital requirement, the higher is bank self-discipline and this
necessarily reduces the appeal of disclosure as a means to enhance market discipline.




                        Figure 2: Optimal disclosure,     , as a function of .

                                                                                 s incentive to rely
   The fact that an increase in the share of insured liabilities reduces the bank’
on market discipline, however, does not mean that it necessarily increases risk taking incentives.
Again, one should look both at the moral hazard and at the charter value e¤ects. As proved in
Proposition 2, Figure 3 shows that, if the cost of disclosure, , is high, and thus market discipline
is costly for the bank, then it is more likely that the charter value e¤ects dominates and that
guarantees discipline bank behavior. Instead, when the cost of disclosure is low, starting from low
levels of , a further increase in the share of guaranteed liabilities increases risk taking. This, occurs
up to a point where the level of market discipline becomes so low that the charter value e¤ect again
dominates (locally).




                                                   18
         Figure 3: Bank optimal monitoring, q , as a function of , with         endogenous.


   Finally, when we endogenize bank leverage (keeping disclosure exogenous, as in Figure 1), we
…nd, see Figure 4, that an increase in the share       of debt liabilities priced at the margin (from
                                  s optimal level of capital; and so does an increase in the share
28:5% to 48:5%) decreases the bank’
of debt liabilities covered by the guarantee. Notice that, here, the decrease in the level of capital
is bounded below by the minimal capital ratio k = 15%, which, interestingly enough, becomes
binding the earlier, the higher is the share of deposits priced at the margin. Again, this con…rms
our previous …nding that self discipline, enabled by lower leverage, and market discipline enabled
by a larger share of liabilities priced at the margin, are strategic substitutes.




                  Figure 4: Optimal bank capitalization, k , as a function of .


   Last, but not least, Figure 5 illustrates the e¤ects of an increase in the share of guaranteed
liabilities on bank risk taking when capital is exogenous. In this case, the moral hazard e¤ect

                                                  19
necessarily dominates as guarantees further discourage the bank to hold capital. However, when
capital requirements become binding, and at some point they do, we are back to the situation
described in Figure 1, where, the e¤ect of the expectation of a bailout on bank risk taking incentives
depends on the e¤ectiveness of market discipline, measured by the share of deposits priced at the
margin.




                 Figure 5: Bank optimal monitoring e¤ort, q , when capital k is endogenous.


8         Our results and the existing empirical evidence

The main message of our model is a very simple one: a necessary condition for government
guarantees, such as deposit insurance, to hinder market discipline is that debtholders actually
be able/willing to exert such a discipline. If not,11 the subsidy embedded in the guarantees should
induce banks to select safer portfolios by increasing the bank’s return conditional on success, thus
making it more of a residual claimant and aligning its incentives with value maximization. To
understand whether the …rst e¤ect–moral hazard–or the second one–the value e¤ect–of government
guarantees is more likely to prevail in a speci…c situation, one should form a view on the extent to
which debtholders are actually able to discipline banks. Ultimately, this is an empirical question,
which has been investigated quite extensively in the recent banking literature.
         Were we asked to summarize this literature in one line, we would say that the evidence that
depositors and other security holders are able to identify banks that are at risk of failure, either
by running or by demanding higher interest rates, is pretty solid (for the US, among others, see
    11
         Min (2015) provides a comprehensive discussion of market discipline and its failures.




                                                             20
Baer and Brewer, 1986, Goldberg and Hudgins, 1996, Calomiris and Wilson, 1998, Flannery and
Sorescu, 1996; for Argentina, Chile and Mexico, see Martinez Peria and Schmukler, 2001).
   Yet, the fact that depositors tend to leave troubled banks and/or demand higher risk premia
when a bank is in distress does not necessarily imply that depositors are able to discipline e¤ectively
bank managers’behavior. This important point was raised …rst by Bliss and Flannery (2001), who
distinguish between the monitoring and the in‡uence aspect of market discipline. When they refer
to (market) monitoring, they point to investors’ ability to understand the …nancial condition of
a …rm; when they refer to (market) in‡uence they point to investors’ability to a¤ect managerial
actions and, ultimately, to align them with their own interests. With this important distinction in
mind, they then look at a panel of large US bank holding companies, those for which one expects
market discipline to hold, and they …nd scant evidence of investors’in‡uence.
   Actually, the distinction between the monitoring and the in‡uencing aspects of market discipline
can be better understood as a distinction between ex-post and ex-ante discipline (Bliss, 2004). Ex-
post discipline comes as a response to a managerial action, such as the withdrawal of deposits from
a bank in a situation of …nancial distress; ex-ante discipline, instead, constrains managers’action
by making it costly to act in a way that is not aligned with (in our case) debtholders’objectives.
In our model, when depositors observe the bank’s portfolio choice, risk is priced directly in the
deposit rate and we have ex-ante discipline; when risk is non observable or, for various reasons, not
contractible, discipline is necessarily ex-post. Such a distinction is very useful when interpreting
some of the recent …nancial crises.
   Stephanou (2010), for instance, looks at the price of di¤erent instruments issued by some of
the banks more exposed to mortgage instruments (Citigroup, Bear Stearns, and Lehman Brothers)
in the period preceding the explosion of the sub-prime crisis in the US. His main …nding is that
the prices of these instruments only began to decline (vis-à-vis a market benchmark) in the second
half of 2007, and went deep south only after Bearn Stearns’collapse. In other words, the market
started to price in exposure to risky asset well after banks undertook such investments. Figure 6
plots the CDS spreads for …ve major US banks in the run-up to the global …nancial crisis. It is
evident that until late 2007 markets did not discriminate across banks which then performed very
di¤erently during the crisis. Further, while one could argue that the absence of discrimination may
have been the result of an expected bailout, this hypothesis seems contradicted by the fact that
late in 2007 and more in 2008 bank CDS started diverging dramatically.


                                                  21
                           Figure 6: CDS Spreads (Source: Bloomberg).

Stephanou (2010) also found that prices of CDS and equities reacted much quicker and stronger than
those of subordinated or senior debt–Lehman Brothers’senior debt remained close to par until just
before the bank failed–raising serious doubts about debtholders’ability to exert market discipline.
Mispricing of risk is clearly not only a US phenomenon. Beirne and Fratzcher (2013) show that,
prior to the Eurozone crisis, economic fundamentals were very poor predictors of sovereign risk,
thus hinting again at lack of bondholders’in‡uence.
   The distinction between ex-ante and ex-post discipline is thus critical to understand how the
presence of government guarantees a¤ects risk taking incentives. For instance, if depositors can
exert ex-post, but not ex-ante discipline, there is no reason to question the credibility of the deposit
                                                            s (2001) contrasting …ndings that
guarantee schemes to reconcile Martinez Peria and Schmuckler’
depositors do discipline banks in trouble–by withdrawing deposits or demanding higher interest
rates–but that the presence of a deposit insurance scheme does not diminish the extent of market
discipline.
   In addition, when looking at the empirical literature, it is important to keep in mind that even
if government guarantees, such as deposit insurance schemes, may decrease market discipline (see,
for instance, Demirgüç-Kunt and Huizinga, 2004, for cross-country evidence, and Hadad et al., 2011
for the case of Indonesia), this does not imply that they increase bank risk-taking incentives per se.
Indeed, in our model, with the exception of the limit case in which –the fraction of risk sensitive
uninsured deposits–is equal to zero, government guarantees do create moral hazard; however, they
also create a countervailing value e¤ect; which of the two e¤ects is more likely to prevail depends,
ultimately, on depositors’ability/willingness to monitor banks’behavior e¤ectively.


                                                  22
      It is also important to notice that information disclosure is not enough to guarantee market
discipline. Freixas and Laux (2012) argue that the latter requires that information e¤ectively
reaches the market and is adequately processed and used. In their view, in the period that preceded
the global …nancial crisis, the lack of market discipline was not the consequence of insu¢ cient
disclosure but of market participants’lack of incentives to process it.
      With such distinctions clear in mind, we are now in a position to look at the recent literature on
the e¤ects of government guarantees on bank risk taking behavior. Not surprising, this evidence is
mixed, too. In Germany, Gropp et al. (2014) show that the unanticipated removal of saving banks’
government guarantees, because of a court decision, led to a reduction in credit risk; Dam and
Koetter (2012), using political factors to identify the causal e¤ect of bank bailouts on risk taking,
also …nd economically signi…cant positive e¤ects. Conversely, looking at the bailout of distressed
banks, Berger et al. (2016a) …nd that capital support was conducive to a reduction both in lending
and in risk taking.
      There is also a large and growing literature trying to ascertain whether the Troubled Asset Relief
Program (TARP) in the US was successful in reducing systemic risk by providing, among other
things, an “upside” to banks, or whether it increased risk taking incentive because of the moral
hazard it generated. Again, the evidence is mixed: Duchin and Sosyura (2014) show that bailed-
out banks tend to be riskier, even if such an increase in risk may not be perceived by regulators;12
Schenk and Thornton (2016), instead, indicate that TARP bailouts are likely to increase risk-
taking in “weak” institutions (low charter values and high leverage) and to decrease it in “strong”
institutions (high charter values and low leverage). Finally, using a di¤-in-di¤ strategy, Berger et
al. (2016b) also show that TARP contributed to the reduction in systemic risk and that such a
reduction has been stronger for larger, safer banks, in states with better economic situations.
      The crisis also o¤ered natural experiments to look into the pricing behavior of bank investors.
Data on banks’ sovereign debt holdings disaggregated by bond issuer are not generally available.
However, the EBA released detailed bank-level information when it announced the results of its
stress tests. And evidence suggests that this had an impact on banks’ CDS spreads. The table
                Ariccia et al. 2016) shows that banks that were found to hold larger amounts of
below (from Dell’
distress sovereign bonds on their balance sheets experienced a sharper increase in CDS spreads and
drop in stock returns. This evidence is not consistent with the notion that investors price risk at
 12
      Because it occurs in the same asset classes and thus does not a¤ect the CAR.


                                                         23
the margin; in particular, since the stress tests revealed new information about bank holding, but
little news about the underlying quality of those securities.
                     Impact of banks’exposure to government debt on stock and CDS market performance
                                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)
                                                                      Banks' stock market returns      Banks' CDS spreads

                       Sovereign CDS*Domestic sovereign exposure   -1.664***   -1.782***   -1.690***   0.159***   0.115***
                                                                    (0.396)     (0.425)     (0.401)     (0.062)    (0.047)
                       Domestic sovereign exposure (% assets)       -0.009                   0.003      0.443*    0.596***
                                                                    (0.038)                 (0.040)     (0.266)    (0.183)
                       Sovereign CDS                               -0.177***   -0.182***   -0.186***   0.041***
                                                                    (0.035)     (0.037)     (0.035)     (0.005)

                       Bank FE                                       Yes                      Yes        Yes        Yes
                       Country FE                                    Yes         Yes                     Yes
                       Year                                                                              Yes
                       Year-month FE                                 Yes
                       Bank-year-month FE                                        Yes
                       Country-year-month FE                                                  Yes                   Yes

                       Number of countries                           12           12          12          5          5
                       Number of banks                               33           33          33         29          29
                       Observations                                 1,468       1,468        1,468      1,849      1,849
                       R-squared                                    0.234       0.305        0.273      0.60       0.66
           Notes: In columns 1-3 the dependent variable is the bank’    s stock market return and the sample contains 33
           domestic banks from 12 euro area countries. The data are pooled over EBA stress test release periods, where
           each period includes the day of data release and the subsequent 10 trading days, during Mar 2010-Dec 2013.
           Regressions are run at the bank-trading day level. “  Domestic exposure”is the ratio of the bank’    s total holdings
           of domestic sovereign bonds to the bank’   s total assets. “Sovereign CDS”is the log-difference of daily CDS
           spreads on a 5-year government bond. In columns 4-5 the dependent variable is the bank’       s CDS spread and the
           sample includes 29 domestic banks in Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain. Regressions are run at the
           bank-month level. The time period is Aug 2007-Jun 2013. “       Sovereign CDS”is the maximum CDS spread on a
           10-year sovereign bond during the month. “    Domestic exposure”is the ratio of the bank’   s total holdings of
           domestic sovereign bonds to the bank’   s total assets (divided by 1000). A constant term is included (coefficient
           not shown). Standard errors clustered at the bank level appear in parentheses, where *** indicates significance
           at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. Sources: ECB Individual MFI Balance Sheet
           Statistics, European Banking Authority, Bankscope, Bloomberg, SNL Financial, and Datastream.




9    Discussion and conclusions

This paper reexamines the theoretical relationship between the expectation of a government bailout
of bank debtholders (depositors and bondholders) and bank risk taking. After the Global Financial
Crises, the regulatory policy debate has centered on how to make …nancial institutions safer and
more resilient to shocks. Within that debate, the classical argument that explicit (typically deposit
insurance) or implicit (typically the expectation of a public bailout of bondholders) government
guarantees on bank liabilities entail a moral hazard e¤ect that increases bank risk taking has played
a prominent role. Yet, this argument critically relies on debtholders and depositors’ability to price
bank risk at the margin. Put di¤erently, it requires the cost of bank liabilities to re‡ect changes
in bank behavior. In contrast, absent this ability, the presence of government guarantees improves
bank incentives by reducing the cost of their liabilities and hence increasing their charter value.



                                                                       24
   The simple model in this paper highlights these e¤ects. It shows that, when the proportion of
bank debt-holders that can price risk at the margin is su¢ ciently high, the classical moral hazard
argument holds. But when it is relatively low, the charter value e¤ect dominates. The model also
shows that when banks can choose (at some cost) how much information to disclose and, hence,
the proportion of liabilities priced at the margin, government guarantees entail an additional form
of moral hazard. They tend to reduce the degree of disclosure. This tilts the balance in favor of the
classical moral hazard e¤ect. Yet, when the cost of disclosure is su¢ ciently high, the charter value
e¤ect still prevails. The model also …nds that the balance between the moral hazard and charter
value e¤ects is likely to vary across banks and with economic conditions.
   Finally, the model shows that when bank capital is endogenous, public guarantees may lead
to an increase in bank leverage and an associated increase in risk taking, an additional form of
moral hazard. In that context, the model suggests that e¤ective capital regulation and limits on
leverage may avoid some of the negative e¤ects of government guarantees and bailout expectations
and increase the policy space on that front. This also means that government guarantees are much
more problematic for institutions without leverage regulation.
   The model of course has limitations. First, a multi-period could provide a more complex view
of information disclosure. For instance, over time, investors could infer a bank’s portfolio position
from its pro…tability and price its debt accordingly. Yet, as long as banks where able to adjust
their portfolio “often enough,” absent information disclosure, investors would not be able to price
risk at the margin (exactly as in our one-period model). From this perspective, our parameter
                                  s liabilities that are priced at the margin could be reinterpreted
capturing the proportion of a bank’
in a multiperiod setting to capture the portion of a bank portfolio that cannot be easily readjusted.
   Second, the model does not make a distinction between deposits and other debt-like liabilities.
Yet, we believe our distinction between informed and uninformed investors captures some of the
characteristics of deposits versus debt. Indeed, in practice, the way government guarantees are
designed can be seen as somewhat re‡ecting the …ndings in our model. For instance, deposits are
generally more protected than bonds, and small deposits are more protected than large ones. This
partly re‡ect the desire to protect more vulnerable individuals, but it is also justi…ed with the
assumption that informed bondholders and large depositors are more able to penalize excessive
bank risk taking than less wealthy households.



                                                 25
   Recent regulatory reforms have aimed at minimizing the exposure of taxpayers to losses stem-
ming from public interventions into banking systems and reducing the implicit subsidies associated
with too-big-too-fail. New regulation has signi…cantly increased banks’ loss absorption capacity
by raising minimum capital requirements and imposing additional bu¤ers on systemic institutions.
More critically (from this paper’                                                        s hands
                                 s standpoint) reforms have aimed at tying the government’
in case of a crisis. In the US, the Dodd-Frank act included norms aimed at curbing the author-
ities’ ability to inject public money into troubled …nancial institutions. In the EU, the recently
implemented BRRD (Bank Resolution and Recovery Directive) requires a bail-in of junior and
subordinated debt of at least 8 percent of a bank’s total liabilities before public funds can be used.
   These restrictions aim primarily at protecting taxpayers’ money, but were also informed, at
least in part, by the desire to contain moral hazard associated with the expectation of government
assistance. In light of the …ndings in this paper, whether or not these measures will succeed in the
latter objective depends on the degree with which bank risk is priced at the margin. From this
standpoint, as discussed in the previous section, the empirical evidence on the matter is mixed. The
paper also suggests that post-crisis reforms by reducing bank leverage have already reduced the
moral hazard concerns associated with the expectation of government assistance, and have created
policy space for more “generous” guarantees. However, our …ndings also stress that providing
(implicit or explicit) guarantees to unregulated entities is likely to result in moral hazard through
the e¤ect they will have on agents’ability to lever up. A coherent design of prudential regulation,
resolution policies, and the …nancial safety net is, then, critical.




                                                   26
References

 [1] Acharya, Viral and Tanju Yorulmazer, (2007), “Too Many to Fail — An Analysis of Time
    Inconsistency in Bank Closure Policies,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vol. 16: 1-31.

 [2] Acharya, Viral and Tanju Yorulmazer, (2008a), “Cash in the Market Pricing and Optimal
    Resolution of Bank Failures,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 21: 2705-42.

 [3] Acharya, Viral, Itamar Drechsler, and Philipp Schnabl, (2014), “A Pyrrhic Victory? Bank
    Bailouts and Sovereign Credit Risk,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 69: 2689-2739.

 [4] Aghion, Philippe, Patrick Bolton, and Steven Fries,(1999), “Optimal Design of Bank Bailouts:
    The Case of Transition Economies,” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, Vol.
    155: 51-70.

 [5] Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti, Itay Goldstein and Agnese Leonello, (2013), “Government
    Guarantees and Financial Stability,” Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

 [6] Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti and Robert Marquez, (2011), “Credit Market Competition and
    Capital Regulation,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 24: 983-1018.

 [7] Baer, Herbert, and Elijah Brewer, (1986), “Uninsured deposits as a source of market discipline:
    Some new evidence,” Economic Perspectives, Vol. 10: 23-31.

 [8] Beirne, John, and Marcel Fratzscher, (2013), “The pricing of sovereign risk and contagion
    during the European sovereign debt crisis,” Journal of International Money and Finance,Vol.
    34: 60-82.

 [9] Berger, Allen N., et al., (2016a), “Bank liquidity creation following regulatory interventions
    and capital support,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vol. 26: 115-141.

[10] Berger, Allen N., Raluca A. Roman, and John Sedunov, (2016b), “Do Bank Bailouts Reduce
    or Increase Systemic Risk? The E¤ects of TARP on Financial System Stability.”

[11] Bianchi, Javier, (2012), “E¢ cient Bailouts?” (No w18587) National Bureau of Economic Re-
    search.



                                                27
[12] BIS [Bank for International Settlements], (2010), “Basel III: A global regulatory framework
    for more resilient banks and banking systems,” http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs189.htm.

[13] Bliss, Robert R., and Mark J. Flannery, (2002), “Market discipline in the governance of US
    bank holding companies: Monitoring vs. in‡uencing,” European Finance Review, Vol. 6: 361-
    396.

[14] Bliss, Robert R., (2004), “Market discipline: Players, processes, and purposes. Market Disci-
    pline Across Countries and Industries,” ed. W. Hunter, G. Kaufman, C. Borio, and K. Tsat-
    saronis, MIT Press, Boston : 37–53.

[15] Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy, (2003), “Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial
    Development and Underinsurance,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 58: 867–93.

[16] Calormiris, Charles W., and Berry Wilson, (1998), “Bank Capital and portfolio management:
    The 1930’s capital crunch and scramble to shed risk,” (No. w6649) National Bureau of Eco-
    nomic Research.

[17] Cordella, Tito, and Eduardo Levy Yeyati, (2002), “Financial opening, deposit insurance, and
    risk in a model of banking competition,” European Economic Review, Vol. 46: 471-485.

[18] Cordella, Tito and Eduardo Levy Yeyati, (2003), “Bank Bailouts: Moral Hazard vs. Value
    E¤ect,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vol. 12: 300-30.

[19] Corsetti, Giancarlo, Bernardo Guimaraes and Nouriel Roubini, (2006), “International Lending
    of Last Resort and Moral Hazard: A Model of IMF’s Catalytic Finance,” Journal of Monetary
    Economics, Vol. 53: 441-471.

[20] Dam, Lammertjan, and Michael Koetter, (2012) “Bank bailouts and moral hazard: Evidence
    from Germany,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 25: 2343-2380.

         Ariccia, Giovanni, and Robert Marquez, (2006), “Lending Booms and Lending Stan-
[21] Dell’
    dards,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 61: 2511-2546.

         Ariccia, Giovanni, Luc Laeven and Robert Marquez, (2014), “Real Interest Rates, Lever-
[22] Dell’
    age, and Bank Risk-Taking,” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 149: 65-99.


                                               28
         Ariccia, Giovanni, and Lev Ratnovski, (2013) , “Bailouts and Systemic Insurance,” IMF
[23] Dell’
    Working Paper No. 13/233.

[24] Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Harry Huizinga,(2004), “Market discipline and deposit insurance,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 51: 375-399.

[25] Dornbusch, Rudiger, (1999), “Commentary: Monetary Policy and Asset Market Volatility,”
    Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Proceedings - Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson
    Hole: 129-135.

[26] Duchin, Ran, and Denis Sosyura, (2014), “Safer ratios, riskier portfolios: Banks’response to
    government aid,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 113: 1-28.

[27] Ellis, David, and Mark Flannery, (1992) , “Does the debt market assess large banks’risk? Time
    series evidence from money center CDS,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 30: 481-502.

[28] Farhi, Emmanuel and Jean Tirole, (2012), “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch, and
    Systemic Bailouts,” American Economic Review, Vol. 102: 60-93.

[29] Flannery, Mark J., and Sorin M. Sorescu, (1996), “Evidence of bank market discipline in
    subordinated debenture yields: 1983–1991,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 51: 1347-1377.

[30] Freixas, Xavier, and Christian Laux, (2011), “Disclosure, transparency, and market discipline,”
    in Dewatripont, M and X Freixas (eds), The crisis aftermath: New regulatory paradigms,
    London: Centre for Economic Policy Research: 69–104.

[31] Goldberg, Lawrence G., and Sylvia C. Hudgins, (1996), “Response of uninsured depositors to
    impending S&L failures: evidence of depositor discipline,” The Quarterly Review of Economics
    and Finance, Vol. 36: 311-325.

[32] Gropp, Reint, Christian Gruendl, and Andre Guettler, (2013), “The impact of public guaran-
    tees on bank risk-taking: evidence from a natural experiment,” Review of Finance, rft014.

[33] Hadad, Muliaman D., et al., (2011), “Market discipline, …nancial crisis and regulatory changes:
    Evidence from Indonesian banks,” Journal of Banking & Finance, Vol. 35: 1552-1562.




                                                29
[34] Hellman, Thomas, Kevin Murdoch, and Joseph Stiglitz, (2000), “Liberalization, Moral Haz-
    ard in Banking, and Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?” American
    Economic Review, Vol. 90:147-165.

[35] Laeven, Luc and Fabian Valencia, (2010), “Resolution of Banking Crises: The Good, the Bad,
    and the Ugly,” IMF Working Paper No. 10/146.

[36] Martinez Peria, Maria Soledad, and Sergio L. Schmukler, (2001), “Do depositors punish banks
    for bad behavior? Market discipline, deposit insurance, and banking crises,” Journal of Fi-
    nance, Vol. 56: 1029-1051.

[37] Matutes, Carmen, and Xavier Vives, (2000), “Imperfect Competition, Risk Taking, and Reg-
    ulation in Banking,” European Economic Review, Vol. 44: 1-34.

[38] Min, David, (2015), “Understanding the failure of market discipline,” Washington University
    Law Review, Vol. 92

[39] Morgan, Don, (2002), “Rating Banks: Risk and Uncertainty in an Opaque Industry,”American
    Economic Review, Vol. 92: 874-888.

[40] Morrison, Alan, and Lucy White, (2013), “Reputational Contagion and Optimal Regulatory
    Forbearance,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 110: 642-658.

[41] Orszag, Peter, and Joseph Stiglitz, (2002), “Optimal Fire Departments: Evaluating Public
    Policy in the Face of Externalities,” The Brookings Institution, unpublished.

[42] Philippon, Thomas and Philipp Schnabl, (2013), “E¢ cient Recapitalization,” Journal of Fi-
    nance, Vol. 68: 1-42.

[43] Schenck, Natalya A., and John H. Thornton Jr, (2016), “Charter values, bailouts and moral
    hazard in banking,” Journal of Regulatory Economics, Vol. 49: 172-202.

[44] Stephanou, Constantinos, (2010), “Rethinking market discipline in banking: lessons from the
    …nancial crisis,” (No. w 5227) World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series.




                                               30
10     Appendix. Proofs
10.1    Proposition 1.

Proof. Di¤erentiating (5) with respect to , we have that

                             @q   (1 k )r
                                =         ( R + (1                       k )r + 2c(1              )          );                           (16)
                             @      2c
          q
with          (R      (1   k )r)2     4cr (1         ) (1           ) (1        k)      0. At      = 0,

                             ( R + (1          k )r + 2c(1                 )          ) = 2c (1        q );

which is positive when parameters are such that q admits an internal solution so that (16) is always
positive. At       = 1, (A.1), instead, implies that (16) is always negative. Thus, to complete the
                                     @2q
proof, is enough to show that        @ @   < 0. Di¤erentiating (16) with respect to , we obtain:

                       @2q                                          (1         k )r
                                =                                                                                  3   ;                  (17)
                       @ @                                     2                                                   2
                                     (R        (1    k )r)            4cr(1           k )(1      ) (1         )

with
                           (R   (1     k )r)(R           (1        k )r )        2cr(1          )(1        k )(1           ):             (18)
               @2q
To show that   @ @    < 0; it is enough to show that                     > 0. Since             is a linear function of , to prove
that it is positive for any , it is enough to show that it is positive at                                    = 0, and           = 1 (for any k
and ). When        = 0, we have that

                                     = R(R          (1        k )r)        2cr(1        k )(1         ):                                  (19)

Since (19) is an increasing function of k and , if we know that if it is positive at k = 0 and                                           = 0,
then it is positive for all k and . We thus have that

                                           j   =0; =0     = R2           Rr           2cr > 0

However since from (A.1), we know that R < c a su¢ cient condition for the inequality to hold is
that
                                                         R2        3rc > 0




                                                                   31
or
                                                                            R2
                                                                     c<        ,
                                                                            3r
which is always satis…ed if (A.1) holds. This in turn implies that a single b 2 (0; 1) exists such that
@q
@     > 0, if     < b; and     @q
                               @      < 0, if       > b.

10.2      Lemma 1

Proof. De…ne

                         d                                            r2 (1            )2 (1          k )2
                 H=            = (1        ) q                                                                                                     ':         (20)
                         d
                                            q (R               (1       k )r)2        4cr (1             ) (1            ) (1         k)

Note that
                                                                                 dH
                                                                 d               d
                                                                   =             dH
                                                                                      ;
                                                                 d               d
          dH                                                                                                        d
where     d     < 0 from the second order conditions. Then, we have that                                            d        will have the same sign as
dH
d .   We can write:
                                                                                                        @A
                                dH                                                             2A +     @     (1              )
                                   =           (1        ) r2 (1           ) (1       k )2                                        ;
                                d                                                                        A2
                  q
where A = q         (R         (1     k )r)2        4cr (1          ) (1        ) (1         k ): Now:

                       @A                                           R       r (1          k)         2c (1          )
                          =         qr(1       k) q                                                                                            ;
                       @                                                          2
                                                      (R        (1         k )r)          4cr (1             ) (1             ) (1        k)

which, after substituting, gives us
                                                    2q 2 ((R    (1 k)r )2 4cr (1               )(1     )(1 k))               q 2 r (1 k)(1         )(R r (1 k) 2c(1   ))
dH                      2                       2                         A                                                                           A
   =        (1        ) r (1        ) (1      k)                                                                                                                           :
d                                                                                                             A2
     dH
So   d    will have the opposite sign of

                                    2q 2 (R           (1       k )r)2        4cr (1              ) (1         ) (1            k)
                             B=                                                                                                       +
                                                                      A
                                    q 2 r(1     k ) (1         ) (R r (1                  k)         2c (1          ))
                                                                                                                         ;
                                                                    A




                                                                           32
expression that we can rewrite as

                  BA
                     = (R             (1    k )r)2     4cr (1         ) (1       ) (1        k) +
                  q2
                     + (R         (1       k )r) (R    r(1         k) )      2cr (1          ) (1      ) (1     k) :

The …rst term is just A2 =q > 0: A su¢ cient condition for the second term to be positive is that
                                                                                                                         dH
R > 2r, which is always veri…ed from our other restrictions. It follows that B > 0 and that                              d    < 0,
                                  d
which, in turn, implies that      d    < 0:

10.3    Proposition 2

Proof. From (5), we have that

                                                 1      p
                          q j     =0        q0 =    (R + R2 4cr(1 k )(1                              );                       (21)
                                                 2c
                                                         R (1 k )r
                                            q j =1 q1 =            :                                                          (22)
                                                            c
Let now de…ne     as the value of           such that q0 = q1 , or

                         1     p                                                      R      (1      k )r
                            R + R2                  4cr (1         ) (1     k) =                            ;                 (23)
                         2c                                                                   c

which gives
                                                      R       (1     k )r
                                             =1                             =1        q1 :                                    (24)
                                                               c
The …rst order condition of (7) with respect to                    can be written as

              d                                       r2 (1         )2 (1     k )2
                  = (1    )       q                                                                             ' = 0;        (25)
              d
                              q        (R      (1      k )r)2       4cr (1       ) (1         ) (1     k)

and, using (5):
                          d                           r2 (1      )2 (1 k )2
                                  = (1         )                                              ' = 0:                          (26)
                          d                        q (2cq       R + (1 k )r )
When    = 0, the expression becomes:

                                       d                    r2 (1 k )2
                                            = (1       )                             ' = 0:                                   (27)
                                       d                   q0 (2cq  R)

If now we substitute     from (24) into (27), we obtain:




                                                                33
                                      d            r2 (1 k )2
                                           = q1                          (1     q1 )' = 0:                   (28)
                                      d           q0 (2cq  R)
                                      R (1 k)r
However, at       = , q0 = q1 =          c         so that we can rewrite (28) as

                                d         r2 (1    k )2       c      R + (1      k )r
                                      =                                                  ' = 0;              (29)
                                d         (2cq     R)                   c

Solving for ', we obtain
                                                        cr2 (1 k )2
                                     '=                                                      :
                                            (c    R + (1 k )r) (R 2(1                k )r)
Notice that, by construction, ' is the cost of transparency such that, after having chosen optimally,
the bank chooses the same portfolio riskiness when its deposit are fully insured ( = 1) and when
                                                                                                       @q0
they are not ( = 0). Formally, this means b (') = : Now, note that q1 is invariant in ; but            @     > 0:
                               @b
Then, since from (24),         @'   > 0; we have that q0 > q1 () ' < '. Finally, numerical simulations
indicate that max q ( ) never admits an interior solution, so that arg max q ( ) 2 f0; 1g :


10.4      Proposition 3
                                    @q
Proof. From 5, it is immediate that @k > 0 (k enters always with a positive sign, actually two
                         @2q
negative signs) and     @k@     < 0: It follows that

                                                                  @2
                                                      db
                                                       k          @k@
                                                         =        @2
                                                                         <0
                                                      d
                                                                   @k2

        d2
since   dk2
              < 0 from the second order conditions. Note that for                       = 1; we have

                               d                  R     (1 k )r
                                  =        1                              r       < 0; for all k
                               dk                         c

and the …rst order conditions for k can never be satis…ed. Then, the model will only admit a corner
solution with b
              k = 0:

10.5      Proposition 4
                                          @2
Proof. From 15, we have that              @k@     < 0; which, together with the second order conditions with
respect to k; implies that
                                                              @2
                                                      dbk     @k@
                                                          =   @2
                                                                         < 0;
                                                      d
                                                               @k2




                                                              34
that is as government guarantees increase, banks …nd it optimal to reduce their capitalization
(increase their leverage).




                                             35
