                                                 WPS8182


Policy Research Working Paper                   8182




       Child Schooling and Child Work
in the Presence of a Partial Education Subsidy
                              Jacobus de Hoop
                               Jed Friedman
                              Eeshani Kandpal
                                Furio Rosati




Development Research Group
Poverty and Inequality Team
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8182


  Abstract
  Could a partial subsidy for child education increase chil-                        programs fully offset schooling costs, while the transfers
  dren’s participation in paid work? In contrast to much of                         under the Philippine transfers fall short of the full costs
  the theoretical and empirical child labor literature, this                        of schooling for a typical child. As a result, some benefi-
  paper shows that child work and school participation can                          ciary children from poor Philippine households increased
  be complements under certain conditions. Using data from                          work to support their schooling. The additional earnings
  the randomized evaluation of a conditional cash transfer                          from this work represent a substantive share of the shortfall
  program in the Philippines, the analysis finds that some                          in the schooling costs net of transfer. The paper rules out
  children, who were in neither school nor work before                              several potential alternative explanations for the increase
  the program, increased participation in school and work-                          in child labor, including changes in household productive
  for-pay after the program. Earlier cash transfer programs,                        activities, adult labor supply, and household expenditure
  notably those in Mexico, Brazil, and Ecuador, increased                           patterns that, in principle, can arise after a cash transfer
  school attendance while reducing child labor. Those                               and may also affect the supply of or demand for child labor.




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Inequality Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at ekandpal@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
Child Schooling and Child Work in the Presence of a Partial Education Subsidy

Jacobus de Hoop*; Jed Friedman**; Eeshani Kandpal***; Furio Rosati****




JEL codes: C93, I21, J22, O22
Keywords: Cash transfers, child labor, education, education subsidy, Philippines
____________________________________

* UNICEF Office of Research – Innocenti, jdehoop@unicef.org ** World Bank,
jfriedman@worldbank.org *** World Bank, ekandpal@worldbank.org **** International Labour
Organization (ILO), University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, IZA and Understanding Children’s Work
Project, frosati@ucw-project.org. We thank Pablo Acosta, Jorge Avalos, Gabriel Demombynes,
Eric Edmonds, Francisco Ferreira, Deon Filmer, Yusuke Kuwayama, Berk Özler, Aleksandra
Posarac, and participants in the 2015 EUDN and 2016 PopPov conferences for insightful comments
and suggestions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely
those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the
Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent. The views expressed
here should also not be attributed to the ILO or UNICEF, or any of these agencies’ member
countries.
I. Introduction

          An extensive literature consistently finds that conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs

increase children’s school participation (Baird et al., 2014; Fiszbein and Schady, 2009; Saavedra and

Garcia, 2012) usually while decreasing their participation in work (de Hoop and Rosati, 2014;

Edmonds 2008; Edmonds and Schady, 2014; Fiszbein and Schady, 2009). In this paper, we present a

counterexample from the experimental pilot of a conditional cash transfer program in the Philippines

that shows that cash transfers can, under certain conditions, increase both school enrollment and

participation in paid work.

         The program, Pantawid Pamilya Pilipino Program or simply Pantawid, supports poor

households (those with income less than US $2.15 per capita per day) by providing two transfers, one

conditioned on child health-related behavior and the other on schooling.1 The randomized evaluation

(World Bank, 2013) of Pantawid demonstrated that the program broadly achieved its primary

objectives by increasing school participation of eligible children (those aged 6 to 14 from pre-

identified poor households) by almost 5 percentage points and improving the health and nutrition of

eligible 0-14 year olds (World Bank, 2013; Kandpal et al., 2016).2 Using data from the Pantawid

impact evaluation, we find that the increase in school participation was accompanied by a

concomitant increase in children’s participation in paid work outside the home. This increase is on

the order of 5 percentage points, as compared to a control mean of 12 percentage points in the rate of

child work-for-pay. In particular, the program appears to have encouraged children who would

otherwise be neither in school nor in work to attend school and to start working.




1
    The program has been in place since 2008 and now covers over 4.5 million poor households.
2
    Children younger than age 5 in treated areas had higher height-for-age z scores, were less likely to
be severely stunted, and more likely to eat protein-rich foods and use health services. Older children
(aged 6 to 14) were more likely to be offered de-worming medication.

                                                    2
         We consider and rule out a range of possible explanations for the increase in child labor,

including investment of the transfers in household productive activities and changes in adult

productive engagement, both of which can increase household demand for child labor, as well as

improvements in child health, which could affect the supply of child labor. Instead, we present

evidence suggesting that schooling and work-for-pay were complements in the face of Pantawid’s

partial schooling subsidy. During the evaluation period, education transfers did not fully cover the

cost of education and hence the school attendance of compliers, i.e. those who started attending school

in response to the program, represented a net cost to the household. The maximum annual transfer

amount per child was approximately US$70 although the households in our sample reported receiving

an average education transfer of US$55. Estimated primary schooling cost was US$86 in treated

areas, indicating an average shortfall of US$31 per enrolled child; the shortfall for compliers may

have been even greater. We show that the earnings of working children make up for a large portion

of this shortfall.3

         While we do not estimate the total welfare impact of the increase in children’s school

attendance and work, which would require knowledge of the full long-run benefits and costs of both

school attainment and child work, this paper contributes to our understanding of the relationship

between schooling and work-for-pay and argues for the adoption of a broader framework when

assessing the cost effectiveness of possible transfer schemes. When discussing program design, the

literature typically compares the size of the transfer to household income. However, our findings

suggest that the cost of the behavior on which the program is conditioned (in our case school




3
    The compensatory behavior we document is particularly likely to occur in ultra-poor populations
and when the price of school participation exceeds the value of the subsidy by a substantive margin.
A later evaluation identifying the local effect of Pantawid on the wealthiest beneficiaries (exploiting
the poverty means test based on which the program is allocated) did not document a similar impact
on child work (World Bank, 2013).

                                                  3
participation) is also a germane metric. A transfer too large may be wasteful if full compliance can

be achieved with a smaller transfer amount (or if most transfers are infra-marginal). A transfer too

small may not sufficiently compensate potential compliers to modify behavior, even if the presence

of positive externalities is an acknowledged motivation for the subsidy. Alternatively, a transfer that

does not fully compensate for the cost of adopting the compliant behavior can result in unanticipated

consequences as beneficiary households seek to supplement the partial subsidy through a labor

response or an asset drawdown.4, 5 While such compensatory behavior need not arise in all contexts,

such as in wealthier populations, the identification of such behavior is relevant because cash transfer

programs are widely implemented, including in settings with markedly lower primary school

attendance rates and higher rates of idle children. The phenomenon we document could equally occur

in programs encouraging secondary school participation – an issue of increasing policy concern – or

providing partial subsidies subject to other behavioral requirements. We thus interpret our findings

as an example of an issue of broader concern. Our findings also raise questions about the efficiency

of spending in such programs as most CCTs with primary school conditions are targeting populations

already at very high enrollment levels.




4
    From an efficiency standpoint, it may be optimal to induce a small amount of child labor, particularly
since evidence suggests only a partial negative trade-off between child labor and human capital
formation (Akabayashi and Pscharapoulous, 1999).
5
    A few studies have examined how labor supply, including by children, can help households respond
to income shocks. Jacoby and Skoufias (1997) find that households smooth seasonal fluctuations in
consumption by drawing upon their children’s labor, and that such fluctuations have negligible
average effects on human capital. Banerjee, Karlan, and Zinman (2015) show that a relatively small
loan to acquire an expensive durable good may lead to complex adjustments in household
consumption and labor supply. Various other studies find that micro-credit programs may increase
children's participation in productive activities (Augsburg et al., 2012; Nelson, 2011).

                                                     4
       Finally, by documenting compensatory behavior, this paper also contributes to our

understanding of the often-significant unintended consequences of CCTs, both beneficial and

detrimental. While a comprehensive discussion of this literature is beyond the scope of this paper, a

few germane examples include Contreras and Maitra’s (2013) finding that the Colombian CCT

significantly improved health outcomes among non-targeted adults in treated households. Ferreira, et

al. (2009) and Barrera-Osorio et al. (2011), examining a Cambodian scholarship program and the

Colombian CCT, respectively, show that child-specific cash transfers may generate negative

displacement effects on the schooling of ineligible siblings. Finally, several studies have also found

that peer effects can increase school enrollment of non-targeted populations, at least in the case of

Mexico’s PROGRESA/Oportunidades/Prospera CCT (Bobba and Gignoux, 2014; Bobonis and

Finan, 2009; Lalive and Cattaneo, 2009).

       This paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we introduce a framework to examine

household responses to a partial schooling subsidy. Section III describes the context and program.

Section IV discusses the data and our empirical strategy. Section V presents results on the impact of

Pantawid on children's schooling and work, as well as various alternative channels, and compares the

effects of Pantawid to those of programs that fully offset schooling costs, including Prospera, to

highlight the role of the subsidy size. Section VI offers concluding thoughts.

II. Schooling and child work decisions in the presence of a subsidy

       The literature exploring household child labor decisions generally treats education and child

labor as substitutes. For instance, Basu and Van (1998) assume that children work only to support

household subsistence (the so-called luxury axiom), and Baland and Robinson (2000) posit a trade-

off between child labor and human capital accumulation. Most of the empirical evidence on schooling

and child labor supports this view (Beegle et al., 2006; Bourguignon, Ferreira, and Leite, 2003;

Edmonds and Schady, 2014; Ferreira, Filmer and Schady, 2009; Manacorda, 2006; Ravallion and

Wodon 2000; Schady et al. 2008). However, as we show, since the time allocated to school and work-
                                                  5
for-pay can be adjusted on both the extensive and intensive margins, complementarities can arise

when households are offered an education subsidy that only partially offsets education expenditures.

In that case, we may observe compensatory behaviors as poor (and adult labor constrained)

households need to supplement the partial subsidy if they wish to enroll their children. A brief

conceptual framework describes how such compensatory behavior can arise.

       Most models of the child labor decision explore the trade-off between current household

income and the future income of the child, as determined by lumpy investments in schooling. Several

studies present theoretical explanations for why households may under-invest in children’s education

and examine how a CCT may affect this investment decision (for instance, Das, Do and Ozler (2005)

and Fiszbein and Schady (2009) provide comprehensive overviews of the theoretical underpinnings

of CCT design). The central question of this paper is somewhat different in that it concerns the

household’s response to an offered schooling subsidy after an initial decision on child labor allocation

has already been made. Possible responses include an asset drawdown, an increase in adult labor

supply, a shift in consumption patterns, or an increase in child labor. In so far as the only scenario

observed is an increase in child labor, we explore a conceptual framework – described in detail in

Appendix 1 – that focuses on this scenario and identifies how and for whom this increase might arise.

       We adapt a simple two-period overlapping generation model of a unitary household to

highlight how the presence of fixed schooling costs and non-convexity in the time and budget

constraints, generated by a minimum amount of time that must be devoted to school attendance, can

lead to a complementarity between education and child labor in the presence of a partial schooling

subsidy. Salient determining factors are the relative size of the subsidy vis-à-vis the cost of schooling,

and the strategies available to the household to take up the subsidy and enroll the child in school.

       It is important to note that this type of behavioral response need not arise in wealthier

populations where fewer households require subsidies to enable children’s school attendance and the

households that do have a more diversified set of strategies to engage a partial subsidy. Therefore,
                                                    6
this framework does not attempt to present a global model for all child schooling and work decisions,

but rather to understand the observed shifts in child labor after the onset of Pantawid.

III. Background and study context

Education and child labor in the Philippines

       Recent (2011) ILO survey data show that 95 percent of 10-to-14-year old Philippine children

are in school and that 13 percent of children in the same age range are engaged in economic activities

(Understanding Children’s Work, 2016). About 85 percent are in school only, 11 percent combine

school and work, 3 percent are idle (i.e. in neither in school nor in work), and 2 percent are in work

only. Boys are more likely to work than girls (15 percent versus 10 percent) and somewhat less likely

to be in school (93 percent versus 97 percent).6 Children in this age range are not legally allowed to

engage in economic activities in the Philippines, although the enforcement of such laws has been

under-resourced, at least until the establishment, in 2015, of an interagency council to enforce child

labor laws (US Department of Labor, 2016).

The Program

       Pantawid aims to support poor households in satisfying their consumption needs and to

encourage investment in their children's education and health. The program began in 2008 with the

first enumeration of potential beneficiary households through a listing exercise that collected a




       6
           The self-declared reasons for children’s participation in economic activities are varied: a
substantial number of children work to help in the household-operated farm or business (53 percent)
or to otherwise support family income (20 percent), while a smaller fraction works to gain experience
in the labor market (10 percent) or to appreciate the value of work (5 percent). While school
attendance rates are comparable between rural and urban areas, rural child employment rates are
higher (15 percent versus 8 percent). In rural areas, about 82 percent of children aged 10 to 14 are in
school only, 13 percent combine school and work, and 3 percent each are idle and in work only.

                                                   7
number of socio-demographic and household asset indicators in order to construct a Proxy Means

Test (PMT) score. Households were eligible for the CCT if their baseline PMT score fell below the

poverty threshold of approximately US$2.15 per capita per day (in 2011 dollars) and the household

included a pregnant woman and/or at least one child under the age of 14. The first beneficiary

households enrolled and began receiving benefits in the same year. The program has since been

expanded and now covers about 4.5 million households.

         Pantawid provides both education and health grants. The monthly education grant of 300

Philippine Pesos (roughly US$7)7 is offered to children aged 6 to 14 who attend primary or secondary

school regularly (at least 85 percent of school days in a given month). The education grant is provided

for up to 3 children per household and for 10 months a year.8 The lump sum monthly health grants of

500 Philippine Peso (roughly US$11.50) are provided to beneficiary households on the condition that

pregnant women and children up to the age of 5 regularly attend health clinics, children aged 6 to 14

receive deworming treatment, and the household member receiving the cash transfers (or their

spouse) attend "Family Development Sessions" organized by the implementing agency, the

Department of Social Welfare and Development.9 In our study sample, the average household has 2.6

children, which translates to a maximum monthly transfer of US$30, representing about 20 percent

of the average beneficiary’s monthly household income (see World Bank, 2013).

         Both the theoretical framework and the interpretation of the empirical results rely on the

beneficiary’s expectation of enforcement of the schooling condition, and not necessarily on the actual

enforcement of the condition. While we do not have data on the enforcement of conditions, the



7
    All amounts related to the Philippines in the remainder of this paper are in 2011 US$, the year in
which the follow-up data were collected.
8
    While the amounts mentioned above here are monthly, payment is made every two months.
9
    The focus of these sessions rotates on a monthly basis but covers topics such as good parenting
practices, general health and nutrition, and household management.

                                                   8
program was designed and publicized as conditional. Administrative data show that the average

monthly amounts transferred to our sample (US$18.50) were significantly smaller than the US$30

maximum for which households were eligible, which may be indicative of conditions being at least

partially enforced. Even if program conditions were not consistently enforced during the first years

of the pilot stage program, beneficiaries could not have known with certainty whether conditions

would be enforced. Hence, non-compliance would have entailed the risk of loss of benefits in the

minds of the study subjects. Finally, as Benhassine et al. (2015) show in Morocco, even a “nudge” or

an unenforced condition can be enough to induce beneficiaries to comply.

The evaluation design

       A village-randomized evaluation was designed by the World Bank in conjunction with the

Philippines Department of Social Welfare and Development. In October 2008, 130 villages were

randomly allocated to treatment and control arms of 65 villages each stratified by 8 municipalities.

The number of villages was chosen based on power calculations for three primary outcomes: school

attendance of children aged 6 to 14, household consumption, and health facility visits. Data for the

PMT were collected in all 130 villages from October 2008 to January 2009, and in April 2009 eligible

households in the treatment villages began receiving transfers.

       Since our conceptual framework suggests that the poorest households are the most likely to

exhibit increases in child labor and education in response to a partial schooling subsidy, it is useful

to note that these experimental villages represent the poorest villages in the poorest municipalities in

the country: the PMT eligibility threshold of US$2.15 per capita per day is barely above the World

Bank’s US$1.90 a day poverty line. Indeed, eligible households in the 130 evaluation villages had an

average per capita income of approximately $1.50 per capita per day, 11 percent lower than the

average per capita income in the other program areas from this period.




                                                   9
IV. Data and methods

Data

          We rely on four sources of data collected as part of the Pantawid evaluation. Our primary data

source is a follow-up household survey conducted in October and November of 2011 – two-and-a-

half years after the start of the intervention and during the middle of the 2011/2012 school year. In

each of the 130 villages in the evaluation, survey data were collected from a random sample of both

eligible and ineligible households in treatment and control communities.10

          This survey covered a range of topics including school attendance by children aged 6 to 17,

and work by children aged 10 to 17. Questions on children's school participation were addressed to

the child’s mother, guardian, or main caregiver, while the questions on work were addressed to the

child herself. Children were asked not only about current work but also, albeit in less detail, about

work prior to the start of the program for the calendar years 2007, 2008, and 2009. We use these recall

data to explore baseline balance in child work as the baseline does not contain this information.

Appendix 2 explains how we construct our outcome variables based on this data.

          The second source of data is the baseline assessment of household-level demographic and

socio-economic measures used to construct the PMT score. We use these data to assess balance of

key baseline characteristics across treatment and control communities at baseline. Our third data

source is a survey administered to village leaders concurrently with the household survey, which

includes an assessment of the average daily wage of a male laborer in the village as well as measures

of community access to services, such as the distance from the village hall to the nearest public




10
     In each village, the survey was administered to 10 poor households (those with a PMT score below
the eligibility threshold) with children aged 0 to 14 and/or a pregnant woman, 10 non-poor households
with eligible children and/or pregnant women, 5 poor households without eligible children or
pregnant women, and 5 non-poor households without eligible children or pregnant women.

                                                    10
primary and secondary schools. Finally, we use administrative data on the monthly amounts

transferred to beneficiary households over the evaluation period.

Estimation strategy

          We exploit the cluster-randomized treatment assignment to identify the impact of the cash

transfer program on both children's education and work. In our preferred specification, presented

below, we estimate the intent-to-treat (ITT) effect of the program by regressing the outcome of

interest on the indicator variable for treatment while controlling for municipality, which is the

stratification variable, and age dummies where appropriate:

          (1)     Yiv = β0 + β1*Tv + β2'Xb+ β3'Xivb+ εiv.

Here Yiv is the outcome of interest (e.g. school or work) for child i in village v at follow-up, Tv is the

indicator variable taking the value 1 for treatment villages, Xb is a vector of stratification variables

measured at baseline, denoted b, Xivb is a vector of age dummies in regressions at the child level, and

εiv is the error term. The coefficient β1 estimates the intent-to-treat effect of the program using OLS.

In a series of appendices, we examine whether the precision of our estimates improves when we

include control variables and whether results are robust to using the following alternative models:

Probit, Logit, and panel regressions with individual fixed effects (treating the 2007, 2008, and 2009

recall data as baseline measurements).11 All standard errors are clustered at the village-level.




11
     We use the following fixed effect specification: Yivt = β0 + β1*Tvt + di+ d2008 + d2009 + d2011 + εivt.
Here, Yivt is the outcome variable for individual i from village v at time t (i.e. 2007, 2008, 2009, or
2011), Tvt is the treatment variable (1 for treatment villages in 2011, 0 otherwise), di is an individual
fixed effect, and d2008, d2009, and d2011 are time fixed effects. We do not have recall data on schooling
and duration worked, so we cannot establish the robustness of those estimates using fixed effects.




                                                      11
Sample definition

         We focus on children aged 10 to 14 as they are the youngest children eligible for the education

grant for whom both schooling and work data are available. We further restrict our sample to children

from households that are below the poverty threshold and therefore eligible to participate in Pantawid,

which yields a final sample of 1,264 children: 637 from 411 households in treatment villages and 627

from 422 households in control villages.12

         Appendix 3 examines the validity of the village-level randomized assignment of Pantawid

across all available baseline individual, household, and community characteristics. We test for

balance by regressing the vector of these characteristics on the treatment indicator, clustering standard

errors at the village-level. There are no statistically significant mean differences between the

treatment and control groups across the covariates considered.

         Administrative data show that 605 of 637 (95 percent) of the children from treatment villages

are from households that actually participated in the CCT program. In contrast, none of the children

from control villages belong to households who participated. Given the high rate of compliance with

treatment assignment, the ITT effects reported are not substantively different from estimates of

treatment on the treated (instrumenting for household participation in the cash transfer program using

village-level assignment to the program; Appendix Tables 1a-c).

V. Results

Descriptive statistics

         Table 1 presents mean values in the control group for the outcome variables considered.

School attendance rates among children aged 10 to 14 are high – almost 90 percent attend school, and




12
     Household-level attrition from the baseline sample was 11.2% in control and 11.4% in treated
households, with no evidence of systematic attrition by baseline characteristics (World Bank, 2013).

                                                   12
80 do so regularly – but lower than the national average because the evaluation study sample was

drawn from the poorest areas of the Philippines. Most children in the 10 to 14 age range are in primary

school, although about 20 percent are already in secondary school. A substantial proportion, about 20

percent, worked in the 12 months before the interview and about 16 percent in the 7 days prior.

Conditional on any work, children work about 30 days a year and about 12 hours a week. Children

are as likely to report working for pay outside the household as working without pay inside the

household. Most of the work carried out by children is unskilled, and most children who work (about

4 in 5) are also in school. A sizeable group of children (about 7 percent) neither worked nor attended

school in the 12 months prior to the interview. As we show below, the cash transfer program had a

particularly strong effect on the schooling and labor supply of this last group of children.

Impact of Pantawid on education

       A key goal of Pantawid is to improve children’s school participation. Table 2 presents

estimates of the effect of the cash transfer program on the school participation of children aged 10 to

14. Overall attendance increased by 4 percentage points relative to a control mean of 89 percent

(column (1)). Regular attendance, defined as attendance of at least 85 percent of school days in the

two weeks prior to the interview, increased by 9 percentage points (over a control mean of 80 percent,

column (4)). This increase occurred especially in primary school (Columns (2) & (3) and Columns

(5) & (6)). The reported number of days children attended school in the two weeks prior to the

interview increased by approximately a full day, from 7.5 to 8.5 (column (7)). The increase in the

number of days children attend school reflects changes in both the probability of school attendance

and the number of days attended in the 2 weeks prior to the interview conditional on having attended




                                                  13
school at least one day (presented at the bottom of the table). 13 Pantawid thus appears to have

significantly increased regular primary school attendance.

Impact of Pantawid on child labor

          While Pantawid did not explicitly target child work in its choices of conditions or messaging,

the program may have had an impact on child work through the channels discussed above. Table 3

explores such impacts.14 The probability of 10-to-14-year old children engaging in work in the 12

months before the interview increased by 4 percentage points (column (2)). While not precisely

estimated, the point estimate indicates a 20 percent increase over the control mean.15 Columns (3) to

(5) of Table 3 show that the increase in work is due solely to an increase in work for pay outside the

household – a 5 percentage point increase over the control mean of 12 percent, significant at the 5

percent level. Work without pay, inside or outside the household, and work for pay inside the

household are not significantly affected. Further, as shown in columns (6) to (8), children increase

their participation in laboring and unskilled work, while participation in other work, such as farming

and fishing, is not significantly affected. Effects on the number of days worked, including for pay, in

the past year are positive but not statistically significant. However, as shown at the bottom of the




13
     Of course, given that regular school attendance is a program requirement, these self-reported data
need to be interpreted with some care (Baird and Özler, 2012). Households may misreport school
attendance to ensure that they are not removed from the program even if the responses to the
questionnaire were treated as confidential and were not used to check compliance. By emphasizing
children’s education, the program may also have stigmatized child labor in treated villages, thus
leading to a downward bias in our estimated effects on child labor.
14
     The outcome measures for work are observed for about 93.4 percent of children (94.6% in the
treatment group and 92.1% in the control group). Appendix Table 11e shows that reported pre-
intervention child work is lower in treated communities than in control communities.
15
     This coefficient reaches traditional levels of significance if we include covariates to increase
precision (as shown in Appendix Table 4).

                                                    14
table, conditional on working, days worked are slightly higher in the treatment group than in the

control group. Although we cannot identify working hours separately for children who started

working because of the program and those who would work even in the absence of the program, the

latter suggests that working hours are similar in both of these groups.

       In Table 4, we examine how Pantawid affected the four mutually exclusive combinations of

school only, work only, school and work, and neither school nor work (Columns (1) to (4)

respectively), and whether children worked while school was in session (Column (5)). We find that

Pantawid causes a 4 percentage point decrease in the probability of children being neither in school

nor work and a 6 percentage point increase in the probability of children both working and attending

school. The probability of children working while school was in session increased by 5 percentage

points. These results suggest the most prevalent behavioral shift caused by the program was a

transition from being in neither school nor work to being in both school and in work.

       We separately estimate the effects on boys and girls by interacting the treatment variable with

gender dummies (results available in Appendix Table 2). F-tests do not allow us to reject the null

hypothesis that the program impact is similar for boys and girls, with both sexes increasing regular

school attendance (8 and 9 percentage points respectively, Column (2)), and the likelihood of being

engaged in work for pay outside the household by about 5 percentage points (Column (4)).

Robustness of the reported impacts of Pantawid on child schooling and labor

       We now examine whether the inclusion of control variables increases the power of our

hypothesis tests and the extent to which the results presented above are sensitive to the use of

alternative estimation procedures, sample trimming, and alternative reference periods. Our

specification with control variables augments the original regression specification as follows:

       (2)     Yiv = β0 + β1*Tv + β2'Xivb + β3'Tv *(Xivb - μ(Xvb)) + β4'Xivb Missing + εiv.




                                                   15
Here Xivb is a vector of individual, household, and village-level control and stratification variables

(municipalities) measured at baseline (denoted b in the subscript). These controls, described further

in Appendix 3, include the interaction of the treatment variable Tv with the vector (Xivb - μ(Xvb)) to

address concerns of regression adjustment laid out in Freedman (2008a & 2008b) and discussed in

Lin (2013). The vector μ(Xvb) contains the averages of the control variables across both treatment and

control groups. When a control variable is missing for individual i, we set both the relevant element

of the vector Xivb and the element of the vector Tv *(Xivb - μ(Xvb)) equal to -1. We let the elements of

the vector Xivb Missing take the value 1 if the relevant control variable is missing and 0 otherwise. Our

sensitivity tests also reconsider the following choices made above: (1) the use of OLS instead of

binary models like Probit or Logit, (2) the inclusion of 43 children who were neither children nor

grandchildren of the household head, which may lead to concerns around endogenous changes in

household composition, and (3) using 12-month recall instead of 7-day recall for work outcomes.

       Appendix Table 3 shows the effects on school enrollment and attendance, while Appendix

Tables 4 and 5 present the effects on child work and the transition from idleness to joint schooling

and work respectively. As the first row of each of these tables shows, point estimates do not change

in magnitude or sign but more likely to be statistically significant when we include covariates. Impact

on any work in the 12 months before the interview, for instance, is statistically significant when we

include controls. Appendix Tables 3, 4 and 5 further illustrate that our results are robust to the use of

binary response models instead of OLS, as well as child-level fixed effects using the 2007, 2008, and

2009 recall data as our baseline measurement. While some standard errors are marginally larger, all

results are robust in magnitude and precision to the exclusion of children who are neither the

biological child nor grandchild of the household head. Finally, Panel B of Appendix Table 4 confirms

that the estimated increase in work is broadly robust to 7-day recall instead of a 12-month recall. For

this alternative reference period, participation in work, unskilled work, and work for pay outside the




                                                   16
household all increase across most specifications, suggesting that our results are not driven by

differential measurement in the longer recall period.

Working to support school attendance?

          To examine potential explanations for the increase in work for pay outside the home, we start

by considering transfer sizes, schooling costs, and children’s earnings. If children work to make up

the shortfall in the net cost of education, we would expect the income they earn to represent a

substantial share of this shortfall. For this analysis, we focus on primary school attendance, which

increased significantly.16 School expenditure averages US$73 for every 10-to-14-year old child

enrolled in primary school in control communities and US$86 in treatment communities. The

difference in school expenditures between control and treatment arms in the full sample suggests that

school attendance is costlier for children who switch from idleness to the school-and-work state

because of Pantawid. Indeed, there is likely substantial variation in the actual schooling costs faced

by individuals. Assuming that marginal children in treatment communities, i.e. those who are in

school even in the absence of the program, exhibit the same schooling costs as those in control

communities, the observed US$13 difference in education costs for the treatment and control groups

in the overall sample would reflect an average education cost as high as US$195 for compliers.

         Bounded by the interval ($86, $195), total education expenditures for compliers thus appear

to be well above the maximum annual per-child education transfer of approximately US$70. The

difference between education expenditures and transfers actually received by beneficiary households




16
     There are 96 children in primary school and work, while only 45 attend secondary school while
working. We focus on primary school as a result of the larger sample size. Secondary school
expenditures are markedly higher than primary school expenditures, while the reported child labor
income is the same regardless of level of school enrollment. Appendix 4 describes how we calculate
the total private costs of education.

                                                   17
according to the administrative data is higher still. Regressing administrative data on total transfer

amounts received by households on the number of children aged 6 to 14 in primary school, in

secondary school, and a constant, we find that households received about US$115 in a calendar year

if no children attended primary or secondary school, which is roughly equal to the annualized health

grant. Beneficiary households report receiving an additional US$55 for every child in primary school.

         Results show that the amount earned by children represents a large share of the shortfall in

schooling costs. Conditional on engaging in any work for pay, enrolled children in control

communities report earning US$22 annually. The same value for children in treatment communities

is US$43 annually. Assuming that infra-marginal children in treatment communities exhibit the same

annual income, the observed difference in average earnings of US$21 between treatment and control

communities corresponds to average earnings of US$75 by marginal children. This income earned

by compliers would hence cover roughly half of the upper bound of education costs net of the transfer,

approximately equaling US$140.17

         Examining the behavior of siblings of children aged 10 to 14 lends further support to the

hypothesis that children work to support their school attendance. We turn first to the eligible older

siblings (ages 15 to 17) of the 10-to-14-year olds in our core sample. Panel A of Appendix Table 6

shows that the school participation of these older siblings is not affected, but that these children, too,

increase their participation in work for pay outside the household, perhaps helping to offset the

education expenditure of their younger siblings. Indeed, Panel A of Table 5 shows larger increases in

school and work by 10 to 14 year olds with older siblings than among those without older siblings, a

finding comparable to the negative displacement result reported in Barrera-Osorio et al. (2011).




17
     Note that this shortfall may be an upper bound on the true shortfall if infra-marginal children
increased their school expenditure or reduced their participation in work for pay.

                                                   18
       If the lump-sum health grant was used by households to meet some of the schooling cost

shortfall left by the education grant, then the lump-sum transfer should be most effective at increasing

enrollment and attendance when there are no other school-age children in the household; the greater

the number of enrolled children, the greater the dilution in the impact of the lump-sum health transfer

for each child. Consistent with such a dilution, panel B of Table 5 indeed shows that children with no

enrolled siblings are more likely to be enrolled in school only and the probability of being enrolled

in school decreases with the number of in-school siblings.

Alternative compensatory behaviors

       The evidence thus far is consistent with the shortfall in education costs met by an increase in

child labor as well as, perhaps, increased spending from the health grant and shifts in the working

patterns of older siblings where applicable. Further analysis suggests that the households did not rely

on other compensatory mechanisms to cover the additional cost of schooling. First, adults did not

adjust their labor supply, measured for the 7 days prior to the interview, as a result of the CCT: Table

6 examines whether the program affected the probability (i) that any adult household member was

involved in agricultural activities, a family-owned non-farm businesses, or fishing and (ii) that adult

members in these households worked, and whether they worked for a private household or enterprise,

worked for the government, or on their own or household owned farm or non-farm business.

Following the estimation strategy outlined above, we find no indication that the program affected

household-level micro-entrepreneurial activities or the overall likelihood of adult work. However,

there is some evidence of substitution out of self-employment into wage work, which may indicate a

need for cash income. This result is also consistent with our assumption in the conceptual framework

appendix that these households are adult labor constrained (60 percent of all adults in these

households were already engaged in economic activities in the absence of the program).

       Second, household expenditure, other than on health and education, does not appear to have

changed, suggesting that changes in household consumption patterns are not driving our results. Table
                                                  19
7 explores the relative expenditures of households with children in our core sample. The point

estimates for education and health expenditures are relatively large (suggesting increases of 18 and

22 percent) although these are not precisely estimated. Approximately 20 percent of these households

had any savings, and the average amount saved was $11, suggesting that this is a savings-constrained

population that would find it difficult to cover additional education expenditures from savings. All

told, these findings indicate that households did not use other compensatory behavior to cover the

shortfall in child schooling costs.

Alternative explanations for the rise in child work

       This section examines a range of potential alternative explanations for the increase in child

work. A first possibility is that the inflow of cash led to changes in the local economy (Angelucci and

DeGiorgi (2009) document positive spillovers on non-beneficiaries living in Prospera villages) that

increase the returns to work or labor demand in treatment communities. To understand whether the

program resulted in such general equilibrium effects, we examined whether wages and economic

activity of ineligible households were affected by the program, but find no evidence for such an effect

(Appendix Table 7). A second possibility is that household composition changes in response to the

cash transfer. For instance, the additional income available to the household may induce increased

fertility, in turn decreasing adult female labor supply and increasing demand for child work, but we

do find any evidence that Pantawid affected family composition (Appendix Table 8). A third

possibility is that school attendance opens up new opportunities for children to work. This may occur

if there are few employment opportunities close the home of the child, but commuting to a school

near a market (or other economic hub) allows the child to work. However, Appendix Table 9 shows

that, if anything, longer distance to the nearest market is associated with a higher probability of being

in work. A fourth option would be that children learn about work opportunities from their peers in

school. However, given that the villages in our sample are small (215 households on average in the

baseline PMT data), this mechanism appears unlikely.

                                                   20
        Finally, cash transfer programs may improve children’s health, thus increasing their capacity

for work and school participation. Indeed, Kandpal et al. (2016) find that Pantawid helps to keep the

youngest children healthy, one of the stated aims of the program. In treatment villages, children up to

the age of 5 (for whom extensive health data, including anthropometric indicators, were collected)

were less likely to be stunted, more likely to eat protein-rich food, and more likely to receive

preventative health services. Older children’s health may have improved due to increased household

expenditure on health and nutrition. The program also required regular deworming for older children,

which may have improved schooling outcomes (Baird et al., 2016; Bleakley, 2007; Miguel and

Kremer, 2004). If this mechanism were driving our results, we would expect improvements in child

health to have similar effects on work for pay outside the household and work without pay inside the

household. However, we do not observe an impact on the latter. In addition, Appendix Table 10 shows

no significant association between parent-reported offer of deworming pills at school to children aged

10 to 14 and child labor supply in the control areas. Deworming was offered at school, with 75 percent

of 10-14 year olds in control areas being offered them; we do not find any effect of the deworming

offer on regular school attendance. Moreover, as we discuss below, similar programs in other

contexts, including Prospera in Mexico, improved child health without increasing child work.

The impact of more generous education subsidies

        The evidence presented above suggests that the increase in child work is largely the result of

a partial grant for the full cost of education. This observed increase in children’s participation in paid

work contrasts with evidence from other cash transfer programs, which document either a significant

decrease or no change in child labor as a result of the transfer (reviewed in de Hoop and Rosati, 2014).

However, Table 8 shows that, in virtually all of the programs studied, the transfer amount exceeded

the full cost of education. The Philippines thus appears to be the first CCT program to experience a

slight rise in the rate of child work, and is one of the few that did not fully cover the cost of education.



                                                    21
       To further illustrate this contrast between Pantawid and more generous CCT programs, we

examine the schooling and child labor effects of the Mexican Prospera program when it was first

implemented in the late 1990s (Parker, Rubalcava, and Teruel, 2008). This comparison is insightful

for three reasons. First, the rural target populations of the two programs had comparable levels of

school attendance and child labor: the 1996 Mexican National Survey of Household Income and

Expenditure (ENIGH) shows that 84 percent of children aged 12 to 14 were in school while 15 percent

were engaged in economic activities with boys, especially in rural areas, being almost twice as likely

to work as girls. About 76 percent of children were in school only, 9 percent were idle, 8 percent

combined school and work, and 7 percent were in work only. Second, Pantawid was explicitly

modeled after Prospera in terms of both conditions and relative transfer size to household income

(Barber and Gertler, 2008; Skoufias and Parker, 2001). The experimental phases of both programs

were targeted at the poorest communities with household poverty defined by a PMT (World Bank,

2013). However, in contrast to Pantawid, the education grant from Prospera was explicitly “set to

cover the opportunity costs for students, estimated on the basis of observed children’s incomes”

(Fiszbein and Schady, 2009, p. 182) and the maximum-possible education grant covered about two-

thirds of the earnings of a full-time working child (Schultz, 2004). Third, the pilot phase of the-then

Progresa, and now Prospera, program was accompanied by a similar cluster-randomized evaluation

design (Parker, Rubalcava, and Teruel, 2008). In the late 1990s, 495 rural localities were randomly

allocated to an early treatment group (313 localities) and a late treatment group (182 localities), with

take up rates of approximately 97 percent (Ozer et al., 2011). We use the baseline household survey

administered in 1997, follow-up household survey administered in 1999, as well as 1999 locality

level information, to construct variables comparable to those used in the Pantawid analysis above

(variable construction is described in Appendices 2 and 4).

       Replicating the Pantawid estimation procedure, we estimate the effects of Prospera on

children's schooling and work based on regression specification (1). Table 9 presents our estimates of

                                                  22
the effects of Prospera on participation in school and work by children aged 10 to 14. As established

in previous studies (Rubio-Codina, 2010; Schultz, 2004; and Skoufias and Parker, 2001), we find that

Prospera increased school enrollment and attendance by about six percentage points each (Columns

(1) and (2)). However, in contrast with Pantawid, Prospera reduced the probability of children

working for pay by about 1 percentage point (Column (4)) and the probability of children being in

neither school nor work by 4 percentage points (Column (8)).

       Various other studies show that Prospera resulted in benefits and behaviors that, at least in

theory, can increase children's participation in work, including greater household investment in

productive activities (Gertler, Martinez, and Rubio-Codina, 2012), higher consumption by ineligible

households (Angelucci and De Giorgi, 2009), and improved children's health (Gertler, 2004; Rivera

et al. 2004). The fact that Prospera nonetheless lowered children's participation in work is consistent

with our hypothesis that the size of the education subsidy relative to schooling cost influences the

child schooling and work decision. Further, the fact that Prospera improved child health while

reducing their labor participation suggests that, at least in the case of rural Mexico, the relative value

of the education subsidy dominates the health channel when it comes to child work decisions.

VI. Discussion and conclusions

       This paper illustrates how a partial subsidy for a socially desirable good can elicit

unanticipated compensatory behavior from complier households. We show that The Philippine’s

Pantawid cash transfer program, which partially subsidized schooling during its early

implementation, generated compensatory behavior in the form of concomitant increases in schooling

and participation in paid work by the same children. In particular, Pantawid increased children’s

participation in work for pay outside the household by about 5 percentage points, over a control mean

of 20 percent. This result appears to have been driven by children who would otherwise neither be in

school nor in work, and stands in contrast with most other cash transfers, including the Mexican

Prospera, which increased schooling while decreasing paid work by children. Unlike these other
                                                   23
CCTs, Pantawid only partially subsidized schooling, and the schooling of marginal children

represented a net cost to the household leading children to make up a substantial share of this cost

through paid work. We rule out several alternative explanations for this increase in child labor

including changes in household investments, adult labor supply, and household spending patterns.

We also address the role of child health and possible declines in the search cost for child jobs, but do

not find evidence consistent with these channels principally driving the observed results on work-for-

pay.

       This behavioral response to Pantawid is consistent with a theoretical framework that posits

child labor as a complement to school participation when the offered subsidy does not cover the full

cost of schooling, but is high enough to render part-time child work a useful supplemental strategy.

This view of child work as complementary to schooling runs counter to most theoretical treatments

of child labor, which presents the two as strict substitutes. In particular, our findings relate to the

luxury axiom in to the child labor model presented in Basu and Van (1998), which stipulates that

child labor occurs only if families could not subsist without child labor. However, since time allocated

to school and work-for-pay can be adjusted on both extensive and intensive margins, complementarity

can arise in the presence of a partial education subsidy, as we observe here.

       Findings of this nature present complications for the policy maker’s choice of transfer amount

in a CCT program. A transfer amount set too high may allocate substantial resources to households

who would comply with the conditions even without the transfer thus raising concerns about the

efficiency of the transfer. On the other hand, a lower transfer amount may not induce all eligible

population to take up the preferred behavior or may induce households to adopt compensatory

activities such as an increase in child labor. The consideration of an efficient subsidy level should

take into account not only program costs, but also additional costs incurred by financing such a

program (such as deadweight loss) and any cost of private behavior change taken in response to the



                                                  24
program. Against these costs stand the anticipated benefits of increased school participation and

reduced income poverty.18

         A back-of-the-envelope calculation of the increase in program costs from increasing the

Pantawid education grant to a full schooling subsidy demonstrates these trade-offs. We estimate

above that schooling costs ranged between $85 and $195, while the reported annual education grant

received by families during the pilot was $70. To provide a full subsidy, Pantawid would thus have

had to pay between an additional $15 to $125 per child in school per year. For our sample of 654

children, this would have meant an increase ranging between 21 and 179 percent in the disbursements

for the education grant (the outlay would have gone from $45,780 to $55,590 for these 654 children

if the costs were $85, and to $127,530 if the costs were $195). During the pilot phase, education

grants comprised approximately half of the potential total transfer value ($12.50 of a maximum of

$25 per month), and the Philippine government reported spending 90 percent of its Pantawid budget

to the health and education grants (DSWD, 2015). An increase of 21 percent in the outlay for the

education grant would thus have translated to a 9.5 percent increase in the overall 2015 program

budget of US$ 1.3 billion, while a 179 percent rise in outlays for education grants would have




18
     While our framework predicts that transfers smaller than the cost of education can lead to
compensatory behavior, policy makers should also consider a variety of contextual factors. For
instance, rigidities in minimum working hours and school attendance requirements might make it
difficult for children to combine work-for-pay and school (see Edmonds and Schady, 2011), even in
the presence of a partial subsidy. Household resource availability is another mediating factor: since
the lack of asset wealth is a key factor of the proposed mechanism, we do not expect similar changes
in the wealthier communities phased into Pantawid as the program continued to expand its coverage.




                                                 25
translated to a 80.6 percent budget increase.19,20 Without knowing the nature of the work done by

children, we cannot estimate welfare effects, but note that eliminating the increase in child labor

reported by this paper would have come at a substantial increase in total program costs.




19
     The risk of child labor may be exacerbated over time because transfer sizes have not kept up with
inflation, so the current shortfall in education costs may be higher than estimated here.
20
     Since the rise in child labor appears to be concentrated among the poorest households, an alternative
approach might be to introduce a differentiated subsidy that falls in value as the estimated income of
the beneficiary household rises. While this would mean more complex program implementation, it
would decrease the additional program costs required to avoid the increase in paid work by children.

                                                     26
References

Akabayashi, H. and Psacharopoulos, G. 1999. The trade-off between child labor and human capital

       formation: A Tanzanian case study. The Journal of Development Studies, 35(5): 120-140.

Angelucci, Manuela, and Giacomo De Giorgi. 2009. "Indirect Effects of an Aid Program: How Do

       Cash Transfers Affect Ineligibles' Consumption?" American Economic Review, 99(1): 486-

       508.

Attanasio, Orazio, et al. 2010. "Children’s schooling and work in the presence of a conditional cash

       transfer program in rural Colombia." Economic Development and Cultural Change 58(2):

       181-210.

Augsburg, Britta, Ralph de Haas, Heike Harmgart, and Costas Meghir. 2015. “The Impacts of

       Microcredit: Evidence from Bosnia and Herzegovina.” American Economic Journal: Applied

       Economics, 7(1): 183-203.

Baird Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer, and Edward Miguel. 2016. “Worms at Work:

       Long Run Impacts of a Child Health Investment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4):

       1637‒1680.


Baird, Sarah, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, Berk Özler, and Michael Woolcock. 2014. “Conditional,

       Unconditional and Everything in Between: A Systematic Review of the Effects of Cash

       Transfer Programs on Schooling Outcomes”, Journal of Development Effectiveness, 6(1): 1-

       43.

Baird, Sarah and Berk Özler. 2012. “Examining the Reliability of Self-Reported Data on School

       Participation.” Journal of Development Economics, 98(1): 89-93.

Baland, Jean-Marie and James A. Robinson. 2001. “Is Child Labor Inefficient?” Journal of Political

       Economy, 108(4):663-679.




                                                27
Banerjee, Abhijit, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. "Six Randomized Evaluations of

       Microcredit: Introduction and Further Steps." American Economic Journal: Applied

       Economics, 7(1): 1-21.

Barber, Sarah L. and Paul J. Gertler. 2008. “The Impact of Mexico’s Conditional Cash Transfer

       Programme, Oportunidades, on Birthweight.” Tropical Medicine and International Health,

       13 (11): 1405-1414.

Barham, Tania, Karen Macours, and John A. Maluccio. 2013. “More schooling and more learning?

       Effects of a three-year conditional cash transfer program in Nicaragua after 10 years.” No.

       IDB-WP-432. IDB Working Paper Series.

Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Marianne Bertrand, Leigh L. Linden, and Francisco Perez-Calle. 2011.

       "Improving the Design of Conditional Transfer Programs: Evidence from a Randomized

       Education Experiment in Colombia." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(2):

       167-95.

Basu, Kaushik and Pham Hoang Van. 1998. “The Economics of Child Labor.” American Economic

       Review, 88(3): 412-427.

Beegle, Kathleen, Dehejia, Rajeev and Gatti, Roberta. 2006. “Child labor and agricultural

       shocks.” Journal of Development Economics, 81(1): 80-96.

Behrman, Jere R. and Petra E. Todd. 1999. "Randomness in the Experimental Samples of

       PROGRESA (Education, Health and Nutrition Program)." Washington DC: International

       Food Policy Research Institute; 1999.

Benhassine, Najy, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, and Victor Pouliquen. 2015.

       "Turning a Shove into a Nudge? A "Labeled Cash Transfer" for Education." American

       Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(3): 86-125.

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the

       American South.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 73‒117


                                               28
Bobba, Matteo and Jeremie Gignoux. 2014. “Policy Evaluation in the Presence of Spatial

       Externalities: Reassessing the Progresa Program.” PSE Working Papers 2011-37.

Bobonis, G. J. and Finan, F. 2009. “Neighborhood peer effects in secondary school enrollment

       Decisions.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(4), 695–716.

Bourguignon, F., Ferreira, F.H. and Leite, P.G. 2003. “Conditional cash transfers, schooling, and

       child labor: Micro-simulating Brazil's Bolsa Escola program.” The World Bank Economic

       Review, 17(2): 229-254.

Chevalier, Arnaud. 2004. “Parental Education and Child’s Education: A Natural Experiment.” IZA

       Discussion Paper No. 1153.

Contreras, Diana and Pushkar Maitra .2013. Health Spillover Effects of a Conditional Cash Transfer

       Program. No. 44-13. Monash University, Department of Economics.

Dammert, Ana C. 2008. "Heterogeneous impacts of conditional cash transfers: Evidence from

       Nicaragua." Economic Development and Cultural Change 58(1): 53-83.

Das, Jishnu, Quy-Toan Do, and Berk Özler (2005). "Reassessing conditional cash transfer programs."

       World Bank Research Observer 20(1): 57-80.

de Hoop, Jacobus and Furio. C. Rosati (2014). “Cash Transfers and Child Labor”, World Bank

       Research Observer, 29(2): 202-234.

Department of Social Welfare and Development. Pantawid Pamilya Financials. URL:

       http://pantawid.dswd.gov.ph/index.php/pantawid-pamilya-financials. Accessed on May 4,

       2016.

Duryea, Suzanne, and Andrew Morrison. 2004. "The effect of conditional transfers on school

       performance and child labor: Evidence from an ex-post impact evaluation in Costa Rica."

       Working Paper.

Edmonds, Eric. V. 2008. “Child Labor”, In Schultz, T. and J. Strauss (Eds.) Handbook of

       Development Economics Volume 4.


                                               29
Edmonds, Eric V., and Norbert Schady. 2012. “Poverty Alleviation and Child Labor.” American

       Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (4): 100–24.

Edmonds, Eric V., and Maheshwor Shrestha. 2014. "You get what you pay for: Schooling

       incentives and child labor." Journal of Development Economics 111: 196-211.

Evans, David K., and Edward Miguel. 2007. “Orphans and Schooling in Africa: A Longitudinal

       Analysis.” Demography, 44 (1): 35-57.

Ferreira, Francisco H. G., Deon Filmer, and Norbert Schady. 2009. “Own and Sibling Effects of

       Conditional Cash Transfer Programs.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5001.

Ferro, Andrea R., Ana Lucia Kassouf, and Deborah Levison. 2010. “The impact of conditional cash

       transfer programs on household work decisions in Brazil.” In Child Labour and the

       Transition between School and Work (Research in Labour Economics, Volume 31), eds.

       Randall K.Q. Akee, Eric V. Edmonds, and Konstantinos Tatsiramos, 193–218. Bingley:

       Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

Fiszbein, Ariel, and Norbert Schady. 2009. Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and

       Future Poverty. World Bank, Washington DC.

Fitzsimons, Emla, and Alice Mesnard. 2014. “Can Conditional Cash Transfers Compensate for a

       Father’s Absence?” World Bank Economic Review, 28 (3): 467-491.

Freedman, David A. 2008a. "On Regression Adjustments to Experimental Data." Advances in Applied

       Mathematics, 40: 180–93.

Freedman, David A. 2008b. “On Regression Adjustments in Experiments with Several Treatments.”

       The Annals of Applied Statistics, 2: 176–96.

Gertler, Paul. 2004. "Do Conditional Cash Transfers Improve Child Health? Evidence from

       PROGRESA's Control Randomized Experiment." American Economic Review, 94(2): 336-

       41.




                                                30
Gertler, Paul J., Sebastian W. Martinez, Marta Rubio-Codina. 2012. "Investing Cash Transfers to

       Raise Long-Term Living Standards." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1):

       164-92.

Galiani, Sebastian, and Patrick J. McEwan. 2013. “The Heterogeneous Impact of Conditional Cash

       Transfers.” Journal of Public Economics 103: 85–96.

Glewwe, Paul, and Pedro Olinto. 2004. “Evaluation of the Impact of Conditional Cash Transfers on

       Schooling: An Experimental Analysis of Honduras’ PRAF Program.” Working Paper.

Jacoby, Hanan and Emmanuel Skoufias. 1997. “Risk, Financial Markets, and Human Capital in a

       Developing Country.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol 64: 311-335.

Kandpal, Eeshani, Harold Alderman, Jed Friedman, Deon Filmer, Junko Onishi and Jorge Avalos.

       2016. “A Conditional Cash Transfer Program in the Philippines Reduces Severe Stunting”.

       Journal of Nutrition 146 (9), 1793-1800.

Lalive, R. and Cattaneo, M. A. 2009. ‘Social interactions and schooling decisions’, The Review of

       Economics and Statistics 91(3), 457–477.

Levy, Dan, and Jim Ohls. 2007. “Evaluation of Jamaica’s PATH Program.” Mathematica Policy

       Research Report.

Levy, Santiago, and Evelyne Rodríguez. 2004. "Economic Crisis, Political Transition and Poverty

       Policy Reform: Mexico’s PROGRESA/ Oportunidades Program." Unpublished manuscript,

       Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, DC.

Lin, Winston. 2013. "Agnostic notes on Regression Adjustments to Experimental Data: Reexamining

       Freedman’s Critique." The Annals of Applied Statistics, 7(1): 295-318.

Manacorda, Marc. 2006. "Child Labor and the Labor Supply of Other Household Members: Evidence

       from 1920 America." American Economic Review, 96(5): 1788-1801.

Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. 2004. “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health

       in the Presence of Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica, 72(1): 159-217.


                                                  31
Nelson, L. K. 2011. “From Loans to Labor: Access to Credit, Entrepreneurship, and Child Labor.”

       Mimeo.

Ozer, Emily J., Lia CH Fernald,, Ann Weber, Emily P Flynn, and Tyler J VanderWeele. 2011. "Does

       Alleviating Poverty Affect Mothers’ Depressive Symptoms? A Quasi-experimental

       Investigation   of   Mexico’s Oportunidades     Programme."      International   Journal   of

       Epidemiology, 40(6): 1565-1576.

Parker, Susan. W., Luis Rubalcava, and Graciela Teruel. 2008. "Evaluating Conditional Schooling

       and Health Programs." In Schultz, T. P. and J. Strauss (Eds.) Handbook of Development

       Economics, Vol.4, North-Holland.

Philippine National Statistics Office. 2014. 2011 Survey on Children 5 to 17 Years Old. Philippine

       National Statistics Office in collaboration with International Labour Organization.

Ravallion, Martin and Quentin Wodon. 2000. “Does Child Labor Displace Schooling? Evidence on

       Behavioral Responses to an Enrollment Subsidy.” The Economic Journal, Vol 110: C158-

       175.

Rawlings, Laura B., and Gloria M. Rubio. 2005. “Evaluating the Impact of Conditional Cash

       Transfer Programs.” World Bank Research Observer 20 (1): 29–55.

Rivera, Juan A., Daniela Sotres-Álvarez, Jean-Pierre Habicht, Teresa Shamah, and Salvador

       Villalpando. 2004. "Impact of the Mexican Program for Education, Health, and Nutrition

       (PROGRESA) on Rates of Growth and Anemia in Infants and Young Children: A

       Randomized Effectiveness Study." JAMA, 291(21): 2563–70.

Rubio-Codina, Marta. 2010. “Intra-household Time Allocation in Rural Mexico: Evidence from a

       Randomized Experiment.” In Child Labor and the Transition between School and Work

       (Research in Labor Economics, Volume 31), ed. Randall K.Q. Akee, Eric V. Edmonds, and

       Konstantinos Tatsiramos, 219–57. Bingley: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.




                                                 32
Saavedra, Juan E. and Sandra Garcia. 2012. “Impacts of Conditional Cash Transfers on Educational

       Outcomes in Developing Countries: A Meta-analysis”, Rand Working Paper 921-1.

Schady, Norbert, Maria Caridad Araujo, Ximena Peña, and Luis F. López-Calva. "Cash Transfers,

       Conditions, and School Enrolment in Ecuador." Economía (2008): 43-77.

Schultz, T. Paul. 2004. "School Subsidies for the Poor: Evaluating the Mexican Progresa Poverty

       Program." Journal of Development Economics, 74(1): 199–250.

Skoufias, Emmanuel, and Susan W. Parker. 2001. "Conditional Cash Transfers and their Impact on

       Child Work and Schooling: Evidence from the PROGRESA Program in Mexico." Economía,

       2(1): 45–96.

Sparrow, Robert. 2007. “Protecting Education for the Poor in Times of Crisis: An Evaluation of a

       Scholarship Programme in Indonesia.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 69 (1):

       99–122.

Understanding Children's Work. Forthcoming. "Understanding Children's Work and Youth

       Employment Outcomes in the Philippines."

U.S. Department of Labor. 2016. “Philippines: 2015 Findings on the Worst Forms of Labor:

       Significant Advancement.”

World Bank. 2013. Philippines Conditional Cash Transfer Program Impact Evaluation 2012. World

       Bank Report Number 75533-PH.




                                                33
Appendix 1: A Conceptual Framework for the Child Labor Response to a Partial Education

Subsidy

          This paper concerns the household’s response to an offered schooling subsidy that does not

fully cover the cost of schooling. Possible responses include an asset drawdown, an increase in adult

labor supply, a shift in consumption patterns, or an increase in child labor. For the poorest households,

such as those studied here, an increase in child labor may be the only available margin as they lack

significant assets, are credit-constrained with consumption patterns are at or near subsistence levels,

and (we assume) adults are not able to supply additional labor after the subsidy.21 Therefore, if the

shortfall in education costs after the introduction of the partial schooling subsidy must be met through

shifts in household labor, it is the children who were not working prior to the subsidy that will supply

this labor.

          A question may be why some children were idle prior to the subsidy instead of working. One

possibility is that disutility from work outweighs the fairly modest income that could be earned

through child labor. Another possibility is that the opportunities for child work are few and not well

known, and there is a search cost. The conceptual framework presented in this section considers the

first of these two reasons, which is that even poor households would not like their children to work

as the returns are not substantial and there is disutility or stigma from paid work by children. While

we do not model the second possibility, we explore its applicability in the empirical section of the

paper and as we review the literature on other conditional cash transfer program and their effects.




21
     It is also possible that parents value children’s education less than do children. In that case, a cash
transfer enables children to start attending school, but the cost of additional schooling must be
primarily borne by the children themselves. While we have no information to support this hypothesis,
such a breakdown in altruism, or parents’ myopia resulting in under-investments in children’s
education would also be consistent with both the estimated results and the broader conceptual
framework (Das, Do, and Ozler, 2005).

                                                      34
          Households maximize a utility function defined over the child’s lifetime income and the

disutility of child effort in work or school by deciding (a) whether to send their children to school and

the time they spend in education, and (b) whether their children work and the amount of time devoted

to it. As we shall see, children might participate in either, both, or neither of these activities. We do

not consider substitution between present and future consumption in the household as the optimal

arbitrage condition will not alter the essence of the results we want to illustrate here: for this reason,

we focus on the maximization of the lifetime utility of the children conditional on current household

income y.

          More formally, the household’s problem is to maximize a utility function U=U(Y,e) where Y

is the expected discounted lifetime earnings of the child, including any income earned during

childhood, and e is total effort expended by the child in the period before adulthood.22 Effort can take

the form of time devoted to school, es, and to work, ew. Time can also be spent in leisure, l.

Normalizing total time available during childhood to one, the child faces the following time budget

constraint:

                                               +      =1−l

Discounted lifetime earnings depend on accumulated human capital, which is a function of the

household’s choice of schooling level for the child, S. Schooling choice, in turn, is a function of the

cost of schooling, c, net of any subsidy, p, relative to current period household income, y, as well as

the amount of time devoted to schooling, es and to work, ew:

                                          =      ( − ,     ;   ,; )

The cost of schooling, c, is fixed while the subsidy, p, is allowed to vary with the policy choice.




22
     We assume that the utility function has a strictly positive (negative) first derivative and strictly
negative (positive) second derivative in income (effort).

                                                    35
          The schooling decision is subject to two further conditions:


                                 (   | = ) = 0 and        =0      es< es.min


The first condition states that the level of initial income does not have any direct effect on the returns

to education; it only influences the decision of whether to attend school and for how long. We assume

that household income varies across the population, but do not make any specific assumptions on the

characteristics of its distribution. The second condition states that investment in education is lumpy.

For schooling to have any impact on earnings, a minimum amount of time, es.min, must be devoted to

school; else there are no income gains to education. This assumption, reflecting the minimum time

investment needed for schooling to increase human capital implies that enrolling a child in school

creates a discontinuity in the time budget of the child.23

          As this model describes household decision-making related to child schooling and work, we

abstract from the adult labor decision and assume there are no complementarities in the relationship

between child and adult labor.24 Since the population we study is low-income and credit constrained,

we assume that the adult household member supplies a full unit of labor at the exogenous parent

wage, wparent.25 The child wage, wchild, is also taken as exogenously fixed and lies below wparent. Given

the child wage, the net cost of schooling, c-p, and the level of income, y, children can be in one of 4




23
     This assumption is reflected in the general requirement that children are required to attend school
for minimum numbers of days during a school year to advance.
24
     We also assume that the subsidy level, c, does not appreciably affect the rate of child labor through
a change in the returns to child labor due to increased economic activity in the locality, a change in
household composition, or the improved health of the child. While we do not discuss these channels
theoretically we explore their empirical relevance in subsequent sections of the paper. None of them
appear to play a role in child labor decisions in the Pantawid context.
25
     We further assume that when the child enters adulthood she will in turn supply a full unit of labor.

                                                     36
states: idle (both es = 0 and ew = 0, i.e. el = 1), work only (es = 0), school only (ew = 0 and es ≥ es.min),

or school and work (both ew > 0 and es ≥ es.min).

         Denote the minimum level of school subsidy needed for a given household to prefer school

and work, as opposed to idleness, as p0, which in turn defines minimum lifetime earnings, Y0, that can

be attained by restricted combinations of school effort, es0 ≥ es.min, and work effort, ew0, given an

income level, y0, and a subsidy level, p0.

                                   = ( ( −            ,    ,   ≥      .   ,   > 0))

If both attending school and working is to be a viable option for a child, the expected utility from

combined school and work needs to exceed the utility from the idle state for a household at the same

income level. Specifically:

                                  (   ,   ,     )≥         Y(S = 0,       = 0)

The curve denoted UY0 in Figure 1 presents the possible combinations of school subsidy and current

period household income at which the child is indifferent between idleness and joint school and work.

If a particular combination of school subsidy and household income falls below this curve, the child

either works only or remains idle.26 Children who both work and study can reallocate the time spent

at work to further study as the subsidy level increases beyond p0 but still remains below c; however

these children cannot exit from work and remain in school as the full schooling cost must be met.

         As the subsidy level p increases further and approaches c then the full cost of schooling is

nearly met, and any subsidy in excess of c becomes an infra-marginal transfer to total household



26
     For children that do not enroll in school, the decision to work or to remain idle depends on the
comparison between the earnings from child work and the disutility of time devoted to work. A child
will enter the labor force if there is some level of ew such that
                           ( ( = 0,           > 0),       ) ≥ ( ( = 0,           = 0),0)


                                                          37
income. At some point, the return to continuing in child work is surpassed by the discounted total

gains from increased attention to school. Call this transition point of lifetime earnings Y*:

                                   ∗             ∗       ∗
                                       = ( ( −       ,       ,   ≥      .   ,      = 0)

       The UY* curve in Figure 1 denotes the combinations of current income and subsidy value for

which a child is just indifferent between attending school and work and only attending school. At any

point on or above the UY* curve, the following holds:

                     (   ∗                                                                    ∗
                             ,   > 0,    = 0) ≥ ( ,              > 0,       > 0)          ≥

and any child finding herself above the UY* curve will devote her time only to school.

       The lumpiness of investments in human capital implies thresholds in both the utility from

school enrollment and school cost that determine whether a child is enrolled. Our model thus

categorizes four transitions between school, work, and idleness as a function of the level of subsidy

and of the current household income. We now consider a relatively modest increase in the school

subsidy and the set of children currently not enrolled in school. If household income is low enough

that the partial subsidy still does not make the expected gains in utility from school enrollment and

part-time work an attractive option, then the child will not leave the idle or work only state. This

situation is labeled S1 in Figure 1. However, at a higher level of current household income, the

additional subsidy combined with part-time child work fully offsets the remaining school costs,

leading to the child enrolling in school and beginning to work; this transition is labeled S2 in Figure

1. At higher levels of household income, the same partial subsidy might induce idle or working

children to transition directly to the school only state (S3), or for children in school and work to

transition into school alone (S4). This framework thus predicts that children of higher current income

households should exhibit a reduced labor response, i.e. be less likely to be in school and work than

children from poorer households after the introduction of the subsidy.




                                                         38
Figure 1. Combinations of school and work depending on current household wealth and school

subsidy value




                                           39
Appendix 2: Definition of outcome measures used in the analysis

Outcomes as defined for the Philippines data

       The analysis concentrates on children's participation in education and work. For education,

we consider current school attendance (in primary or secondary school), regular school attendance,

and days of school attendance in the two weeks prior to the interview. We define regular school

attendance as attending school for at least 85 percent of the days that school was in session in the two

weeks prior to the interview (self-reported).

       For work, we focus on participation in economic activities, days worked in the 12 months

prior to the interview (with or without pay), and annual earnings. Work without pay refers to any

work without pay on a farm, work in the private or public sector, work for own account, and work in

a business belonging to the child or the household. Work without pay does not include household

chores. We separately examine participation in work for pay outside the household, work without pay

both inside and outside the household, work for pay inside the household, as well as participation in

the following occupations: (i) farmers, forestry workers, and fishermen, (ii) laborers and unskilled

workers, and (iii) all other occupations. We check the robustness of the estimated impact on work

using the same set of outcome variables, but reported for the seven days preceding the interview

(instead of the 12 month recall period). We focus primarily on work in the 12 months prior to the

interview, because this outcome variable is less likely to be affected by seasonality concerns.

       To calculate annual earnings, we first estimate children’s individual hourly wage rate by

dividing the last pay they received by the hours worked over the period covered by the last pay. We

multiply this hourly wage rate by the estimated number of days worked in the last year and “usual”

hours worked per day in the job. Finally, to examine summary shifts in child behavior as a result of

the program, we analyze four mutually exclusive combinations of school attendance and work in the

last 12 months: in school only, in work only, in work and in school, and neither in work nor in school.


                                                  40
To complement the analysis with these last outcomes, we additionally examine whether, in the past

year, children worked while school was in session. To construct this outcome variable, we rely on the

following two questions asked to working children: "Were you enrolled in the past 12 months?" and

"Did you sometimes work [in this occupation] while also attending school (i.e. during the school

year)?"

Outcomes as defined for the Mexican data

          We classify children as attending school if they "currently" attend school, regardless of the

level attended. We classify them as attending school regularly if they currently attend school and did

not miss any school days during the 4 weeks prior to the interview. We classify them as working if,

during the week prior to the interview, they worked, had a job but did not work, or worked in the

household business, on the household property, or on the household farm. We classify them as

working for pay if they worked in the week prior to the interview for a wage or salary.




                                                   41
Appendix 3: Balance of baseline characteristics

Balance of baseline characteristics and variable definitions, used in the Philippine data

          This Appendix describes the individual, household, and community characteristics we include

as controls in the regressions presented in Appendix Tables 3, 4, and 5. We constructed these

characteristics using the baseline Proxy Means Test survey, unless noted otherwise. We briefly

describe why these characteristics are appropriate potential covariates and present balance tests to

assess the validity of the village-level randomized assignment. In each balance test, we regress the

vector of covariates on the treatment indicator and cluster the standard errors at the village level.

There are no statistically significant differences between the treatment and control groups across the

range of outcomes considered.

          Appendix Table 11a shows the balance along child (aged 10-14) level controls: age, gender,

and an indicator variable taking the value 1 if neither the child's mother nor his/her father lives in the

child's household. We consider the latter an important covariate because a large literature shows that

parental absence (mostly death) is an important predictor and determinant of schooling outcomes (e.g.

Evans and Miguel, 2007) and cash transfers can help compensate for parents’ absence (Fitzsimons

and Mesnard, 2014). All of these child-level controls are constructed using follow-up data as no child-

level information can be derived from the data collected for the proxy-means test. In the absence of

differential attrition, these variables are unlikely to be affected by the program (and the lack of

significance in the balance tests indeed implies there was no differential attrition unless the

characteristics were originally unbalanced at baseline and then experienced a degree of differential

attrition that would result in balance at end line, a situation not supported by any supplementary

quantitative or qualitative evidence).27



27
     In the impact estimates, we do not include the age variable as a linear control, but rather indicator
variables for age equal to 10, 11, 12, and 13 interacted with the indicator variable for being male.

                                                     42
       Appendix Table 11b examines the balance of the household level measures: a wealth index

(included because it is a key targeting criterion of the program), whether the household head is

Muslim and whether the household belongs to an indigenous ethnic group (included to account for

differences in education outcomes across population groups), whether the household head ever

attended school (included because it is commonly considered as a determinant of the well-

documented intergeneration link between parents and children’s life outcomes, e.g. Chevalier, 2004),

whether the household is engaged in agricultural activities (included because most child labor (62%)

in the Philippines takes place in agriculture according to Understanding Children’s Work, 2016) and

household size and demographic composition (number of members aged 0 to 5, 6 to 14, and 15 to 17,

included because the program is partly targeted based on the number of children in these age ranges).

The variables for Muslim household head and indigenous household are based on the follow-up data,

all remaining household indicators were measured at baseline in the Proxy Means Test survey. The

wealth index is defined as a normalized measure with weights from the first principal component of

the following dwelling and asset characteristics: electricity, strong roof, strong walls, dwelling owned

by the household, the household has no access to toilet facilities, the household's main source of water

is located in the household's own dwelling or plot, and ownership of the following assets: TV, video,

stereo, refrigerator, washing machine, air conditioning, living room furniture set, dining room

furniture set, car, phone, PC, microwave, and motorcycle.

       Appendix Table 11c explores the balance of the two key village level characteristics: whether

the distance from the village hall to nearest public primary or secondary school, respectively, is more

than 2 kilometers, which is the 95th percentile of distance to primary school. We include these

variables as the cost of commuting to school is an important component of the overall cost of

education (see also Appendix 4).

       Appendix Table 11d explores the balance of the child labor recall data measures across

treatment and control villages, separately for the years 2007, 2008, and 2009. Importantly, these

                                                  43
variables are not used as controls in our regressions, but exploited in the panel fixed-effects estimates

displayed in Appendix Table 4.

          Across all of these balance tests, not one indicator for treatment assignment is significant at

standard levels of precision, suggesting that the randomization process, stratified by municipality,

resulted in a well-balanced sample at baseline. As such, any estimated impact of the program is

unlikely to be caused by unobserved confounders. Finally, to further rule out a lack of balance

between treated and control areas at baseline driving our results, we examine schooling and work for

10-to-17-year-old children from program ineligible households (i.e. those with imputed income above

the eligibility threshold) and find no differences in schooling or work among ineligible children

(results displayed in Panel B of Appendix Table 6).

          In Appendix Table 12, we present the results of a multinomial logit regression of the four

mutually exclusive combinations of work and school on the household characteristics for which we

carried out balance checks in the control villages. We estimate the multinomial logit both for our

primary sample of children from eligible poor households (columns (5) – (8)) and for the full sample

of children observed in the control villages (columns (1) – (4)) to highlight the role of income in the

probability that children work and/or attend school.28 Several results are as expected: the probability

of children being in school decreases with the distance to school and increases with household wealth

(here we can interpret wealth as a proxy for the role that household income plays in the model in

Section II). The probabilities of being in work only, combining work and school, and being idle all




28
     We estimate the multinomial logit for the full sample of children in the data in control villages (not
only for children from the eligible poor households) to highlight the role of income in the probability
that children work and/or attend school. Municipality fixed effects are included. We do not display
the coefficients for these dummy variables.




                                                     44
decrease in wealth.29 The probability of being neither in work nor in school, on the other hand,

increases with distance to school. The younger the child is, the more likely she is to be in school only

and the less likely to be in work only. Boys are generally less likely to be in school only than girls.

Children are less likely to be in school if the household head never attended school. Children are also

less likely to attend school only and more likely to work only if the household is engaged in

agricultural activities.

Baseline balance in the Mexican data

      For the analysis of child work and schooling in the Mexican data, we tested for balance along the

following individual and household characteristics: age, gender, and an indicator variable taking the

value 1 if neither of the child’s parents live in the household, a wealth index (with weights derived

from the first principal component of the following dwelling characteristics: electricity, three

indicators for roof material ((i) sheets made of metal, fiber glass, or plastic, (ii) sheets made of

cardboard, or (iii), concrete), indicators for wall material ((i) wood, (ii) bricks, or (iii) adobe),

dwelling owned by the household, the household has no access to toilet facilities used exclusively by

the household, the household has access to piped water on the household's dwelling or plot, and

ownership of the following assets: TV, video, stereo, blender, refrigerator, washing machine, fan, gas

stove, gas heater, car, and truck.), whether the household belongs to an indigenous people group,

whether the household head ever attended school, whether the household is engaged in (non-

livestock) agricultural activities, the total number of household members, and the number of

household members aged 0 to 5 and 6 to 17. Finally, we also test for balance in whether there is a



29
     We get similar results if we include annual baseline per capita income instead of the wealth index:
the probability of being in school only increases significantly with 1.7 percentage points for every
additional 1,000 Philippine Peso of per capita income, while the probability of being in work only, in
school and in work, or idle each decreases by about half a percentage point (statistically significant
at the 5% level).

                                                    45
primary school in the locality and whether there is a secondary school in the locality. The locality

level characteristics are established using November 1999 follow-up data. We found that there is one

statistically significant difference between the treatment and control group: treatment localities are

about 4 percentage points more likely to have a primary school than control localities. We do not

present these balance tests here, as numerous other studies have investigated the balance of the

Mexican data. The most notable of these is Behrman and Todd (1999), who find minor but statistically

significant imbalances when using the household level (instead of locality level) data.




                                                 46
Appendix 4: Estimates of schooling costs

       The Pantawid data contain information on a range of education expenditures for individual

pupils including expenditure on school fees, exam fees, fees for extracurricular activities, school

materials, uniforms, books, pocket money and snacks, transport, and other expenditures are reported

for each child in school. Because reference periods for these expenditures may differ, we converted

all of these to annual expenditures. In the calculation of annual expenditure on pocket money, snacks,

and transport, we assume that children who are in school attend school 98 percent of the academic

calendar's 204 school days, based on the average self-reported number of days that children attended

school in the 2 weeks prior to the interview and the number of days that school was in session in the

2 weeks prior to the interview.

       The Pantawid survey collected data on “the total cost to go to school one way” without

clarifying whether students make this commute on every school day. To limit the probability of

overestimating transport costs for boarders or students who otherwise live closer to the school during

part of the school year, we exclude children who (i) live more than 50km from their school or (ii)

spend more than US$1.15 a day, which is the ninetieth percentile, on transport to and from school.

These restrictions lead to the exclusion of 24 children aged 10 to 14 from eligible households

attending primary school. We further exclude the children with non-transport education expenditure

in the highest percentile.

       The Progresa data do not contain information on the cost of education. Instead, we used the

1998 Mexican National Survey of Household Income and Expenditure (ENIGH) to assess household

education expenditures. ENIGH contains information on fees and subscription, education services,

overnight stays, additional education, special education, transport to school, purchase and

maintenance of books and other school materials. Because the ENIGH does not provide all of this

information at the child level, we regressed total household expenditure on education in the month

before the interview on the number of children in primary and secondary school grades.
                                                 47
       To be consistent with the Philippines impact evaluation sample of poor households, we

restricted our analysis to rural households with total expenditure in the national bottom quartile. We

also restrict to households that do not have individuals attending other school grades, or individuals

over 18 attending school, to limit the probability that we are picking up other household education

expenditures in the regression. The regression does not include a constant, as we assume that the cost

of education is zero if no one in the household attends school. The estimated monthly household

expenditure on education increases by US$3 for every child in primary school and US$5 for every

child in secondary school. The direct cost of education was thus substantially lower than even the

minimum value of the Prospera education grants.




                                                 48
Tables

Table 1 . Descriptive statistics: mean values for children from Pantawid control communities
Extensive margin:
    Attends                                                                               0.882
        Attends primary school                                                            0.651
        Attends secondary school                                                          0.231
    Attends regularly                                                                     0.793
        Attends primary school regularly                                                  0.579
        Attends secondary school regularly                                                0.215
    Worked in past 12 months                                                              0.202
        Pay and location:
            For pay, outside own household                                                0.091
            For pay, inside own household                                                 0.031
            Without pay, outside own household                                            0.040
            Without pay, inside own household                                             0.091
        Types of occupations:
            Laborers and unskilled workers                                                0.144
            Farmers, forestry workers, and fishermen                                      0.079
            Other                                                                         0.008
    Worked in past 7 days                                                                 0.158
        Pay and location:
            For pay, outside own household                                                0.066
            For pay, inside own household                                                 0.017
            Without pay, outside own household                                            0.028
            Without pay, inside own household                                             0.080
        Types of occupations:
            Laborers and unskilled workers                                                0.098
            Farmers, forestry workers, and fishermen                                      0.068
            Other                                                                         0.000
    Mutually exclusive combinations of school and work
        In school only                                                                    0.725
        In work only                                                                      0.038
        In school and in work                                                             0.164
        Neither in school nor in work                                                     0.073
    Worked while school was in session                                                    0.094
Intensive margin:
    Days attended school past 2 weeks
        Unconditional                                                                      7.4
        Conditional on attending school                                                    8.6
    Days worked in past 12 months
        Unconditional                                                                      5.9
        Conditional on any work                                                            29.7
    Days worked for pay, outside own household in past 12 months
        Unconditional                                                                      2.2
        Conditional on any work                                                            24.4
    Hours worked in past 7 days
        Unconditional                                                                      1.9
        Conditional on any work                                                            12.4
    Hours worked for pay, outside own household in past 7 days
        Unconditional                                                                      0.7
        Conditional on any work                                                            10.6
Note. Estimates based on 656 childen aged 10-14 from eligible households in control villages.

                                                             49
Table 2 . Pantawid program impact on school attendance

                                                                                                         Attends  Attends           Days
                                                                  Attends     Attends                    primary secondary        attended
                                                                  primary    secondary       Attends      school    school       school past
                                                       Attends     school      school       regularly   regularly regularly       2 weeks
                                                         (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)      (6)             (7)
OLS only controlling for municipality and child age.   0.044**     0.039       0.004        0.094***    0.076***    0.016         0.955***
                                                       (0.019)    (0.024)     (0.021)        (0.025)     (0.027)   (0.021)         (0.243)
Additional information:
Number of observations                                    1,264      1,264        1,264         1,243      1,243       1,243         1,263
Observations in control group                              627         627         627           611        611         611           626
Observations in treatment group                            637         637         637           632        632         632           637
Mean in control group                                     0.887      0.665        0.222         0.795      0.589       0.206         7.502
Mean in treatment group                                   0.929      0.700        0.228         0.888      0.663       0.223         8.457
Conditional mean in control group                                                                                                    8.648
Conditional mean in treatment group                                                                                                  9.131
Note. Estimates of program impact on self-reported education outcomes of children aged 10 to 14 from eligible households . Standard errors
are clustered at the village level. Conditional means are means conditional on any school days attended. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                    50
Table 3. Pantawid program impact on children's participation in economic activities
                                                                                         Pay and location                                 Types of occupations                     Days worked
                                                                                                                                                                                            Days
                                                                      Work for       Work for        Work         Work                        Farmers,                                   worked for
                                                                     pay, outside   pay, inside   without pay, without pay,     Laborers and forestry                                    pay, outside
                                                                         own            own       outside own inside own          unskilled workers, and                        Days        own
                                                       Any work       houshold       houshold      houshold     houshold          workers    fishermen          Other          worked     houshold
                                                          (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)         (5)               (6)          (7)            (8)             (9)         (10)
OLS only controlling for municipality and child age.     0.038         0.050**         -0.003        -0.007       0.010            0.045*       -0.005          0.004           1.812       1.728
                                                        (0.029)        (0.021)        (0.010)       (0.011)      (0.021)           (0.026)     (0.016)         (0.007)         (1.765)     (1.370)
Additional information:
   Number of observations                             1,264            1,264         1,264          1,264         1,264            1,264        1,264          1,264             1,261         1,263
   Observations in control group                       627              627           627            627           627              627          627            627               625            626
   Observations in treatment group                     637              637           637            637           637              637          637            637               636            637
   Mean in control group                              0.201           0.116          0.032          0.038        0.088             0.144        0.078          0.008             5.906         2.851
   Mean in treatment group                            0.242           0.155          0.030          0.030        0.102             0.188        0.077          0.013             7.884         4.666
   Conditional mean in control group                                                                                                                                            29.766        23.182
   Conditional mean in treatment group                                                                                                                                          32.771        27.519
Note. Estimates of program impact on work by children aged 10 to 14 from eligible households in the 12 months prior to the interview. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. Conditional
means are means conditional on positive days worked or positive days worked for pay outside own household. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                  51
Table 4 . Pantawid program impact on mutually exclusive combinations of work and schooling
                                                           Mutually exclusive combinations

                                                                                                            Worked
                                                                                 In school Neither in         while
                                                         In school   In work       and in  school nor     school was
                                                            only       only        work      in work       in session
                                                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)
OLS only controlling for municipality and child age.      -0.003      -0.010      0.047*    -0.034**         0.031
                                                          (0.031)     (0.012)     (0.027)    (0.015)         (0.022)
Additional information:
Number of observations                                    1,264       1,264        1,264       1,264         1,252
Observations in control group                              627         627          627         627           623
Observations in treatment group                            637         637          637         637           629
Mean in control group                                     0.724       0.038        0.163       0.075         0.087
Mean in treatment group                                   0.716       0.028        0.214       0.042         0.119
Note. Estimates of program impact on mutually exclusive combinations of work in the 12 months prior to the
interview and current school attendance for children aged 10 to 14 from eligible households. Here, school refers to
current school attendance and work refers to any work in the past 12 months. Standard errors are clustered at the
village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                52
Table 5. Heterogeneous Pantawid program impacts on schooling and work by household composition
                                                               Education        Work past 12 months                       Mutually exclusive combinations

                                                                                                   Work for                                In school Neither in
                                                                     Attends                      pay, outside     In school    In work      and in  school nor
                                                                    regularly       Any work     own houshold         only        only       work     in work
                                                                       (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)
Panel A: Heterogeneous effects on core sample (10-14), by older
siblings
     No siblings aged 15-17                                           0.040            0.033         0.019          -0.004      -0.015       0.048      -0.029
                                                                     (0.033)          (0.042)       (0.037)         (0.043)     (0.018)     (0.037)     (0.020)
    One or more siblings aged 15-17                                 0.134***          0.067**      0.085***         -0.030       0.003      0.063*      -0.037
                                                                     (0.036)          (0.033)       (0.032)         (0.040)     (0.014)     (0.033)     (0.024)
Number of observations:
     P-value F-test (impact no siblings = impact siblings)            0.005            0.617         0.151           0.716       0.491       0.409       0.246
     Number of observations                                           1,193            1,212         1,212           1,212       1,212       1,212       1,212
     Mean in control group, no siblings                               0.758            0.211         0.091           0.712       0.040       0.171       0.077
     Mean in treatment group, siblings                                0.888            0.247         0.148           0.707       0.034       0.213       0.046
     Mean in control group, one or more siblings                      0.841            0.190         0.091           0.743       0.036       0.154       0.067
     Mean in treatment group, one or more siblings                    0.868            0.231         0.122           0.732       0.020       0.210       0.037
Panel B: Heterogeneous effects on core sample (10-14), by
eligible siblings
     No enrolled siblings aged 6-14                                   0.264*           -0.075        -0.077         0.275**     -0.154       0.079      -0.200*
                                                                     (0.135)          (0.103)       (0.092)         (0.128)     (0.098)     (0.063)     (0.117)
    One or two enrolled siblings aged 6-14                           0.066**          0.068**       0.071**         -0.065*      0.003      0.064**      -0.003
                                                                     (0.031)          (0.033)       (0.028)         (0.033)     (0.014)     (0.032)     (0.017)
    Three or more enrolled siblings aged 6-14                         0.044*           0.027         0.051*          -0.016      0.014       0.013       -0.010
                                                                     (0.026)          (0.047)       (0.031)         (0.046)     (0.009)     (0.047)     (0.011)
Number of observations:
     P-value F-test (impact 0 siblings = impact 1 or 2 siblings)          0.147            0.187    0.117          0.011        0.115         0.841       0.094
     P-value F-test (impact 0 siblings = impact 3+ siblings)              0.107            0.349    0.196          0.031        0.094         0.399       0.104
     P-value F-test (impact 1 or 2 siblings = 3+ impact siblings)         0.568            0.450    0.626          0.367        0.501         0.339       0.709
     Number of observations                                               1,264            1,264    1,264          1,264        1,264         1,264       1,264
     Mean in control group, no enrolled siblings                          0.296            0.280    0.200          0.260        0.240         0.040       0.460
     Mean in treatment group, enrolled siblings                           0.571            0.217    0.130          0.522        0.087         0.130       0.261
     Mean in control group, one or two enrolled siblings                  0.801            0.193    0.084          0.749        0.032         0.161       0.058
     Mean in treatment group, one or two enrolled siblings                0.870            0.239    0.144          0.706        0.034         0.206       0.055
     Mean in control group, three or more enrolled siblings               0.881            0.196    0.078          0.787        0.004         0.191       0.017
     Mean in treatment group, three or more enrolled siblings             0.917            0.247    0.139          0.743        0.017         0.229       0.010
Note. Estimates of heterogeneous program impact on work by children aged 10 to 14 from eligible households. Only municipality and child age fixed effects are
included. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                              53
Table 6 . Pantawid program impact on other economic activities of beneficiary households
                                             Household level, past 12 months. Any
                                               household members involved in:                                Adult level, past 7 days
                                                                                                                                              Self-
                                                                                                                                           employed,
                                                                                                                                          employer, or
                                                                                                            Worked for                     worked on
                                                                                                              private                      household
                                                           Non-farm                                        household or    Worked for       farm or
                                             Farming       business         Fishing           Worked       establishment   government       business
                                                (1)           (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)
OLS only controlling for municipality          0.042         0.001           0.006             0.007          0.038*          0.007          -0.037
                                              (0.033)       (0.019)         (0.028)           (0.020)         (0.023)        (0.007)         (0.023)
Additional information:
    Number of observations                                       830            832          2,480              2,480          2,480          2,480
    Observations in control group                                422            422          1,251              1,251          1,251          1,251
    Observations in treatment group                              408            410          1,229              1,229          1,229          1,229
    Mean in control group                       0.608           0.077          0.134         0.627              0.295          0.023          0.291
    Mean in treatment group                     0.668           0.075          0.123         0.635              0.333          0.028          0.256
Note. Estimates of program impact on household and adult level economic activities. Sample restricted to eligible households with children aged 10-14.
Standard errors are clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                          54
Table 7. Pantawid program impact on household expenditure
                                                                                                          Log per capita
                                                        Log per capita Log per capita Log per capita       alcohol and
                                         Log per capita     food          medical       education            tobacco     Log per capita
                                          expenditure    expenditure    expenditure    expenditure         expenditure      savings
                                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)                  (5)           (6)
OLS only controlling for municipality        0.005         -0.042          0.178          0.221               -0.079         0.169
                                            (0.043)        (0.044)        (0.191)        (0.153)              (0.081)       (0.184)
Additional information:
    Number of observations                       833             833               830          830             833             822
    Observations in control group                422             422               422          421             422             415
    Observations in treatment group              411             411               408          409             411             407
    Mean in control group                       9.357           8.917             2.969       4.453            1.087           -0.666
    Mean in treatment group                     9.345           8.859             3.108       4.652            0.988           -0.551
Note. Estimates of program impact on household expenditure or savings. Sample restricted to eligible households with children aged 10-
14. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                              55
Table 8: Summary of the Literature on Conditional Cash Transfer Programs and Education Costs
                                                                                                                                        Subsidy Relative to
    Country             Reference(s)                  Impact on School Enrollment                    Impact on Child Labor                                                              Notes
                                                                                                                                         Schooling Costs
                                                                                                                                                              Although Ferro et al. (2010) do not explicitly mention the
                                                                                                                                                              cost of education, one of the authors kindly confirmed
                                                                                                                                                              that the transfers will have exceeded the cost of
     Brazil           Ferro et al. (2010)            Positive (2.5 percentage points)            Negative (3 percentage points)            Full subsidy       education. Children in the examined cash transfer
                                                                                                                                                              program would typically attend public schools, which
                                                                                                                                                              are free of charge. The government provides textbooks
                                                                                                                                                              and uniforms and in rural areas there are school buses.

   Cambodia          Ferreira et al. (2009)          Positive (20 percentage points)            Negative (10 percentage points)            Full subsidy       Noted on page 24.



                                                                                             Negative on students in grades 6-10 (30
                 Barrera-Osorio et al. (2011);
   Colombia                                          Positive (3-5 percentage points)        percent reduction), no effect on those        Full subsidy       Noted on page 171.
                         Attanasio ()
                                                                                                           in grade 11



                                                  Positive (2.9 to 8-7 percentage points,                                                                     The conditional transfer program in Costa Rica was an in-
   Costa Rica    Duryea and Morrisson (2004)                                                                No effect
                                                          depending on method)                                                                                kind transfer.


                                                                                                                                                              The authors note on page 118 that the size of the
                                                                                                                                                              transfer is greater than the average increase in schooling
                                                                                                                                                              costs between primary and secondary school. While the
                                                                                                                                                              transfer program in Ecuador was unconditional, it was
    Ecuador      Edmonds and Schady (2011)           Positive (19 percentage points)            Negative (9.9 percentage points)           Full subsidy
                                                                                                                                                              accompanied by marketing activities advocating for the
                                                                                                                                                              relevance of schooling and that part of the beneficiaries
                                                                                                                                                              perceived the program as conditional on school
                                                                                                                                                              participation.


                                                 Positive (1-2 percentage points-- Glewwe No effect (Glewwe and Olinto); negative                             We infer that the transfer amount exceeded the cost of
                  Glewwe and Olinto (2004);
   Honduras                                      and Olinto; 8 percentage points-- Galiani  (3 percentage points-- Galiani and             Full subsidy       education from Fiszbein and Schady (2009, P.182-183)
                  Galiani and McEwan (2013)
                                                               and McEwan)                               McEwan)                                              and Rawlings and Rubio (2005, P.34).


                                                                                                                                       Full subsidy through
                                                                                                                                        junior secondary;
   Indonesia           Sparrow (2007)                Positive (13 percentage points)             Negative (4 percentage points)        marginally lower than Noted on page 105.
                                                                                                                                        senior secondary
                                                                                                                                               costs

                                                  Positive on attendance, enrollment not
    Jamaica         Levy and Ohls (2007)                                                                    No effect                      Full subsidy       Noted on page 7
                                                  reported (38.5-50.6 percentage points)


                                                 Positive (girls: 1.3 percentage points in
                                                 primary school and 7.1 pp in secondary Negative (1.2 percentage points for girls,
                  Skoufias and Parker (2001);                                                                                                                 Inferred from Fiszbein and Schady (2009, P.182-183) and
                                                 school. Boys: 1.2 percentage points in     1.4 percentage points for boys--
    Mexico       Schultz (2004); Rubio-Codina                                                                                              Full subsidy       Rawlings and Rubio (2005, P.34), and confirmed in own
                                                  primary school, 5.2 pp in secondary--      Schultz); Negative for girls (8.4
                             (2010)                                                                                                                           calculations reported in the paper.
                                                      Schultz); Positive for girls (4.9    percentage points-- Rubio-Codina)
                                                    percentage points--Rubio-Codina)


                                                 Positive (4.9 percentage points for full                                                Full subsidy in one
                                                                                              Negative for full subsidy plus stipend
                                                  subsidy plus stipend) 2.3 percentage                                                  arm; full subsidy plus
     Nepal      Edmonds and Shrestha (2013)                                                  (5.3 percentage points); no effect of full                         Noted in footnote 7 on page 7.
                                                 points but insignificant for full subsidy                                              an additional stiped in
                                                                                                          subsidy alone.
                                                                  alone.                                                                       another

                                                 Positive for ex-ante enrolment (19
                                               percentage points-- Thomas), ex-post
                                             early enrolment (14.2 percentage points--
                   Dammert (2008); Thomas                                                                                                                     Inferred from Barham et al. (2013) and Thomas 2010--
                                               Barham et al.), ex-post attendance (12 Negative (1 percentage point for girls, 11
   Nicaragua     (2010); Barham, Macours and                                                                                               Full subsidy       primary education is free and the fees transfer was
                                                   percentage points for girls, 18      percent points for boys-- Dammert)
                        Maluccio (2013)                                                                                                                       designed to offset all other schooling costs.
                                              percentage points for boys-- Dammert),
                                              and long-term attainment (half a year--
                                                           Barham et al.)




                                                                                                    56
Table 9 . Prospera program impact on education and work outcomes
                                                         Education                   Work past week              Mutually exclusive combinations
                                                                                                                                  In school Neither in
                                                                   Attends                  Work for      In school In work         and in   school nor
                                                      Attends     regularly        Any work    pay           only       only        work      in work
                                                         (1)         (2)               (3)      (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
OLS only controlling for municipality and child age   0.058***    0.058***           -0.009 -0.010***     0.053*** -0.014***        0.005    -0.044***
                                                       (0.012)     (0.014)          (0.007)  (0.004)       (0.012)    (0.004)      (0.006)     (0.010)
Additional information:
    Number of observations                                    10,821 10,805   10,886       10,867        10,774       10,774      10,774       10,774
    Observations in control group, boys                        4142   4135     4177         4171          4121         4121        4121         4121
    Observations in treatment group, boys                      6679   6670     6709         6696          6653         6653        6653         6653
    Mean in control group, boys                               0.841  0.805     0.051       0.028          0.827        0.035       0.015       0.124
    Mean in treatment group, boys                             0.900  0.863     0.042       0.018          0.880        0.021       0.020       0.079
Note. Estimates of Prospera program impact on education and work outcomes of children aged 10 to 14 from eligible households. Standard errors are
clustered at the level of localities. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                              57
Appendix tables


Appendix Table 1a. Pantawid program impact on education outcomes, alternative specifications
                                                                                      Attends      Attends                    Days
                                         Attends     Attends                          primary secondary                     attended
                                         primary secondary                 Attends     school       school                school past
                               Attends    school      school              regularly regularly regularly                     2 weeks
                                 (1)        (2)         (3)                  (4)         (5)          (6)                      (7)
2SLS TOT controlling
only for municipality:         0.044**     0.039       0.002             0.088*** 0.073**            0.014                 1.004***
                               (0.019)   (0.029)      (0.028)              (0.025)    (0.032)       (0.028)                  (0.269)
Number of observations          1,351      1,351       1,351                1,351       1,351        1,351                    1,351
Observations in control
group                            678        678         678                  678         678          678                      678
Observations in
treatment group                  673        673         673                  673         673          673                      673
Mean in control group           0.879      0.649       0.230                0.789       0.576        0.213                    7.426
Mean in treatment group         0.921      0.686       0.232                0.879       0.651        0.227                    8.387
Conditional mean in
control group                                                                                                                 8.647
Conditional mean in
treatment group                                                                                                               9.142
Note. Estimates of program impact on education outcomes of children aged 10 to 14 from eligible households. Standard errors are
clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                 58
Appendix Table 1b. Pantawid program impact on the extensive margin of work, alternative specifications and alternative reference period
                                                            Pay and location                                       Types of occupations                                 Intensity
                                                                       Work                                                                                                     Days
                                             Work for                 without       Work                                 Farmers,                                            worked for
                                                pay,     Work for       pay,       without                 Laborers forestry                                                     pay,
                                              outside pay, inside outside pay, inside                          and       workers,                                              outside
                                                own         own         own          own                    unskilled       and                                    Days          own
                          Any work           houshold houshold houshold houshold                            workers fishermen          Other                      worked      houshold
                              (1)                (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)                      (6)          (7)         (8)                         (9)          (10)
Panel A: Work in the past 12 months
2SLS TOT controlling
only for municipality:       0.043            0.053*       0.001       -0.009       0.012                     0.002        0.042       0.006                       2.056        0.021
                            (0.048)           (0.031)     (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.032)                   (0.025)      (0.037)     (0.008)                     (1.577)      (1.129)

Panel B: Work in the
past 7 days
2SLS TOT controlling
only for municipality:       0.043                  0.053*        0.001      -0.009       0.012                   0.002        0.042       0.006                  -0.197       -0.085
                            (0.048)                 (0.031)      (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.032)                 (0.025)      (0.037)     (0.008)                 (0.525)      (0.315)
Additional information,
work in the past 7 days:
Number of observations      1,264                   1,264       1,264       1,264       1,264        1,265       1,264        1,264         1,264                   1,261        1,263
Observations in control
group                        627                     627         627         627         627       628.000        627           627          627                     625          626
Observations in
treatment group              637                     637         637         637         637       637.000        637           637          637                     636          637
Mean in control group       0.201                   0.108       0.116       0.091       0.032        0.038       0.144        0.078         0.008                   5.906        2.851
Mean in treatment group     0.242                   0.122       0.155       0.141       0.030        0.030       0.188        0.077         0.013                   7.884        4.666
Conditional mean in
control group                                                                                                                                                      29.766       23.182
Conditional mean in
treatment group                                                                                                                                                    32.771       27.519
Note. Estimates of program impact on work by children aged 10 to 14 from eligible households. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                         59
Appendix Table 1c. Pantawid program impact on children's participation in economic activities, alternative specifications
                                    Mutually exclusive combinations
                                                                                                           In                  Worked
                                                     In school Neither in                 In primary secondary                   while
                            In school In work          and in   school nor                school and school and              school was
                               only        only        work       in work                  in work     in work                in session
                               (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)                      (5)         (6)                     (7)
TOT controlling only for
municipality:                -0.010       -0.014       0.057     -0.032**                    0.037       0.019                   0.046
                             (0.046)     (0.013)      (0.044)      (0.015)                  (0.030)     (0.019)                 (0.029)
Additional information:
Number of observations        1,264        1,264       1,264        1,264                    1,264       1,264                   1,264
Observations in control
group                          627          627         627          627                      627         627                     627
Observations in
treatment group                637          637         637          637                      637         637                     637
Mean in control group         0.724        0.038       0.163        0.075                    0.113       0.049                   0.094
Mean in treatment group       0.716        0.028       0.214        0.042                    0.113       0.069                   0.138
Note. Estimates of program impact on mutually exclusive combinations of work in the 12 months prior to the interview and current
school attendance for children aged 10 to 14 from eligible households. Here, school refers to current school attendance and work refers
to any work in the past 12 months. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  60
Appendix Table 2 . Heterogeneity of Pantawid program impact on education and work outcomes by gender
                                                            Education               Work past 12 months
                                                                                               Work for pay,
                                                                    Attends                     outside own
                                                     Attends       regularly      Any work        houshold
                                                        (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)
OLS:
    Impact on boys                                     0.040        0.088**          0.046         0.050*
                                                      (0.029)       (0.034)         (0.038)        (0.028)
    Impact on girls                                  0.050**       0.099***          0.032        0.050**
                                                      (0.020)       (0.027)         (0.032)        (0.023)
Additional information:
    P-value F-test (impact boys = impact girls)        0.697         0.762           0.803          0.862
    Number of observations                             1,264         1,264           1,264          1,264
    Mean in control group, boys                        0.864         0.840           0.249          0.122
    Mean in treatment group, boys                      0.899         0.940           0.293          0.170
    Mean in control group, girls                       0.914         0.841           0.145          0.055
    Mean in treatment group, girls                     0.964         0.933           0.185          0.109
Note. Estimates of program impact on education and work outcomes by gender for children aged 10 to 14
from eligible households. Impact estimated using only municipality dummies as controls. Standard errors are
clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                    61
Appendix Table 3 . Pantawid program impact on education outcomes, alternative specifications

                                                                                                    Attends     Attends         Days
                                                               Attends  Attends                     primary secondary         attended
                                                               primary secondary       Attends       school      school      school past
                                                    Attends     school    school      regularly regularly regularly           2 weeks
                                                       (1)       (2)       (3)            (4)          (5)        (6)            (7)
OLS with controls:                                  0.050***    0.035     0.014       0.097*** 0.071***          0.024        1.019***
                                                     (0.019)   (0.023)   (0.019)       (0.024)      (0.026)     (0.020)        (0.237)
Probit without controls:                            0.041**     0.033     0.005       0.087*** 0.069**           0.016
                                                     (0.019)   (0.026)   (0.023)       (0.025)      (0.029)     (0.024)
Logit without controls:                             0.040**     0.033     0.005       0.086*** 0.069**           0.017
                                                     (0.019)   (0.026)   (0.023)       (0.025)      (0.029)     (0.023)
OLS excluding children not directly related to      0.041**     0.033     0.005       0.087*** 0.069**           0.017          0.941
household head                                       (0.019)   (0.026)   (0.023)       (0.025)      (0.029)     (0.024)        (0.255)
Note. Estimates of program impact on education outcomes of children aged 10 to 14 from eligible households. Standard errors are
clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                    62
Appendix Table 4 . Pantawid program impact on the extensive margin of work, alternative specifications and alternative reference period
                                                                                              Pay and location                                     Types of occupations                      Intensity

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Days
                                                                                                                                                                                      Days      worked past
                                                                                Work for       Work for        Work         Work                       Farmers,                    worked past year / Hours
                                                                               pay, outside   pay, inside   without pay, without pay,    Laborers and forestry                     year / Hours worked past
                                                                                  own            own        outside own inside own         unskilled workers, and                  worked past week for
                                                                Any work        household     household      household    household        workers    fishermen           Other       week         pay
                                                                  (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)             (6)          (7)              (8)          (9)        (10)
Panel A: Work in the past 12 months
   OLS with controls:                                             0.046*         0.052***        -0.002        -0.000        0.009          0.050**        -0.004        0.006        1.794           1.426
                                                                  (0.026)         (0.019)       (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.021)         (0.024)       (0.016)       (0.006)      (1.731)         (1.270)
    Probit controlling only for municipality:                      0.041         0.045**         -0.001        -0.007        0.006           0.045       -0.004**        0.002
                                                                  (0.031)         (0.019)       (0.008)       (0.010)       (0.018)         (0.025)       (0.013)       (0.005)
    Logit controlling only for municipality:                       0.043         0.042**         -0.002        -0.007        0.009           0.044*        -0.003        0.003
                                                                  (0.031)         (0.017)       (0.007)       (0.010)       (0.017)         (0.024)       (0.011)       (0.004)
    Panel fixed effects based on recall data                       0.049           N.A.           N.A.          N.A.         N.A.            -0.006      0.054**         0.006        N.A.               N.A.
                                                                  (0.033)                                                                   (0.019)       (0.026)       (0.006)
   OLS excluding children not directly related to household        0.039         0.047**         -0.001        -0.009        0.012           0.043         -0.003        0.004        2.044           1.989
   head                                                           (0.030)        (0.022)        (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.022)         (0.027)       (0.016)       (0.007)      (1.802)         (1.403)
Panel B: Work in the past 7 days
   OLS only controlling for municipality and child age:          0.046*           0.024         -0.002        -0.006        0.023            0.048**        -0.008        0.003       0.040           0.152
                                                                (0.027)          (0.016)       (0.008)       (0.010)       (0.019)           (0.022)       (0.015)       (0.002)     (0.410)         (0.248)
   OLS with controls:                                           0.052**          0.027*         -0.004        0.002         0.021            0.051**        -0.006        0.003       0.029           0.076
                                                                (0.025)          (0.015)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.018)           (0.021)       (0.014)       (0.002)     (0.364)         (0.231)
   Probit controlling only for municipality:                     0.047*           0.021         -0.001        -0.005        0.022             -0.007      0.047**         0.003
                                                                (0.027)          (0.014)       (0.006)       (0.008)       (0.017)           (0.013)       (0.021)       (0.004)
   Logit controlling only for municipality:                      0.047*           0.021         -0.001        -0.005        0.020             -0.005      0.044**         0.003
                                                                (0.026)          (0.013)       (0.006)       (0.008)       (0.015)           (0.012)       (0.020)       (0.004)
   OLS excluding children not directly related to household      0.051*           0.024         0.000         -0.006        0.027            0.049**        -0.005        -0.006      0.073           0.170
   head                                                         (0.027)          (0.016)       (0.008)       (0.010)       (0.019)           (0.023)       (0.015)       (0.032)     (0.413)         (0.246)
Note. Estimates of program impact on work by children aged 10 to 14 from eligible households. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                   63
Appendix Table 5 . Pantawid program impact on children's participation in economic activities, alternative
specifications
                                                     Mutually exclusive combinations
                                                                      In school Neither in    Worked while
                                             In school In work          and in   school nor   school was in
                                                only        only         work      in work       session
                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)
OLS with controls:                             -0.009      -0.013      0.059**    -0.037**       0.047**
                                              (0.028)      (0.011)     (0.025)      (0.014)       (0.021)
Probit controlling only for municipality:      -0.004      -0.008       0.047     -0.032**        0.029
                                              (0.034)      (0.010)     (0.029)      (0.015)       (0.021)
Logit controlling only for municipality:       -0.007      -0.008       0.050*    -0.032**        0.030
                                              (0.034)      (0.009)     (0.027)      (0.014)       (0.019)
OLS excluding children not directly            -0.006      -0.009       0.048*    -0.033**         0.031
related to household head                     (0.032)      (0.011)     (0.028)      (0.015)       (0.023)
Note. Estimates of program impact on mutually exclusive combinations of work in the 12 months prior to the
interview and current school attendance for children aged 10 to 14 from eligible households. Here, school
refers to current school attendance and work refers to any work in the past 12 months. Standard errors are
clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                64
Appendix Table 6. Heterogeneity of Pantawid program impact on schooling and work by household composition
                                                             Education               Work past 12 months

                                                                                                            Work for
                                                                              Attends                      pay, outside
                                                              Attends        regularly       Any work     own houshold
                                                                (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
Panel A: Effects on older siblings (15-17) of children in
core sample (10-14) from eligible households
    OLS without controls:                                       -0.025         0.031            0.077        0.107***
                                                               (0.048)        (0.051)          (0.047)        (0.039)
Additional information:
   Number of observations                                        474           461               395           395
   Observations in control group                                 234           224               189           189
   Observations in treatment group                               240           237               206           206

    Mean in control group
                                                                0.632         0.563             0.323         0.175
   Mean in treatment group                                      0.600         0.591             0.417         0.291
Panel B: Effects on children (10-17) from ineligible
households
   OLS without controls:                                        0.008          0.015            0.033         -0.001
                                                               (0.019)        (0.026)          (0.024)       (0.010)
Additional information:
   Number of observations                                       1,277          1,237            1,162         1,162

    Observations in control group                                663           633               607           607

     Observations in treatment group                              614            604             555            555
     Mean in control group                                       0.861          0.815           0.216          0.120
     Mean in treatment group                                     0.857          0.820           0.247          0.132
 Note. Estimates of program impact on education and work outcomes by gender for children aged 10 to 14 from
eligible households. Etimates include village and household level controls described in Appendix 2. Standard errors are
clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                       65
Appendix Table 7 . Pantawid program impact on the local economy
                                                                                             Ineligible households with children aged 6 to 14
                                                                  Household level, past 12 months. Any
                                             Village level          household members involved in:                                Adult level, past 7 days
                                                                                                                                                                    Self-
                                                                                                                                                                 employed,
                                                                                                                                                                employer, or
                                                                                                                                 Worked for                      worked on
                                                                                                                                   private                       household
                                            Wages of adult                      Non-farm                                        household or     Worked for       farm or
                                            male laborers        Farming        business         Fishing          Worked        establishment    government       business
                                                 (1)               (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)               (6)             (7)             (8)
OLS only controlling for municipality and
                                                9.306              0.020          -0.015         -0.032            -0.010           0.001           0.003          -0.016
child age.
                                            (6.422)             (0.030)         (0.016)           (0.024)         (0.013)          (0.014)          (0.010)        (0.011)
Additional information:
   Number of observations                     127                2,323           2,322             2,323           5,403            5,403            5,403          5,403
   Observations in control group               62                1182            1180              1181            2802             2802              2802           2802
   Observations in treatment group             65                1141            1142              1142            2601             2601              2601           2601
   Mean in control group                      142                0.615           0.131             0.110           0.620            0.257            0.061          0.108
   Mean in treatment group                    150                0.648           0.114             0.074           0.611            7.000            0.065          0.090
Note. Estimates of program impact on household and adult level economic activities in ineligible households. Standard errors are clustered at the village level *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                66
Appendix Table 8 . Pantawid program impact on household composition
                                                                                 Female            Male       Children
                                                 Household     Dependency      dependency      dependency     Aged 0-
                                                   Size            Ratio          Ratio            Ratio         14
                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)         (5)
Treated                                            0.120           0.107          0.132           0.233*       0.102
                                                  (0.163)        (0.065)         (0.131)         (0.129)      (0.130)
After                                            0.905***       -0.150***       -0.308***       -0.185***     0.055**
                                                  (0.092)        (0.028)         (0.062)         (0.055)      (0.024)
Treated*After                                     -0.040          -0.001          0.084           -0.016       0.030
                                                  (0.116)        (0.043)         (0.083)         (0.086)      (0.033)
Additional information
    Number of observations                              664             664            664            664          664
    Observations in control group                       336             336            336            336          336
    Observations in treatment group                     328             328            328            328          328
    Mean in control group                              6.193          1.180           2.460          2.350        3.005
    Mean in treatment group                            6.313          1.287           2.592          2.582        3.107
Note. Estimates of program impact on composition of households with 10-14 year olds in study sample Standard errors
are clustered at the village level. OLS only controlling for municipality and child age. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                       67
Appendix Table 9. The Effect of Remoteness Child on Work and Schooling
                                                               Mutually exclusive combinations
                                             Control Households                              Treated Households
                                                        In school Neither in                           In school Neither in
                                  In school In work       and in   school nor In school In work          and in  school nor
                                     only       only      work       in work       only        only      work     in work


Travel time to nearest market         -0.002***        0.000   0.002*** -0.000***       -0.003**     0.000**     0.003**       -0.000
                                        (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.001)      (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.000)
      Number of observations            530          530         530         531         567          567         567         567
Travel fare to nearest market             -0.001       0.000      0.001*      -0.000      0.001*       -0.000    -0.001**       0.000
                                            (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
       Number of observations               602         602         602       602          616         616         616         616
Note. Estimates of travel time and travel costs to nearest market on the school attendance and work for 10-14 year old children from
eligible households. Here, school refers to current school attendance and work refers to any work in the past 12 months. Standard
errors are clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                      68
Appendix Table 10. The Effects of Deworming on Child Work-for-Pay on Eligible Children in Control Areas
                                                                                                   Pay and location                                 Types of occupations                Days worked
                                                                                                              Work                                                                               Days
                                                                                    Work for                 without             Work                      Farmers,                           worked for
                                                                                       pay,      Work for      pay,             without       Laborers     forestry                               pay,
                                                                                      outside pay, inside outside             pay, inside        and       workers,                             outside
                                                                    Any work           own         own         own               own          unskilled       and                     Days       own
                                                          Any work    for pay        houshold houshold houshold                houshold       workers     fishermen     Other        worked    houshold
                                                              (1)       (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)               (6)            (7)          (8)        (9)          (10)       (11)
Child was offered deworming pills during last school year   -0.025    -0.043          -0.014      -0.032      -0.002            -0.003          0.021       -0.025     -0.014        -1.458     -1.018
                                                           (0.050)    (0.041)         (0.024)     (0.029)    (0.032)            (0.019)        (0.027)      (0.044)    (0.011)       (1.747)    (0.779)
Additional information:
Number of observations                                              546        546            546        546         546         546           546          546          546            544         546
Observations not offered deworming                                  133        133            133        133         133         133           133          133          133            133         133
Observations offered deworming                                      413        413            413        413         413         413           413          413          413            411         413
Mean in group not offered deworming                                0.241      0.165          0.060      0.105       0.105       0.038         0.075        0.173       0.015           6.083       1.564
Mean in group offered deworming                                    0.167      0.092          0.027      0.063       0.075       0.034         0.077        0.109       0.002           3.314       0.475
Note. Estimates of 10-14 year old children being offered deworming at school in the past 12 months on any work in the past 12 months. OLS only controlling for municipality and child age. Standard errors
are clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                             69
Appendix Table 11a. Balance of child characteristics in Pantawid data
                                                    Study sample                                        All eligible households                      All households in survey sample
                                                                                                                                                                            Neither
                                                                                                                                                                             father
                                                                                                                                                                               nor
                                                                       Neither                                                Neither                                       mother
                                                                      father nor                                             father nor                                     lives in
                                                                    mother lives                                           mother lives                                    househol
                                            Age           Male      in household                  Age           Male       in household                 Age       Male          d
                                                                                                   (1)           (2)             (3)                     (1)       (2)         (3)
OLS without controls:                       0.043        -0.011         0.007                     0.005         0.006           0.012                  0.017     0.013       0.015
                                           (0.059)       (0.030)       (0.013)                   (0.064)       (0.028)         (0.011)                (0.051) (0.019) (0.014)
Additional information:
    Number of observations                    1,264           1,264        1,264                     1,310        1,310         1,310                     2,184    2,184      2,184
    Observations in control group              627             627          627                       656          656           656                      1,114    1,114      1,114
    Observations in treatment group            637             637          637                       654          654           654                      1,070    1,070      1,070
    Mean in control group                    11.968           0.537        0.040                    11.997        0.529         0.029                    11.955    0.521      0.094
    Mean in treatment group                  12.013           0.526        0.047                    12.002        0.535         0.041                    11.972    0.535      0.109
Note. Estimated differences in individual covariates measured in the endline survey for children aged 10-14 from eligible households. Estimates based on OLS regressions without
controls. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                        70
Appendix table 11b. Balance of household characteristics in Pantawid data
                                                                                                                                                        Number
                                                                 Household Household Household                       Total                                 of          Children,
                                                      Household belongs to head never engaged in                   number of    Number of Number of children           10-14,
                                                       head is   indigenous  attended agricultural                 household     children children aged aged 15        enrolled
                                         Wealth index  muslim   people group  school   activities                  members      aged 0 to 5   6 to 14    to 17         in school
                                             (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)                         (6)          (7)          (8)       (9)              (10)
Panel A: OLS without controls on study
                                             -0.035         0.075         0.004         0.004         0.012          0.115         0.009         0.087       -0.030     -0.031
sample:
                                            (0.035)        (0.054)       (0.053)       (0.027)       (0.048)        (0.152)       (0.071)       (0.088)      (0.051)    (0.023)
Additional information:
     Number of observations                   796            833           833           791           796            796           796           796          796        796
     Observations in control group            400            422           422           397           400            400           400           400          400        400
     Observations in treatment group          396            411           411           394           396            396           396           396          396        396
     Mean in control group                   9.036          0.070         0.149         0.091         0.698          6.420         0.898         2.323        0.553      0.830
     Mean in treatment group                 9.001          0.148         0.153         0.096         0.710          6.535         0.907         2.409        0.523      0.785
Panel B: OLS without controls on all
                                             -0.023         0.071         -0.017        -0.000        0.044         -0.003         0.056         -0.016      -0.044     -0.044
eligible households:
                                            (0.029)        (0.051)       (0.058)       (0.021)       (0.046)        (0.139)       (0.058)       (0.086)      (0.037)    (0.046)
Additional information:
    Number of observations                   1,330          1,167         1,167         1,325         1,330          1,330         1,330         1,330        1,330      1,330
    Observations in control group             670            585           585           667           670            670           670           670          670        670
    Observations in treatment group           660            582           582           658           660            660           660           660          660        660
    Mean in control group                    9.093          0.072         0.149         0.078         0.685          5.828         0.906         1.743        0.475      0.830
    Mean in treatment group                  9.071          0.143         0.137         0.078         0.729          5.826         0.962         1.727        0.430      0.785
Panel C: OLS without controls on all
                                             -0.017         0.062         -0.005        0.004         0.028         -0.102         0.017         -0.031      -0.029     -0.031
households in baseline:
                                               (0.031)      (0.042)        (0.046)      (0.017)      (0.036)          (0.088)       (0.028)        (0.044)    (0.020) (0.023)
Additional information:
    Number of observations                      3,595         2,350         2,350        3,575        3,595            3,595         3,595          3,595      3,595       3,595
    Observations in control group               1,817         1,191         1,191        1,806        1,817            1,817         1,817          1,817      1,817       1,817
    Observations in treatment group             1,778         1,159         1,159        1,769        1,778            1,778         1,778          1,778      1,778       1,778
    Mean in control group                       9.523        0.055          0.142        0.086        0.565            4.489         0.482          0.966      0.361       0.830
    Mean in treatment group                     9.506        0.117          0.137        0.090        0.593            4.388         0.498          0.936      0.332       0.785
Note. Estimated differences in household covariates across treatment and control villages. Estimates based on OLS regressions without controls. All variables come from
the baseline measurements taken to determine household eligibility for the transfer program with two exceptions: religion of the household head and household members
belonging to an indigenous group, which come from the endline survey. The dwelling and asset index is the first principal component of the following dwelling characteristics:
electricity, strong roof, strong walls, dwelling owned by the household, the household has no access to toilet facilities, the household's main source of water is located in the
household's own dwelling or plot, and ownership of the following assets: TV, video, stereo, refridgerator, washing machine, air conditioning, living room furniture set, dining
room furniture set, car, phone, PC, microwave, and motorcycle. Standard errors are clustered at the barangay level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                              71
Appendix Table 11d. Balance of pre-intervention child work measures, recall data for children aged 10 to 14 at endline interview in Pantawid data
                                                                    2009                                                                2008                                                    2007
                                                                         Farmers,                                                                                                                   Farmers,
                                                                         forestry                                                             Farmers,                                 Laborers forestry
                                                         Laborers and workers,                                                  Laborers      forestry                                     and      workers,
                                                           unskilled        and                                               and unskilled workers, and                       Any      unskilled       and
                                            Any work       workers      fishermen      Other                    Any work        workers      fishermen     Other               work     workers fishermen Other
                                                (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)                        (5)            (6)           (7)        (8)                 (9)       (10)         (11)      (12)
OLS with controls:                            -0.011         -0.022        0.011       -0.003                     -0.012         -0.014         0.003     -0.002              -0.016     -0.015       -0.000    -0.002
                                             (0.032)        (0.026)       (0.016)     (0.002)                     (0.016)        (0.013)       (0.009)    (0.002)             (0.014) (0.012)        (0.007)    (0.002)
Additional information:
    Number of observations                     1,210          1,210        1,210        1,210                      1,164          1,164         1,164      1,164               1,165      1,165        1,165     1,165
    Observations in control group               603            603          603          603                        580            580           580        580                 582        582          582       582
    Observations in treatment group             607            607          607          607                        584            584           584        584                 583        583          583       583
    Mean in control group                      0.124         0.103         0.033       0.003                       0.053          0.043         0.016      0.002               0.043      0.034       0.012      0.002
    Mean in treatment group                    0.114         0.081         0.044       0.000                       0.041          0.029         0.019      0.000               0.027      0.019       0.012      0.000
Note. Estimated differences in recall data between the treatment and the control villages for children aged 10-14 from eligible households. Estimates based on OLS regressions without controls. Standard errors are
clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                     72
Appendix Table 11c. Balance of village characteristics in
Pantawid data
                                           Distance to Distance to
                                             nearest       nearest
                                              public        public
                                             primary      secondary
                                           school from school from
                                          town hall > 2 town hall > 2
                                               Km            Km
                                                (1)          (2)
OLS without controls:                         0.067         0.083
                                             (0.051)       (0.106)
Additional information:
    Number of observations                     120           86
    Observations in control group               60           41
    Observations in treatment group             60           45
    Mean in control group                     0.050         0.561
    Mean in treatment group                   0.117         0.644
Note. Estimated differences in village level covariates taken from
the endline questionnaire. Estimates based on OLS regressions
without controls. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     73
Appendix Table 12. Determinants of mutually exclusive combinations of work and school for children from Pantawid control communities
                                                                            All households                            Eligible households only
                                                                                     In school Neither                              In school Neither in
                                                               In school In work       and in in school In school In work and in                 school
                                                                  only       only      work       nor in        only        only        work     nor in
Child aged 10                                                  0.483*** -0.381*** -0.064* -0.039             1.237*** -1.760*** 0.463*** 0.060
                                                                (0.051)    (0.063) (0.038) (0.027)            (0.246)     (0.344) (0.126) (0.068)
Child aged 11                                                  0.161*** -0.044*** -0.068** -0.049** 0.116*** -0.060** -0.015 -0.042*
                                                                (0.030)    (0.014) (0.028) (0.019)            (0.043)     (0.023) (0.040) (0.024)
Child aged 12                                                  0.084*** -0.038*** -0.015          -0.031       0.048     -0.037*       0.041    -0.052*
                                                                (0.028)    (0.013) (0.021) (0.020)            (0.037)     (0.019) (0.027) (0.031)
Child aged 13                                                  0.097*** -0.032** -0.016 -0.048**               0.050     -0.035*       0.035    -0.050*
                                                                (0.027)    (0.013) (0.023) (0.020)            (0.035)     (0.020) (0.031) (0.027)
Male                                                          -0.096*** 0.024** 0.039* 0.033** -0.084*** 0.022                         0.037     0.025
                                                                (0.020)    (0.010) (0.021) (0.015)            (0.027)     (0.015) (0.026) (0.021)
Neither biological mother nor biological father lives in the     0.039      -0.017    -0.048       0.026     1.006*** -1.686*** 0.508*** 0.171*
household                                                       (0.043)    (0.028) (0.043) (0.024)            (0.225)     (0.317) (0.141) (0.092)
Wealth index                                                   0.032*** -0.012** -0.011* -0.010                0.024       -0.015      0.001     -0.009
                                                                (0.008)    (0.005) (0.006) (0.006)            (0.016)     (0.010) (0.012) (0.010)
Distance to nearest public primary school from town hall
                                                                -0.130*     0.042      0.033      0.055* -0.264*** 0.049               0.109 0.106***
> 2 Km
                                                                (0.068)    (0.033) (0.064) (0.028)            (0.086)     (0.052) (0.080) (0.041)
Distance to nearest public secondary school from town
                                                                 0.019      0.018     -0.019      -0.017       0.055       0.020       -0.035    -0.039
hall > 2 Km
                                                                (0.033)    (0.015) (0.026) (0.026)            (0.048)     (0.024) (0.038) (0.038)
Household head is muslim                                        0.177**     -0.044 -0.170** 0.037            0.364*** -0.061          -0.272*    -0.030
                                                                (0.071)    (0.033) (0.078) (0.035)            (0.132)     (0.053) (0.151) (0.051)
Household belongs to indigenous people group                     0.030      -0.011     0.011      -0.030       -0.006      -0.021      0.047     -0.020
                                                                (0.043)    (0.011) (0.043) (0.021)            (0.053)     (0.019) (0.060) (0.024)
Household head never attended school                            -0.104*     0.022     -0.012 0.094*** -0.161**             0.035       0.005 0.121***
                                                                (0.054)    (0.018) (0.047) (0.027)            (0.077)     (0.028) (0.074) (0.038)
Household engaged in agricultural activities                  -0.078*** 0.028** 0.045*             0.005       -0.070 0.047**          0.039     -0.016
                                                                (0.030)    (0.012) (0.025) (0.019)            (0.044)     (0.020) (0.041) (0.024)
Total number of household members                                -0.001     0.006*    -0.003      -0.003       -0.002 0.011**          0.001     -0.010
                                                                (0.010)    (0.004) (0.009) (0.006)            (0.016)     (0.005) (0.013) (0.011)
Number of children aged 0 to 5                                   -0.016    0.016** -0.012          0.012       -0.036 0.024** -0.016             0.028
                                                                (0.030)    (0.007) (0.025) (0.013)            (0.039)     (0.012) (0.030) (0.019)
Number of children aged 6 to 14                                  -0.003     -0.002     0.000       0.005       -0.014      -0.005      0.012     0.007
                                                                (0.015)    (0.004) (0.013) (0.009)            (0.019)     (0.005) (0.018) (0.014)
Number of children aged 15 to 17                                 0.015     -0.016*    -0.014       0.015       0.018     -0.024*       -0.019    0.025
                                                                (0.026)    (0.009) (0.019) (0.016)            (0.037)     (0.013) (0.028) (0.026)
Additional information:
     Number of observations                                                      1032                                             627
Note. Coefficients represent marginal effects estimated on the basis of a multinomial logit regression. Standard errors are clustered at the village
level. The estimation sample includes children aged 10 to 14 from all households, those eligible and those ineligible. The estimated specification
includes indicator variables for municipalities and for missing observations. The coefficients for these indicator variables are not displayed in the
table *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                          74
