                                                           WPS8096


Policy Research Working Paper                             8096




              Rural Non-Farm Employment
                 and Household Welfare
                         Evidence from Malawi

                            Guigonan Serge Adjognon
                           Saweda Lenis Liverpool-Tasie
                              Alejandro de la Fuente
                                   Rui Benfica




Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8096


  Abstract
 This paper uses nationally representative panel data and                           methods, dealing effectively with time invariant hetero-
 a combination of econometric approaches, to explore                                geneity, coupled with geographical covariate adjustments,
 linkages between rural non-farm activities (wage and                               controlling for time varying differences in local market con-
 self-employment) and household welfare in rural Malawi.                            ditions and employment opportunities. The results suggest
 The paper analyzes the average treatment effects and distri-                       that non-farm wage employment and non-farm self-em-
 butional effects on participants’ welfare indicators, such as                      ployment are welfare improving and poverty reducing.
 households’ per capita consumption expenditures. Then it                           However, households at the lower tail of the wealth distri-
 investigates the effects of non-farm activities on the use of                      bution benefit significantly less from participation than the
 agricultural inputs, one channel through which non-farm                            wealthiest. Although the results support the promotion of
 employment might improve the welfare of rural households.                          the rural non-farm economy for poverty reduction purposes,
 Although participation in non-farm activities is not ran-                          they indicate that targeted interventions that improve poor
 domly assigned in the data, the identification strategy relies                     households’ access to high-return non-farm opportunities
 on fixed effects and correlated random effects estimation                          are likely to lead to bigger successes in curbing rural poverty.



  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to
  provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
  Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at
  gadjognon@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    Rural Non-Farm Employment and Household Welfare: Evidence from Malawi


  Guigonan Serge Adjognon1, Saweda Lenis Liverpool-Tasie2, Alejandro de la Fuente1,
                                  Rui Benfica3
                               1
                              The World Bank Group (WBG)
                           2
                            Michigan State University (MSU)
               3
                 International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)




Keywords: Poverty, Rural Non-Farm Employment, Household Enterprises, Sub Saharan
Africa, Malawi.

JEL Classification: J43, J71, O13, O55, Q12



Acknowledgements: This paper builds on and expands analysis done for the Malawi
Poverty Assessment report (World Bank, 2016). The authors wish to thank comments
received throughout the review process of the Poverty Assessment. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions of this paper are those of the authors and should not be
attributed to the World Bank Group or its member countries.
       1.       Introduction

        The contribution of non-farm activities (such as non-farm wage employment and non-farm
enterprises) to household income in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) is substantial and has increased
over time (Haggblade et al., 2010, Start, 2001, Lanjouw and Lanjouw, 2001, Lanjouw and Shariff,
2004, Reardon et al., 1998). Recent estimates indicate that 44 percent of rural African households
(on average) participate in non-farm wage employment or self-employment. The average income
share from non-farm sources is 23%, with an overall positive correlation between diversification
and GDP per capita (Davis et al., 2014). Consequently, rural non-farm employment (RNFE) has
become an essential part of discussions on poverty reduction in rural Africa, being a potential
pathway out of poverty for many.
        Despite the extent and growth in importance of the RNFE in SSA, there are still limited
empirical analyses of the welfare effects of the subsector and how this varies across different kinds
of rural households. Though evidence of positive correlations between RNFE participation and
income exists, many studies are outdated while an ongoing debate still questions whether RNFE
improves welfare or if indeed it is the wealthy who are able to engage in RNFE. Consequently,
this paper uses nationally representative data and a combination of empirical approaches to
examine links between RNFE participation and welfare. We explore a key mechanism through
which welfare effects of RNFE are likely to operate in rural SSA and the heterogeneity of such
effects across different types of rural households.
        The paper significantly enriches the discussion on RNFE and rural development in SSA in
three main ways. First, we use panel data methods to address time invariant sources of
heterogeneity in the estimation of the welfare effects of non-farm employment participation. Bezu
et al. (2012) also use panel data from Ethiopia to show positive linkages between RNFE and
consumption expenditure growth. But most of the remaining literature on the subject uses cross
sectional data, leaving open the important policy question of whether non-farm employment is
really a route out of poverty for the millions of poor in rural Africa (Owusu et al., 2011, Ackah,
2013).1 Using a rich nationally representative panel data set from Malawi,2 we are able to use panel
data estimation techniques to at least address the endogeneity of RNFE participation due to time
invariant unobserved characteristics, such as innate ability. We include a rich set of household and
geographical control variables to capture potential time varying confounding factors such as
differences in labor market conditions.
        Second, this paper goes beyond average effects and explores the heterogeneous effects of
RNFE participation. Although the average treatment effects are useful measures of the link
between participation in non-farm employment and welfare outcomes, they often provide an
incomplete view of the relationship. Numerous studies on the determinants of household
participation in non-farm activities (over the past two decades) have found evidence of entry
barriers for marginalized socioeconomic groups such as women or the poor (Abdulai and
CroleRees, 2001, Woldenhanna and Oskam, 2001, Barrett et al., 2001a, Smith et al., 2001,
Lanjouw et al., 2001, Reardon et al., 2000). The marginalized groups are either totally excluded
or restricted to the least lucrative non-farm activities, despite their relatively greater need for


1 Kijima et al. (2006) would be another exception as they used panel data collected from 894
rural Ugandan households in 2003 and 2005; but they focused more on off-farm labor supply and
its determinants, rather than welfare effects.
2 https://www.malawi.gov.mw



                                                                                                   2
diversification. These barriers that restrict the participation of marginalized groups in RNFE imply
that the size of the welfare effects of participation in non-farm activities might be lower for
marginalized groups compared to the more privileged groups with access to high return
opportunities. Despite the widely recognized existence of entry barriers, studies that investigate
the distributional effects of RNFE participation at different points of the wealth distribution are
still very few. Such studies have very important implications in terms of informing the likely
policies (and their targeting) that would be effective in maximizing potential benefits of RNFE for
rural households. To explore such heterogeneity, Bezu et al. (2012) used subgroup analysis,
comparing average consumption growth effects among the poor to the average effects among the
non-poor. This paper goes a step further by using a quantile regression (QR) approach to test for
heterogeneous welfare effects of RNFE participation on household consumption expenditure at
different points of the conditional distribution of household consumption expenditure (Cameron
and Trivedi, 2010). Applying the QR approach within a panel framework, we are able to still
control for time invariant unobservable factors correlated with welfare and participation in RNFE.
         Third, this paper revisits the relationship between RNFE participation and agricultural
investments, given that rural households are likely to at least partially be involved in agriculture.
In addition to the direct effects of income for consumption that RNFE provides for households,
RNFE can also serve as a source of cash for investment in agriculture (Adjognon et al., 2016,
Oseni and Winters, 2009), or rather take resources (such as family labor) away from agricultural
activities (Smale et al., 2016). In rural Malawi, more than 90 percent of households are involved
in agricultural crop production activities, which provide about 55 percent of total household
income on average. Thus, we go a step further and explore if participation in RNFE has positive
(or negative) effects on investments in agricultural inputs. Apart from Holden et al. (2004) who
investigated the effects of off-farm income on household welfare and agricultural production,
most previous studies have focused either solely on the effect of RNFE on agricultural investments
(Oseni and Winters, 2009, Smale et al., 2016) or welfare directly (Ackah, 2013, Owusu et al.,
2011, Matsumoto et al., 2006). We explore both in the context of Malawi and go a step beyond
Holden et al. (2004) to consider the heterogeneous welfare effect of RNFE for different kinds of
rural households.
         We find that participation in RNFE is associated with higher household per capita
consumption expenditure. However, the effects are larger for those at the top of the welfare
distribution compared to those at the bottom. Moreover, we find that farm households involved in
RNFE appear more likely to invest in inputs purchases.
         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data while section 3
discusses the econometric and empirical framework used for our analyses. Section 4 presents and
discusses the study results. Section 5 concludes with suggestions for policy consideration and
future research.

       2.      Data sources and definition of key concepts

       Study context

       This study was conducted in Malawi, a small country located in eastern Africa. Malawi is
one of the poorest countries in the world, with an estimated 71 percent of its population living
below $1.90 per day of purchasing power parity in 2010 (World Bank, 2016). It was ranked 173
of 188 countries by the 2015 United Nations Human Development Index (HDI). According to the



                                                                                                   3
2016 World Development Indicators (WDI), the country had a GNI per capita of US$350 in 2015.
It has a relatively young and growing population (17.2 million people in 2015); and is one of the
most densely populated countries in the world, with 177 people per sq. km of land area. Similar to
most poor countries, the Malawian economy relies primarily on the agricultural sector which
contributes over 30 percent of its GDP and employs 85 percent of its workforce (World Bank,
2016). Given the low return from agriculture and the persistent poverty facing the farm households,
policy makers in Malawi would find it useful to know whether facilitating households’ movement
into new, more productive, and more lucrative activities outside agriculture is a potential way for
reducing poverty in Malawi.

       Data sources

This study uses the panel component of the Malawi Third Integrated Households Survey (IHS3)
and the Integrated Household Panel Survey (IHPS) implemented through a joint effort of the
Government of Malawi through the National Statistical Office (NSO; www.nso.malawi.net), and
the World Bank Living Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture
(LSMS-ISA) initiative. These are multi-topic surveys with detailed information about households’
characteristics, activities and livelihood, agricultural practices and community-level information.
The full balanced panel sample includes 3,104 households successfully tracked and interviewed in
both IHS3 in 2010 and IHPS in 2013. The sample frame includes all three geographical regions of
Malawi: North, Centre and South. The survey stratified the country into rural and urban strata. The
urban stratum includes the four major urban areas: Lilongwe, Blantyre, Mzuzu, and the
Municipality of Zomba. All other areas including Bomas are considered as rural areas.
        In this study, we are interested in livelihood diversification strategies among rural
population. Therefore, our analysis uses only the rural subsample, which represents about 70
percent of the sample (2,766 households). The IHPS data are representative at the national,
urban/rural and regional levels.
        We also use auxiliary data such as the consumption aggregates developed by the World
Bank poverty and LSMS teams for poverty analysis in Malawi.3 The use of these pre-generated
variables allows us to compare and link our analyses to other reports and studies based on the
publicly available LSMS data, thereby contributing coherently to the large discussion about
livelihoods in rural Malawi, and Africa more generally.



       Definition of main concepts

        As suggested by Barrett et al. (2001b), it is important to distinguish between various
terminologies such as “off-farm”, “non-agricultural” , and “non-farm” employment, often used
synonymously in the literature to describe the RNFE. Using an adaptation of the sectoral
classification in Barrett et al. (2011),4 we define non-farm employment in this paper to mean, all


3
  The consumption aggregates data as well as a detailed discussion on how each component is
calculated are in the dissemination documentation available for download along with the
consumption aggregate data from the LSMS website.
4
  Barrett et al. (2011) exclude completely the primary sector from non-farm employments.

                                                                                                 4
activities outside of crop and livestock production. Agricultural wage employment such as ganyu
wage5 is thus excluded from our non-farm employment definition. However, we include other
activities of the primary sector such as forestry, hunting, fishing, mining and quarrying, etc. The
main reason for excluding agricultural wage employment from our analysis is because it is a
special category of employment that attracts generally the poorest, and has been shown to be of
limited significance in household income (e.g. Matsumoto et al. (2006) in Eastern Africa).
Following the functional classification, we distinguish between non-farm wage (involving a wage
or salary contract) and non-farm self-employment (entrepreneurial activity).
        In line with our definition and classification of RNFE, we consider a household to be
participating in non-farm wage employment if at least one member of the household holds or held
a non-agricultural job involving a wage or salary contract, in the 12-month period prior to the
survey. For non-farm self-employment, participation implies at least one member of the household
has owned a business or worked on their own-account during the 12-month period prior to the
survey.6 Note that by this definition we do not require the non-farm activity to be the primary
activity of the household members. As mentioned by Winters et al. (2009), this avoids
underreporting participation rates. However, our definition is not equivalent to the definition used
in Winters et al, (2009) as we do not include transfers and remittances, and we keep non-farm
wage employment and self-employment separate throughout our analyses. We lay out, in the later
section of this paper, the main reasons for keeping both types of non-farm employment separate.

       3.       Conceptual framework and empirical strategy

       Participation in rural non-farm activities: Push and pull factors

         Observed patterns of participation in non-farm activities, such as wage employment and
self-employment result from the combination of “pull” and “push” factors. Push factors relate to
the need for ex-ante income smoothing strategies in the presence of binding financial constraints
and limited risk mitigating solutions. This includes cases where households diversify in order to
satisfy the need for cash to finance agricultural activities in the absence of rural financial services,
or the need to feed a large household on a limited amount of land in case of crop failure. On the
other hand, pull factors relate the desire by economically rational households to take advantage of
opportunities generated by the transformation of the rural economy as a whole. Increased
agricultural productivity from the use of modern production techniques, coupled with diminishing
marginal return of labor in agricultural use, free labor for use in more productive non-farm
alternatives. Also, increased urbanization, and income rise as part of the structural transformation
underway in most developing countries, generates demand for non-agricultural goods and services,
thereby offering remunerative opportunities in the non-agricultural sector for the surplus labor
squeezed out from the agricultural sector (Barrett et al., 2001b, Haggblade et al., 2010). While in


5
  Ganyu labor is short-term labor hired on a daily or other short-term basis. Most commonly,
piecework weeding or ridging on the fields of other smallholders or on agricultural estates.
6
  We have preferred using the binary participation variable instead of continuous participation
variable (such as household income from non-farm activities, or number of hours spent in non-
farm activities) mainly because the continuous forms are more prone to measurement errors.
Also the household income from participation is available only for the participating households.
Assuming zero for the non-participants is likely to lead to biases.

                                                                                                      5
poor agrarian economies, and for poor households, push factors might trigger the need for
diversification (Bardhan and Udry, 1999), resource constraints and entry barriers faced by the poor
often restrict their participation in high-return non-farm activities (Bezu and Barrett, 2012).
Whether it is by necessity or by opportunity, it is a widely held view that participation in non-farm
activities is likely to have a positive effect on the welfare of a participant through the above
described channels (Owusu et al., 2011, Ackah, 2013, Oseni and Winters, 2009), though strong
empirical evidence of this seems to still be lacking in the currently available literature. However,
because poor and non-poor may have differing motives for participating in RNFE (opportunity
versus necessity), their benefits from participation are also likely to differ.
        In this paper, we allow for non-farm wage employment and non-farm self-employment to
affect household welfare differently. Assets that facilitate engagement in either type of non-farm
employment, the timing of their availability, the returns from participation, and the costs imposed
on participating households are likely to be different. For example, non-farm self-employment
often comes from businesses owned and managed by the household and therefore may offer more
flexibility for the household to manage them in parallel with other activities such as agricultural
activities without creating too much competition for labor. Wage employment on the other hand
may imply more competition with agricultural activities due to a less flexible schedule, but does
not require households to make an upfront capital investment. While the data set does not allow
us to fully investigate those differences between non-farm wage employment and non-farm self-
employment, we still consider it important to maintain the separation between them in our
analyses.
        Following Bardhan and Udry (1999), adapted by Abdulai and CroleRees (2001) we
formalize households’ participation in non-farm self-employment and wage employment by
assuming that households allocate resources such as time and land across various activities
including farm and non-farm activities. Households choose consumption               to maximize the
following lifetime expected utility function Max       = ∑               ( ) subject to the following
constraints:

Inter temporal budget constraint:     = ( + )(             −      +∑        (   ,   ; ))          (1)
Time endowment constraint:        ∑     ≤                                                         (2)
Non-negativity constraint:          ≥ , k=1…K                                                     (3)

Where T is life expectancy, and is the discount factor.           is the amount of labor allocated to
activity k at time t. ( , ; ) is the technology constraint that characterizes the returns from
investing       units of labor in alternative k. X captures household’s individual and location
characteristics that influence the returns to labor use in each of the K uses.
        The first-order conditions for the above maximization problem imply that households
allocate labor between K activities in order to equate the marginal utility of allocating one unit of
labor to each of them. Mathematically this implies:

  [   ( ). ′ (     ,   ; )] =     [   ( ). ′ (        ,    ; )]                                  (4)

where –k refers to activities other than k. The household labor allocation decision to activity k
takes into account the expected return from that activity, and the maximum expected returns from
all the other possible activities. If for any activity, the household’s endowments in human,
financial, and physical capitals imply a low expected return from that activity compared to the


                                                                                                   6
others, then no labor would be allocated to that activity. This implies that low expected returns
from participation in non-farm employment might justify, at least partly, the limited participation
observed for the poor relative to the non-poor. Even though, for the poorest, expected marginal
utility from investing labor in agriculture is low given their land constraint and limited access to
other productive agricultural assets, the low expected returns from the best non-farm employment
opportunity they have access to, given their resources, may still be very low. This illustrates why
econometric estimations of the impacts of non-farm employment participation needs to take
seriously the endogeneity of the participation decision.
         A similar reasoning may apply when households are allocating labor between non-farm
wage employment and non-farm self-employment. Different types of households’ resources might
matter for the non-farm self-employment compared to wage employment and therefore will affect
households revealed preference for each of them. We investigate empirically, the main factors that
determine households’ participation in non-farm wage employment and non-farm self-
employment in rural Malawi.

          Determinants of participation in non-farm employment

        Consider the following latent variables ∗ which characterize the differential benefit
from participation in an activity k relative to the next best alternative. We drop the subscripts k for
succinctness. As mentioned above, households’ individual and location characteristics play an
important role in determining this differential benefit. We allow for both observable and
unobservable household characteristics to affect this decision. Therefore, the latent variable model
is specified as follows (Green William, 2000, Wooldridge, 2010, Owusu et al., 2011):
  ∗
      = [       +    +        > ]                                                                 (5)

where        is the observed participation decision of a household at time t.        is the vector of
explanatory variables included in the model. Assuming a standard normal distribution for the error
term        yields a Probit model for the participation decision.            captures unobservable
characteristics of the households such as ability, networks and preferences, that may affect their
employment choice and may also be correlated with some explanatory variables such as education.
  is the vector of parameters of interest. The estimation of this model with pooled Ordinary Least
Square (OLS) or Probit or Logit model without taking into account the unobserved parameter
will likely lead to inconsistent estimates due to omitted variables. If this was a linear model, we
could use a fixed effects (FE) approach to get rid of the unobserved time invariant effects. But in
our case, we have non-linear (binary decision) models. The use of the fixed effects method is, thus,
problematic because of the incidental parameters problem (Wooldridge, 2010). Instead we use the
Mundlak (1978) special case of (Chamberlain, 1982) correlated random effect (CRE) to model the
relation between the unobserved time invariant heterogeneity parameter and the explanatory
variables      , and we get the following unobserved effects Probit response function (Green
William, 2000, Wooldridge, 2010):

      (       = |   )=        (       +   )                                                    (6)

  =       +     +    ,    |       ~           ( ,   )                                          (7)
The full model becomes:


                                                                                                        7
       (    = |     ,        )=           (         +        +   ),                             (8)
                             /
with       = /( +        )        ,                     =( , , )

Partial effects of variable xj, from the model above, are defined as:

              (     |    ,   )
       =                         =            . (            +   +    )                        (9)

The parameters of equations (8) and (9) can be consistently and efficiently estimated using random
effects conditional maximum likelihood (or full MLE). However, consistency of the full MLE
relies on the conditional independence assumption, thereby ruling out serial correlation in the error
terms. In our cases, there are reasons to believe that participation in non-farm employment in the
current year is not totally independent from participation in previous years even after controlling
for observable characteristics, creating a violation of the conditional independence assumption. An
alternative approach uses the pooled binary model or partial (pooled) maximum likelihood
estimation. Though such estimator is usually less efficient, it is consistent, even under the violation
of the conditional independence assumption. A more efficient estimation is possible using the
Generalized Estimating Equation (GEE) technique (Liang and Zeger, 1986). This estimator is also
robust to violation of the conditional independence assumption, but panel-robust standard errors
should be used for inference. Given its advantage over the full MLE and pooled probit approaches,
we use mainly the GEE approach to estimate APEs. The GEE estimator is a more efficient version
of the moment based GMM estimator, and is asymptotically equivalent to the Weighted Non
Linear Square (WNLS) estimation approach (See Cameron and Trivedi (2005), p790 for a brief
discussion).
        The main approach described above uses single equations and models separately the
determinants of participation in non-farm self-employment and non-farm wage employment. This
assumes that both decisions are made in complete independence from each other, implying that
the residuals terms in both equations have zero correlation (See Green William (2000), chapter
17.5 for a discussion of multivariate Probit models):

   =                                  ,                          =                                (10)

This does not have to be the case. It is very plausible that farmers make decisions about labor
allocation to various activities simultaneously. In which case, there is some efficiency gain in
estimating simultaneously both non-farm employment equations. The jointness of the decisions
can be justified by the fact that households have a limited amount of labor available, and labor
markets are not fully functional. Alternatively, there are probably common unobserved factors that
affect participation in both non-farm activities. In the same spirit as seemingly unrelated
regressions, a system of binary response equations can be estimated that take into account the
potentially positive correlation between the residuals from both equations. Multivariate probit
models rely on the joint normal distribution of the errors. Maximum likelihood is applied based in
the joint density function.

                     ,           ~                       ,                                       (11)


                                                                                                      8
While this method is expected to yield efficiency gains compared to the single equations, the joint
normality of the residuals from both non-farm employment equations is a very restrictive
assumption; because, joint normality is not always guaranteed even when each marginal
distribution is normally distributed (Wooldridge, 2010). Under joint normality, bivariate
Maximum Likelihood estimator algorithms are available in most statistical packages such as
STATA. When we have several equations, simulation-based methods such as the Geweke–
Hajivassiliou–Keane (GHK) smooth recursive conditioning simulator are recommended to go
around the difficulty of managing a complex likelihood function (Cappellari and Jenkins, 2003).
Because of the potential loss of consistency in case of violation of the joint distributional
assumption, we maintain single equations as our main approach, but we estimate the bivariate
Probit model using traditional bivariate probit Maximum Likelihood as well as the GHK Simulated
Maximum Likelihood for robustness purposes.

          Average treatment effects of participation in RNFE on participants

       The core equation to be estimated, for each outcome of interest in this analysis, takes the
form of the following unobserved effect model:7

      = (      +                            +                             +        +    +     ) (12)

where       is the vector of idiosyncratic errors, and      is a vector of controls. We allow for an
unobservable household heterogeneity effect            (in equation 1) to be correlated with the
explanatory variables in the model. G(.) is a positive function that links the explanatory variables
to the dependent variable Yit. It could be a linear or non-linear function (for example: standard
normal density, or Tobit function) depending on the dependent variable. , k=0, 1, 2, 3 are the
parameters to be estimated. Our estimation approach uses the fixed effects (FE) approach or the
correlated random effects (CRE) approach, as appropriate. Indeed, some of our outcome variables
are better represented using non-linear models (e.g. poverty incidence (1/0), poverty gap (0-1),
input purchase (1/0), value of input purchases (pile up at zero due to corner solution), and therefore
we estimate both the CRE model and the linear FE model and compare results.
         A weakness of both the FE and the CRE approaches is that they only account for time
invariant unobservable heterogeneity. Any remaining time-varying unobservable heterogeneity
might still lead to inconsistent estimates unless they are effectively taken into account using
appropriate instrumental variables. However, instrumental variable methods suffer the difficulty
of finding a good instrument that satisfies both identification and rank conditions (See Wooldridge
2010): (i) they should have no partial effect on the outcome variables and should not be correlated
with other factors that affect the outcomes variable; and (ii) they must be related, either positively
or negatively, to the treatment indicator. Keeping in mind that “the cure may be worse than the
disease” when a weak instrument is used (Baser, 2009), we use the FE and CRE approaches
without instrumental variable, but we include a large set of time varying explanatory variables to
hopefully capture and proxy for as many sources of heterogeneity as possible. In particular we
control for geographical location using dummy variables thereby capturing local market conditions
that may affect both the participation in RNFE and also the welfare outcome of interest.

          Distributional effects of non-farm employment participation: Quantile regression

7
    See the list of outcome variables in table 1.

                                                                                                    9
          Though the average treatment effect is a useful way to summarize the link between
participation in RNFE and welfare outcomes, it may hide a lot of heterogeneity in terms of how
different groups benefit from non-farm employment participation. Quantile regression methods
(Koenker, 2005) can address this limitation by informing about the relationship between non-farm
employment participation and outcome variables at different points of the conditional distribution
of the outcome (Cameron and Trivedi, 2010). As such, QR methods can inform the distributional
effects of engaging in non-farm activities. This is usually overlooked in treatment effects
estimation discussions and seems largely absent in the literature on RNFE and welfare effects.
Distributional effects have very important implications for informing likely effective policies and
the extent to which finer targeting might be necessary to improve effectiveness of policies. Another
advantage of quantile regressions over conditional mean regressions is that the former is robust to
outliers because quantiles are not sensitive to extreme values of the outcome while the mean is.
          For values of q between 0 and 1, let’s define the conditional quantile ( (. )| , ) =
   (.)| , ( ), as the value of outcome Y (HHPCE in our case) that splits the data into the
proportions q below, and 1-q above, where F-1(.) represents the cumulative distribution function
CDF of potential outcome Y(.). As described by Imbens and Wooldridge (2008) as well as
Cameron and Trivedi (2010) we specify the q-th quantile treatment effect as the average difference
between quantiles of the two marginal potential outcome distributions:

           ( )=      ( )|   ( )−   ( )|   ( )                                                     (13)

       Assuming linearity, the following conditional quantile equation is estimated for various
quantile of Household Consumption Expenditure Per Capita (Koenker, 2005):

    (   (. )| , , ) =       +        +          +     (   | , , )                                (14)

where      = +         is the composite error. We use         to represent the vector of treatment
variables (                      ,                        ). Again, we model the unobserved
household time invariant characteristics using the CRE. We then apply pooled quantile regression
to the resulting equation.8 Using a generalized version of the least absolute deviation (LAD)
estimation approach (Wooldridge, 2010, Green William, 2000), we estimate and graphically
present the quantile treatment effects for several quantiles (10th, 20th, 25th, median, 75th, 80th, and
90th) of household per capita consumption expenditures.

        Estimation strategy and description of key variables

       Table 1 presents the description and summary statistics of the main outcome variables
analyzed in this paper, along with the methods used for estimating their equations.

8 While this way of introducing time averages as regressors is a practical way of introducing
CRE into quantile regressions, it is not totally consistent with the unobserved effects quantile
model in equation 12. Because the quantile of a sum is different from the sum of quantiles, the
independence assumption after including time averages of explanatory variable is still restrictive.
We recognize this as a limitation of our estimates. We explore a model without the time averages
to check consistency of the results (Wooldridge, 2010).

                                                                                                    10
        Beyond our two treatment variables describing participation in non-farm wage
employment and non-farm self-employment, the first main outcome variable considered is
household per capita consumption expenditure (HHPCE) as a direct measure of household welfare.
It includes annual aggregate expenditures on food, non-food, durable goods and housing, deflated
by spatial and temporal prices indices to adjust for cost of living differences, and adjusted for
household size. We prefer this consumption-based measure as opposed to its main competitor
(income-based), because consumption is considered less prone to seasonal variations in living
standards, especially in rural areas of developing countries. Deaton and Zaidi (2002) mention that
consumption aggregates, over a relatively short period of time such as annual, offer a practical
advantage over income aggregates by informing more about longer-term living standards. As
indicated in Table 1, average HHPCE over both survey years is 57,750MKW.9 The conditional
expectation model of HHPCE is a linear model that we estimate using the FE approach. We also
estimate the treatment effects on Log HHPCE using the FE, which gives a sense of percentage
effects of our treatment variable, and allows interpretation in relative terms. The conditional
quantile model is also a linear model in which the quantiles of the conditional distribution of
HHPCE are expressed as linear functions of the independent variables (see equation 14). This
model includes the same explanatory variables as in the conditional expectation model, and is
estimated using generalized least absolute deviation (LAD) approach. As suggested by equations
12 and 14, the independent variables in the estimating equations include primarily our two
treatment variables, in addition to which we include the following set of control variables guided
by on the basis of theory and the available literature:
        - household characteristics (such as education, age of head, household composition);
        - household ownership of productive capital (captured by normalized agricultural assets,
            normalized landholdings,10 as well as normalized total livestock unit11);
        - distance to infrastructures (road and markets to capture transaction costs faced by
            households);
        - community level characteristics that may affect productive activities (prices of fertilizer
            in the EA, price of maize in the EA,12 rainfall, temperature, etc.).
We also include a time dummy variable in the equation to account for time specific shocks that
could affect welfare directly, but also affect RNFE participation. In the CRE model, the time
averages of all the explanatory variables are included to capture time invariant unobserved
heterogeneity. In order to reduce remaining unobserved characteristics that might affect our
estimates of the treatment effects, we include a set of 26 dummy variables to capture district


9
  This is equivalent to about 346.5 USD given the prevailing exchange rate (0.006USD/MKW)
during the survey period. See http://www.xe.com.
10
   An alternative specification includes also a dummy variable for landless households. But
adding this variable does not change the results at all because the proportion of landless
represents only 7 percent of the sample. So our reported results exclude this variable purposely.
11
   Households’ wealth and productive capital indices such as wealth index and agricultural assets
index are generated using factor analysis as in FILMER, D. & PRITCHETT, L. H. 2001.
Estimating wealth effects without expenditure data—or tears: An application to educational
enrollments in states of india*. Demography, 38, 115-132. The index was then normalized such
that norm_index = ((index - min(index)) / (max(index)-min(index))).
12
   Fertilizer is a key modern input in agriculture production, and maize is the most popular food
crop grown and consumed in Malawi.

                                                                                                  11
specific factors that may affect welfare but also determine the economic opportunities available in
the area and affect welfare. The description of all these variables, as well as the test of covariates
balancing between treatment and control groups can be found in Appendices 1 through 3. Those
balancing tests indicate significant differences in education, assets endowment, and resource
constraints between participants and non-participants in non-farm wage employment and non-farm
self-employment. We also notice significant differences between the poor and the non-poor in
terms of household covariates (Appendix 4).
         Second, we investigate whether participation in RNFE influences household consumption
expenditure enough to affect poverty status. For the poverty analysis, the class of poverty metrics
proposed by Foster, Greer and Thorbecke (FGT, 1984) is used. Poverty incidence is based on the
HHPCE, relative to the 85,852 MKW (real 2013 prices) local poverty line per person per year in
Malawi. As opposed to the $1.90/day international poverty line, this local poverty line indicates
the cost of maintaining a reference welfare level (here defined as satisfying necessary energy and
nutritional requirements to have a healthy and active life) to a given person, at a given time in the
specific context of Malawi (Ravallion, 1998).13 Household poverty incidence takes value 1 if
household consumption falls below the poverty line, and 0 otherwise. The summary statistics
presented in table 1 indicate that the proportion of rural households with consumption expenditure
below the poverty line is 37 percent over the 2010-13 pooled sample, confirming that poverty is
relatively widespread in rural Malawi.14 The main specification used to explore the effect of the
RNFE on poverty is a CRE Probit model, estimated using the Generalized Estimating Equation
(GEE) approach.15 Poverty gap (defined as the consumption shortfall relative to the poverty line,
as a fraction of the poverty line) takes a value 0 for all non-poor households, creating a censoring
at 0 and a continuous set of values between 0 and 1. The squared poverty gap (sensitive to extreme
poverty) takes continuous values between 0 and 1 with a pile up at zero. On average, the poor in
rural Malawi appear to be about 30 percent short of the poverty line, and the squared poverty gap
is 0.13. We use the CRE fractional Probit approach to estimate responses of both poverty variables
to RNFE participation. As demonstrated by Gallani et al. (2015), Fractional Response Model
(FRM) is preferable since it overcomes the limitations of other approaches for the statistical
analysis of dependent variables that are bounded in nature and present a significant number of
observations at one of the boundary points. For all these three poverty measures, we also estimate
the linear FE model to serve as benchmark for comparison as it requires fewer distributional
assumptions and generally gives reasonable approximation of APEs (Wooldridge, 2010). The
same set of covariates used in the estimation of the HHPCE response model are used for the
poverty analyses.
         Third, we explore effects of RNFE on subjective measures of food security, captured by
self-reported measures of food insecurity and food consumption adequacy (see Table 1). The food


13 More details about this can be found in the LSMS documentation for Malawi.
14
   This refers to the average proportion of poor rural households in the pooled sample. Over the
period 2010 to 2013, the proportion of poor rural households dropped from 40% to 33%. Overall,
the proportion of poor rural people, the rural poverty headcount, fell from 44% in 2010 to 41% in
2013.
15 The GEE approach consistently identifies average partial effects (APE); it is robust to

violation of the conditional independence assumption as opposed to the full maximum likelihood
approach; it is more efficient than pooled Probit approach but clustered robust standard errors
have to be used. (See Wooldridge (2002) for a full discussion.)

                                                                                                   12
insecurity variable is a binary variable taking value one if the household head responded yes to the
question “Did you worry that your household would not have enough food in the past 7 days?”
This is modeled using the CRE Probit approach and estimated using GEE technique. The food
consumption adequacy variable is an ordered response variable describing household food
consumption over the past month on a scale of 1(less than adequate for household needs); to 3 (it
was more than adequate for household needs). It is modeled using the CRE ordered Probit
approach with maximum likelihood estimation approach. The ordered probit model enables us to
account for the ordered nature of the food insecurity measure as well as time invariant unobserved
household characteristics (See Wooldridge 2010 for details about ordered response models). For
both these variables, we also estimate the linear FE for comparison purpose. Again, the same set
of control variables are included in the model as in the HHPCE and poverty equations.
         Finally, we turn our attention to agricultural investments. Several studies in the RNFE
literature have explored agricultural investment as a pathway through which non-farm employment
participation can increase welfare, and concluded a positive effect. For example, Oseni and
Winters (2009) concluded a positive effect of both non-farm wage employment and non-farm self-
employment participation on Nigerian farmers’ agricultural investments (especially labor and
fertilizer). Other studies such as Smale et al. (2016) found negative effects on fertilizer application
(specifically nitrogen application on maize by Kenyan farmers), and concluded that engagement
in the RNFE could be a distraction with trade-offs in labor allocation and farm investments. We
investigate, in the case of Malawi, the effects of non-farm employment on agricultural investments.
We focus on household purchases of fertilizer, and all inputs, as well as area of land cultivated.
The effects of non-farm employment on the binary purchase decisions are first considered with a
CRE Probit model and GEE estimation technique. Then, the effects on the quantity of
inputs/fertilizer purchases per acre of land cultivated are modeled with a CRE Tobit approach and
estimated using partial Maximum Likelihood. The linear FE estimation of partial effects is used
for comparison purposes.

       4.       Results and discussion

   4.1. The Rural Non-Farm Economy in Malawi

        Like many other parts of the developing world, the rural economy in Malawi is
transforming as its economy grows. A sign of such transformation is the increasingly important
place that non-farm activities are occupying for households in rural Malawi. Though, agriculture
remains the main source of income for most households, participation rates in non-farm wage and
self-employment, as well as income shares from those activities, have reached non-negligible
levels. Table 2 shows that the proportion of households earning income from non-farm self-
employment was about 18 percent in 2010, and 27 percent in 2013. Meanwhile, average
households’ income share coming from non-farm self-employment was estimated at about 7
percent and 11 percent in 2010 and 2013 respectively. As for non-farm wage employment,
participation rates sat around 17 percent and 15 percent, in 2010 and 2013 respectively, with
associated income shares around 8 and 6 percent on average. These estimates are about average
compared to other Sub-Saharan African (SSA) countries. The estimation by Davis et al. (2014) for
a group of SSA countries, indicates on average 15 percent participation rate for non-farm wage
employment and 34 percent for non-farm self-employment, with associated income shares of 8
percent and 15 percent.



                                                                                                    13
        Consistently with the existing literature, the data from Malawi suggest a divide in
participation in the non-farm economy along poverty line. Our descriptive statistics by poverty
status indicate that, while participation in self-employment increased for both the poor and the
non-poor between the two years, participation rates for the poor are significantly lower than for
the non-poor households in both years. In 2013, about 20% of the poor were engaged in self-
employment activities, up from 15% in 2010. Meanwhile the same statistic for the non-poor
increased from 20% in 2010 to 30% in 2013. The difference between poor and non-poor is even
sharper for wage employment, where the participation rates for the non-poor are more than double
the participation rates among the poor in both survey years. The lower gap observed for non-farm
self-employment compared to wage employment likely reflects differences in entry barriers
between the two types of employment. Non-farm wage employment jobs require more education
and better social networks. While the lower participation rates among the poor call for further
attention to participation barriers, the fact that participation rates among the poor are still almost
20% justifies the need to understand if and how such households benefit from non-farm activities.
        In a more detailed analysis, participation rates and returns by sectors of non-farm self-
employment (Table 4) and non-farm wage employment (Table 5) for the poor and non-poor
confirms further patterns of dualism. Our descriptive analyses indicate the existence of high and
low return sectors of non-farm activities and the high return sectors are almost exclusively
available to a handful of privileged, due to entry barriers that prevent the more marginalized groups
(the poor and sometimes women) from accessing those opportunities. In the following paragraphs,
we describe the main features and types of non-farm employment in which rural households in
Malawi are involved, by poverty status.

       Non-farm self-employment in rural Malawi

        Table 3 summarizes the main traits of non-farm businesses observed in rural Malawi. As
most rural non-farm enterprises in SSA, described by Nagler and Naude (2014), the characteristics
of rural non-farm enterprises in Malawi are consistent with little potential for job creation as they
are mostly informal, have low productivity, and short life spans. Almost half of all the non-farm
businesses in rural Malawi are reportedly operated from home, with only 13 percent having access
to electricity, and 6 to 8 percent with some formal registration. Business owners are relatively
young (38 to 39 years old) and mostly uneducated (75% of business owners have no formal
education). Businesses owned by poor household members are less likely to be registered formally
compared to those owned by non-poor household members. Also poor business owners appear less
educated on average compared to non-poor business owners. These differences might well affect
productivity and returns to participation for the poor.

      As for the types of household enterprises operated, participants in non-farm self-
employment are involved in a variety of sectors or industries.16 The distribution of non-farm self-



16
   The classification of non-farm enterprise activities into industry categories used here closely
follows the 1992 United Nations International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) standards
into 5 main groups. The groups include: (a) Primary sector, which comprises agriculture,
livestock, hunting, fishing, and mining; (b) Food, Beverage, and Tobacco Manufacturing; (c)
Non-food Manufacturing, (d) Commerce and Tourism (wholesale and retail, and restaurants and

                                                                                                   14
employment by sector, as well as average profit17 earned by participants, for the poor, and the non-
poor are summarized in Table 4. The analysis of table 3 indicates that about half of household
enterprises in rural Malawi are in the commerce and tourism sector (wholesale, retail trade,
restaurants, and hotels). These are typically small businesses involving people selling or reselling
a wide variety of products from groceries and food products to clothes, shoes, etc., and earning on
average 6,000 to 7,000 MKW18 (or 8 to 10USD) monthly. The second most prominent sector is
the manufacturing sector (food and non-food combined), which accounts for approximately 40
percent of all household enterprises. The manufacturing sector is dominated by food, beverage,
and tobacco manufacturing, which accounts for more than half of the manufacturing sector,
represents more than 25 percent of all household enterprises, and includes primarily street vendors
of various food and drinks and making a profit in the range of 4,000 to 6,000MKW (or 5.5 to
6USD) monthly.
        In general, returns to non-farm self-employment are pretty low (around 6,000MKW ~
8USD) in rural Malawi, and are lowest in the most popular sectors (Table 4). The commerce and
tourism sector, which contains about half of the non-farm businesses, generates on average 6,000
to 7,000KW (8 to 10USD) monthly, as opposed to 9,000 to 12,000 KW (12 to 17USD) of profit
reported in the construction and services sector, which represents only 9 to 10 percent of non-farm
enterprises. The manufacturing sector, second most important sector generates even lower
revenues. Returns from the Food, beverage, and tobacco manufacturing sector are about
3,000MKW monthly, and the non-food manufacturing sector generates about 5,000 to 6,000 KW
monthly.
        With the sectors of non-farm enterprises defined here, no evidence of dualism becomes
particularly apparent from simply observing the distribution of non-farm enterprises by sectors,
for the poor versus the non-poor. However, a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of equality of distribution
does indicate a significant difference (at 1%) between poor and non-poor. We do observe a large
heterogeneity in returns to participation within each category of non-farm enterprises. And profits
earned by the poor are significantly lower compared to the non-poor across all categories of self-
employment. The t-test of mean difference in profit (Table 4) show p-values less than 1% for most
categories of self-employment.


       Non-farm wage employment in rural Malawi

       Non-farm wage employment activities are also distributed across several sectors19
presented in Table 5. The service sector appears to be the largest with about a third of all non-


hotel businesses); and (e) Other sectors, which include construction, electricity and utilities,
transportation, and other services.
17
   This is a direct measure self-reported by the respondent. The reference period for profits is the
latest month of operation prior to the interview. Might suffer measurement errors. Therefore,
should serve only as rough estimation.
18
   Kwachas (MWK), local currency used in Malawi. 1 USD = 723.4319 MWK according to
currency.me.uk.
19
   We follow the occupation codes used in the Malawi LSMS survey instruments, which
includes: Relatively skilled labor jobs such as: (1) Professional, technical, & related workers; (2)
Administration and managerial workers; (3) Clerical and related worker; (4) Sales workers. And

                                                                                                  15
farm wage employment, closely followed by the category of transport equipment operators, and
laborers not elsewhere classified which represents approximately a quarter of all wage
employment. Then comes the sector of Professional, technical, & related worker groups,
representing also about a quarter of the rural non-farm wage employment. Together, the remaining
sectors represent each less than 7% of non-farm jobs in both 2010 and 2013. Notice that
approximately 75% of all rural non-farm jobs are in sectors that do not require highly skilled labor.
Wages in those sectors are significantly lower than wages in sectors that require more skilled labor.
As a result, the average monthly wage across all non-farm jobs in rural Malawi is pretty low,
around 8,000 Kwachas (~ 11USD).
        Dualism in the categories of non-farm wage employment is obvious compared to non-farm
self-employment. The skilled labor jobs, which generate the highest returns, are almost exclusively
accessible to the non-poor while the non-skilled labor jobs appear available for all. Table 5
indicates that about 80 percent of the jobs taken by the poor are in the non-skilled labor sectors,
compared to about 60% for the non-poor. In addition, and non-surprisingly, the poor earn
significantly less than the non-poor in most sectors of non-farm wage employment. Monthly wage
earned by participants in non-farm wage employment, and t-test of difference in wages between
the poor and non-poor by category of employment, reveals significantly lower wage for the poor.
The only sector in which we fail to reject the absence of a significant difference between wages
earned by poor and non-poor is the service sector, which is the most popular sector for both poor
and non-poor.

   4.2. Determinants of participation in non-farm activities

        Table 6 summarizes the estimation results of the determinants of participation in non-farm
wage and self-employment in rural Malawi based on the unobserved effects Probit model
presented in equation 8 and 9. Several important points emerge from those results.
        Education is an important driver of non-farm wage employment participation, but not a
significant determinant of non-farm self-employment participation. Table 5 shows that the average
partial effect of household head education increases with the level of education until MSCE level,
beyond which educational attainment level does not appear significant anymore, probably due to
the low proportion (1.3%) of people in that education level category in the rural Malawi. This is
consistent with several previous findings such as in Oseni and Winters (2009), Winters et al. (2007)
as well as Lanjouw and Shariff (2004), and De Janvry and Sadoulet (2001), though they have often
lumped non-farm wage employment and self-employment together in their analyses, thereby
losing out on some nuances between the two types of activities. Indeed, education may play a
double role, influencing households’ participation in non-farm-self-employment and wage
employment. On one hand, since returns to non-farm wage employment are higher in general than
non-farm self-employment (See Table 4 and Table 5), the more educated may occupy the few non-
farm wage employment, leaving the non-farm self-employment sector for the least educated. This
would imply a negative effect of education on non-farm self-employment participation. On the
other hand, those who are more educated also have higher expected returns from participation in
non-farm self-employment due to skills acquired from their formal training.


relatively unskilled labor jobs such as: (1) Service workers; (2) Agricultural, animal husbandry
and forestry workers, fishermen and hunters; (3) Other sectors including production and related
workers, transport equipment operators and laborers not elsewhere classified.

                                                                                                  16
        We find that access to credit is an important determinant of households’ participation in
non-farm self-employment. More precisely, access to credit for relevant households increases
participation in non-farm self-employment by about 8 to 10 percentage points on average, ceteris
paribus (see table 6). These results challenge the common view that rural household enterprises
require little to no capital investment and thus can provide a source of cash for the poorest who are
lacking access to financial services in presence of rural credit market failures (Poulton et al., 2006,
Bardhan and Udry, 1999). From our analysis, it appears that viable household enterprises in the
context of rural Malawi require some level of investments, significant enough to preclude the
poorest from engaging in those activities.
        Wealth of the household (captured by a normalized asset index) significantly increases
participation in both non-farm wage employment and self-employment. This is consistent with the
findings in Oseni and Winters (2009), and add to reasons why the poorest have a more restricted
access than the non-poor to non-farm employment opportunities. Assets such as tables, sewing
machine, TV, bicycle, etc., can be used to operate household enterprises, commute to a non-farm
wage or business place, etc., thereby increasing households’ likelihood (and may be expected
returns) of participating in non-farm wage and self-employment. In addition, asset ownership is
correlated with social status in most rural areas in Africa. So households with more assets may
have stronger networks through which they can receive information about non-farm wage
employment opportunities. Depending on the type of business, households with large networks
may also have higher expected returns from non-farm enterprises, which increases participation.
        Besides, our results reveal generally stronger evidence of a pull scenario explaining the
participation in non-farm activities in rural Malawi. The participation rate in non-farm wage
employment, among neighboring households of the same geographical area, affects, positively and
significantly, each household’s participation in both non-farm wage employment and non-farm
self-employment. Similarly, the proportion of other households owning a business in the same
geographical area significantly and positively affects each household’s likelihood of participation
in non-farm self-employment and non-farm wage employment. This is consistent with the pull
scenario described in Haggblade et al. (2010), which stresses that the economic environment
greatly determines access and participation in non-farm activities. Having a lot of households
participating in non-farm wage employment or non-farm self-employment in the same locality
may reflect a more vibrant economic environment with more jobs or business opportunities, which
therefore increase participation in those employment categories. From a social network effects
point of view, this also corresponds with what was dubbed correlated neighborhood effects by
(Manski, 1993). People behave like one another when they face similar shocks or environment.
However, the observed correlation might also suggest the existence of social effects (endogenous
and contextual peer effects), which imply that households’ decision to participate in non-farm
wage activities depend on their peers’ behaviors and characteristics. Disentangling these effects is
beyond the scope of this paper. However, the findings that social network effects might influence
participation in non-farm self-employment (similarly to peer effects in agricultural technology
adoption) are intrinsically interesting and deserve further investigation. In the social network
literature and technology adoption literature, Bramoulle et al. (2009) followed by Krishnan and
Patnam (2014) addressed the Manski reflection problem inherent to the identification of peer
effects by using average characteristics of neighbors as instruments for participation rates among
neighbors.
     On the estimation methods, we find large consistency between our linear model results and the
CRE Probit estimation results. The APE estimates have usually similar magnitudes as well as



                                                                                                    17
consistent signs and significance levels in both the non-farm wage employment and non-farm self-
employment cases. More importantly, the results from the more efficient multivariate system
estimates do not add any particular insight (see appendix 5). While the Simulated Maximum
Likelihood (SML) estimates and the Bivariate Probit Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates both
do indicate a negative correlation (ρ=-0.15) and significant (at 1%) between the residuals of the
non-farm wage employment and non-farm self-employment models, the coefficient estimates are
remarkably consistent in signs and significance with the main Probit results described above. This
robust consistency of our estimates across methods increases our confidence in these results, which
indicates that policies geared to increase rural household participation in non-farm employment
might want to focus on factors such as education and access to credit for the poor, in addition to
improving infrastructure and growth motors.

   4.3. Impacts of participation in the RNFE

       Impact on HHPCE

        Does participation in non-farm activities increase households’ welfare, ceteris paribus?
Are the poverty reduction motives of policies promoting the RNFE in developing countries
justified? Our APE estimation results, summarized in Table 7, indicate a consistently positive
response to both questions. Appendices 6 through 11 report the full set of results. We discuss
below the main points that come out of those results.
        First, non-farm wage employment participation increases households’ per capita
consumption expenditure by a margin of 4,500MKW, though only significant at 16%. The log
linear model indicates a 10 percent increase effects, statistically significant at 5%. As for non-farm
self-employment, the APE estimates on the levels of HHPCE is 7,000MKW corresponding
approximately to a 13 percent increase in HHPCE, and statistically significant at 1%. These
numbers are not directly comparable with previous studies such as Owusu et al. (2011) and Ackah
(2013) since they lumped both types of non-farm activities together and also focused on different
outcome variables (notably household income instead of consumption expenditure). However,
they confirm the general conclusion of a positive effect of non-farm employment participation on
direct measures of household welfare. Besides, the t-test of comparison of coefficients of non-farm
self-employment and non-farm wage employment indicates, at 1% significance level, that the
effect of non-farm self-employment on participants is higher on average than the effects of non-
farm wage employment participation.
        While we find positive effects of participation in both non-farm wage employment and
non-farm self-employment, we also find significant heterogeneity of HHPCE response to
participation in the RNFE. Everything else held constant, households at the bottom of the wealth
distribution seem to benefit significantly less from participating in non-farm wage employment or
in non-farm self-employment than households at the top of the distribution (Table 8 and Figure 1).
Though the effects of engaging in non-farm wage employment or non-farm self-employment
remain positive for all classes of the welfare distribution, there is a generally increasing trend in
the size of the effect as we go from lower percentiles to the top of the distribution of HHPCE. The
quantile effects of non-farm self-employment go from a low of about 2,300MKW for the 10th
percentile of HHPCE, and increases to a high of over 16,000MKW for the 90th percentile (almost
10 times the effect on the lowest quantile). As for non-farm wage employment, the effect is not
significant for the 10th and 20th percentiles. It starts being significant for the 25th percentile, from



                                                                                                     18
a low of 4,600MKW to a high of about 6,500 MKW for the 75th and 80th percentiles, before
dropping again to a non-significant size of 2,000MKW at the 90th percentile. This indicates that,
for non-farm wage employment, the middle segments of the population benefit the most; while,
for non-farm self-employment, the upper segments benefit the most from participating. However,
in both cases the poorest appear to benefit the least from participating, confirming the findings in
(Bezu et al., 2012). This heterogeneity of effects also illustrates the fact that resource constraints
faced by the poorest likely consign them to low return activities with less potential to increase their
income considerably, potentially putting them into a poverty trap. Meanwhile the middle and upper
segments earn significantly higher returns from participating in non-farm activities because they
have access to the most lucrative employment opportunities. These results are largely consistent
with our descriptive analysis, and also support the evidence in the existing literature on the
existence of entry barriers that confine marginalized groups to low returns and non-lucrative
employment categories (Abdulai and CroleRees, 2001, Woldenhanna and Oskam, 2001, Barrett et
al., 2001a, Smith et al., 2001, Lanjouw et al., 2001, Reardon et al., 2000).

       Impacts on poverty and food security

         We extend beyond HHPCE to analyze several other welfare outcomes. Our results indicate
that both non-farm wage employment and non-farm self-employment have a negative and
significant effect on all three FGT poverty metrics. Both the fractional Probit model and the linear
FE model show that, on average, a household’s engagement in non-farm wage employment
reduces the likelihood of its consumption expenditure falling below the poverty line by 7
percentage points. Similarly, self-employment reduces poverty incidence by a statistically
significant margin of about 8.5 percentage points. This is an important margin relative to the
pooled sample rural household poverty incidence of about 37 percent (see summary statistics in
Table 1). For the depth and severity of poverty measured by poverty gap and squared poverty gap
respectively, our CRE fractional Probit, and linear FE models produce consistent results indicating
significant and negative effects of both non-farm wage employment and nonfarm self-
employment. This implies that though the poorest seem to benefit less from engaging in non-farm
activities, the size of the effect is still enough to reduce significantly the depth and severity of
poverty confirming that the rural non-farm sector can well serve as a pathway out of poverty for
poor rural households in Malawi.
         The positive effect of non-farm activities persists in the analysis of household subjective
perceptions of food security. In particular, estimates from the CRE Probit model and linear FE
model consistently indicate that participation in non-farm wage employment reduces the likelihood
that a household feels food insecure by about 5 to 6 percentage points. Similarly, the ordered Probit
results show that households engaged in non-farm wage employment perceive their food
consumption level to be more adequate for the needs of the household, compared to non-
participating households. For non-farm self-employment, the estimated effect does not appear
statistically significant.

       RNFE and agricultural investment

       Several studies in the RNFE literature have explored agricultural investment as a pathway
through which non-farm employment increases welfare, and concluded a positive effect. For
example, Oseni and Winters (2009) concluded a positive effect of both non-farm wage



                                                                                                    19
employment and non-farm self-employment participation on Nigerian farmers’ agricultural
investments (especially labor and fertilizer). Other studies such as Smale et al. (2016) found
negative effects on nitrogen application on maize by Kenyan farmers, and concluded that
engagement in the RNFE could be a distraction with trade-offs in labor allocation and farm
investments. Our results (at bottom panel of Table 7) indicate that participation in non-farm self-
employment increases likelihood (but not intensity) of inputs use, especially inorganic fertilizer
purchases among rural households in Malawi by about 5 percentage points. Though restricted to
the purchase decision only, these findings tend to align more with the strand of existing literature
finding evidence that RNFE reduces the cash constraint for rural households at least partially
engaged in agriculture such as Owusu et al. (2011) and Ackah (2013) as well as Barrett et al.
(2001b) on the subject. We do not find a statistically significant effect of wage employment on
input purchases. The lack of significance of the effects of non-farm wage employment could imply
that the negative effect on agriculture due to labor displacement counters the positive effect on
financial constraints for agricultural investments. We also do not find any effects of RNFE on the
area of land cultivated in the season.
        It is possible that decisions to participate in non-farm employment and decision to use
inputs are made simultaneously, and therefore a system estimation of non-farm employment
participation and inputs use equations would improve the efficiency of the estimates; though
identification relies on joint normality of the residuals from the equations in the system. As an
additional robustness check, we estimate a series of recursive trivariate Probit models as an
alternative way to explore the effects of non-farm employment participation on inputs purchase
decisions (Appendix 11). In each system, we have one equation for each treatment variable (wage-
employment and self-employment), and one equation for the outcome variable (fertilizer purchase,
or inputs purchase), making a total of three equations. The equation for the outcome variable
includes both treatment variables as explanatory variables, while the equations for the treatment
variables do not include the outcome variable as explanatory variable. This recursive formulation
(see equation 17-49 in Green William (2000)) implies a one-way causality between the treatments
and outcome variables. A similar approach was used by (Smale et al., 2016) to investigate the same
question in Kenya. We estimate this system, for input purchase and for fertilizer purchase decisions
using GHK Simulated Maximum Likelihood (Cappellari and Jenkins, 2003). The estimated
coefficients are consistent with the single equation results presented above suggesting a positive
effect of non-farm employment participation on inputs purchase decision in general, and fertilizer
purchase in particular. More interestingly while the effect of non-farm wage employment was not
significant in the single equation models, the more efficient system estimations indicates a rather
positive and significant effect of non-farm wage employment on inputs purchase decisions as well.
The likelihood ratio tests of joint significance of the residuals from the equations are always
significant at 1%, justifying the relevance of a system estimation approach to improve efficiency
in our case.
        Overall, the study results indicate positive welfare effects of RNFE on objective and
subjective measures of household welfare and these findings are consistent across different
estimation techniques. The results are also largely consistent with the existing literature. The
magnitude of the welfare effects of self-employment is on average larger than that from wage-
employment. One mechanism through which RNFE likely improves household welfare is through
the provision of funds for investment in agricultural production; the mainstay of most rural
households. Finally, the quantile regression analysis reveals considerable heterogeneity in the




                                                                                                 20
welfare effects of RNFE, with the poor benefitting significantly less than the non-poor from both
non-farm wage-employment and non-farm self-employment.

       5.      Conclusion

        This paper makes several contributions to the debate about the poverty reduction potential
of the rural non-farm employment sector.
        The paper first revisits the determinants of participation in non-farm wage employment
and non-farm self-employment, using recent and nationally representative panel data from Malawi.
The results offer little support for the early view that the poor and least endowed households are
more likely to participate in non-farm activities, in order to insure against production risks and
meet capital constraints (Bardhan and Udry, 1999). Our results rather indicate the presence of
significant barriers to participation, faced by the poorest. These barriers include human, financial,
and physical constraints such as education, assets and credit. Different sets of resources seem to
matter for participation in either type of non-farm activity. Educated and wealthy households are
pulled into non-farm wage employment, while participation in non-farm self-employment is
mostly driven by access to credit and wealth. Market access and proximity to better infrastructure
and opportunities are important for both non-farm wage employment participation and non-farm-
self-employment.
        Then, using panel data estimation techniques, we find consistent evidence that the RNFE
can serve as a potential mechanism to increase welfare and reduce poverty in rural Malawi. Our
results are consistent across a wide range of econometric approaches and broad suite of objective
and subjective welfare and poverty measures. We conclude that while any causal interpretation of
the usually positive correlation between non-farm engagement and wealth requires some care, the
context of rural Malawi offers consistent evidence of a positive welfare impact of participation in
non-farm activities, and thus the RNFE can be considered as a pathway out of poverty for rural
households.
        However, our results suggest that more attention should be paid to improving not just
access, but also the quality of the non-farm opportunities available for the poorest. Though on
average, participation in non-farm wage-employment and non-farm self-employment has a
consistently positive effect on welfare, we find strong evidence that even when the poor participate
in the RNFE, they benefit significantly less than the non-poor. The existing literature and
observations from our data indicate that human, physical, and financial capital are key factors that
limit participation in non-farm employment for the poor in rural areas. Addressing dualism along
poverty and gender lines as well as other dimensions, is of utmost importance if the RNFE is to be
an effective tool for broad-based rural development. Failing to take this into consideration will
likely lead to widening inequality instead of shared prosperity. Moreover, given the notable
heterogeneity of activities within non-farm employment, future research should delve even deeper
into these different types of activities and explore participation in and roles of various sub-
categories of non-farm wage employment and non-farm self-employment for household welfare.




                                                                                                  21
REFERENCES


ABDULAI, A. & CROLEREES, A. 2001. Determinants of income diversification amongst rural
    households in Southern Mali. Food policy, 26, 437-452.

ACKAH, C. 2013. Nonfarm employment and incomes in rural Ghana. Journal of International
    Development, 25, 325-339.

ADJOGNON, S. G., LIVERPOOL-TASIE, L. S. O. & REARDON, T. A. 2016. Agricultural
     input credit in Sub-Saharan Africa: Telling myth from facts. Food Policy.

BARDHAN, P. & UDRY, C. 1999. Development microeconomics, Oxford University Press.

BARRETT, C. B., BEZUNEH, M. & ABOUD, A. 2001a. Income diversification, poverty traps
    and policy shocks in Côte d’Ivoire and Kenya. Food Policy, 26, 367-384.

BARRETT, C. B., REARDON, T. & WEBB, P. 2001b. Nonfarm income diversification and
    household livelihood strategies in rural Africa: concepts, dynamics, and policy
    implications. Food policy, 26, 315-331.

BASER, O. 2009. Too much ado about instrumental variable approach: is the cure worse than
     the disease? Value in Health, 12, 1201-1209.

BEZU, S. & BARRETT, C. 2012. Employment dynamics in the rural nonfarm sector in
      Ethiopia: Do the poor have time on their side? Journal of Development Studies, 48, 1223-
      1240.

BEZU, S., BARRETT, C. B. & HOLDEN, S. T. 2012. Does the nonfarm economy offer
      pathways for upward mobility? Evidence from a panel data study in Ethiopia. World
      Development, 40, 1634-1646.

CAMERON, A. C. & TRIVEDI, P. K. 2005. Microeconometrics: methods and applications,
    Cambridge university press.

CAMERON, A. C. & TRIVEDI, P. K. 2010. Microeconometrics using stata, Stata Press College
    Station, TX.

CAPPELLARI, L. & JENKINS, S. P. 2003. Multivariate probit regression using simulated
     maximum likelihood. The Stata Journal, 3, 278-294.

CHAMBERLAIN, G. 1982. Panel data. National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge,
    Mass., USA.

DAVIS, B., DI GIUSEPPE, S. & ZEZZA, A. 2014. Income diversification patterns in rural sub-
     Saharan Africa: reassessing the evidence. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.


                                                                                            22
DEATON, A. & ZAIDI, S. 2002. Guidelines for constructing consumption aggregates for
    welfare analysis, World Bank Publications.

FILMER, D. & PRITCHETT, L. H. 2001. Estimating wealth effects without expenditure data—
     or tears: An application to educational enrollments in states of india*. Demography, 38,
     115-132.

GALLANI, S., KRISHNAN, R. & WOOLDRIDGE, J. 2015. Applications of Fractional
    Response Model to the Study of Bounded Dependent Variables in Accounting Research.
    Harvard Business School Accounting & Management Unit Working Paper.

GREEN WILLIAM, H. 2000. Econometric analysis. Forth Edition, Prentice Hall International,
     Inc, New York University.

HAGGBLADE, S., HAZELL, P. & REARDON, T. 2010. The rural non-farm economy:
    Prospects for growth and poverty reduction. World Development, 38, 1429-1441.

HOLDEN, S., SHIFERAW, B. & PENDER, J. 2004. Non-farm income, household welfare, and
    sustainable land management in a less-favoured area in the Ethiopian highlands. Food
    Policy, 29, 369-392.

KOENKER, R. 2005. Quantile regression, Cambridge university press.

LANJOUW, J. O. & LANJOUW, P. 2001. The rural non‐farm sector: issues and evidence from
     developing countries. Agricultural economics, 26, 1-23.

LANJOUW, P., QUIZON, J. & SPARROW, R. 2001. Non-agricultural earnings in peri-urban
     areas of Tanzania: evidence from household survey data. Food policy, 26, 385-403.

LANJOUW, P. & SHARIFF, A. 2004. Rural non-farm employment in India: Access, incomes
     and poverty impact. Economic and Political Weekly, 4429-4446.

LIANG, K.-Y. & ZEGER, S. L. 1986. Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear
     models. Biometrika, 13-22.

MATSUMOTO, T., KIJIMA, Y. & YAMANO, T. 2006. The role of local nonfarm activities and
    migration in reducing poverty: evidence from Ethiopia, Kenya, and Uganda. Agricultural
    Economics, 35, 449-458.

NAGLER, P. & NAUDE, W. 2014. Non-farm enterprises in rural Africa: new empirical
    evidence. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.

OSENI, G. & WINTERS, P. 2009. Rural nonfarm activities and agricultural crop production in
     Nigeria. Agricultural Economics, 40, 189-201.




                                                                                           23
OWUSU, V., ABDULAI, A. & ABDUL-RAHMAN, S. 2011. Non-farm work and food security
    among farm households in Northern Ghana. Food policy, 36, 108-118.

REARDON, T., STAMOULIS, K., BALISACAN, A., CRUZ, M., BERDEGUÉ, J. & BANKS,
    B. 1998. Rural non-farm income in developing countries. The state of food and
    agriculture, 1998, 283-356.

REARDON, T., TAYLOR, J. E., STAMOULIS, K., LANJOUW, P. & BALISACAN, A. 2000.
    Effects of non‐farm employment on rural income inequality in developing countries: an
    investment perspective. Journal of agricultural economics, 51, 266-288.

SMALE, M., KUSUNOSE, Y., MATHENGE, M. K. & ALIA, D. 2016. Destination or
    Distraction? Querying the Linkage Between Off-Farm Work and Food Crop Investments
    in Kenya. Journal of African Economies.

SMITH, D. R., GORDON, A., MEADOWS, K. & ZWICK, K. 2001. Livelihood diversification
     in Uganda: patterns and determinants of change across two rural districts. Food Policy,
     26, 421-435.

START, D. 2001. The rise and fall of the rural non‐farm Economy: Poverty Impacts and Policy
     options. Development policy review, 19, 491-505.

WOLDENHANNA, T. & OSKAM, A. 2001. Income diversification and entry barriers: evidence
    from the Tigray region of northern Ethiopia. Food Policy, 26, 351-365.

WOOLDRIDGE, J. M. 2010. Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data, MIT press.

WORLD BANK. 2016. Malawi Poverty Assessment. World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                                                                           24
                                   TABLES & FIGURES
The Heterogeneous Welfare Effects of Rural Non-Farm Employment: Recent Evidence from Malawi




                                                                                              25
                   Table 1: Description and summary statistics of the main variables used in this paper, household level, 2010-2013, rural Malawi

Variables                         Definition                                                                      Types of variables       Overall       SD        N         Estimation approach
                                                                                                                                           Mean

Treatment variables
Non-farm wage employment          A member of household is engaged in non-farm wage employment                                             15.11       35.82      5532        GEE CRE Probit
(0/1)
Non-farm self-employment          A member of household is engaged in non-farm self-employment                                             21.58       41.14      5532        GEE CRE Probit
(0/1)

Outcome variables
HHPCE                             Household total real consumption expenditure per capita                            Continuous           57,759.59   46,702.55   5532   FE, CRE, Quantile regression
Log of HHPCE                      Log of Household total real consumption expenditure per capita                     Continuous             10.75        0.64     5532            FE, CRE
Poverty incidence                 1[HHPCE<=Poverty Line]                                                             Binary (0/1)           37.20       48.34     5532   GEE CRE Probit, Linear FE
Poverty gap                       Consumption shortfall relative to poverty line as a fraction of poverty line     Fractional [0, 1]        11.2        18.8      5532    GLM CRE FRM, Linear FE
Poverty severity                  Squared poverty gap                                                              Fractional [0, 1]         0.05        .11      5532    GLM CRE FRM, Linear FE
Food insecurity (0/1)             Did you worry that your household would not have enough food in the past           Binary (0/1)           32.57       46.87     5532   GEE CRE Probit, Linear FE
                                  7 days

Food consumption adequacy         Which of the following describes best your food consumption over the past       Categorical ordered                             5532     ML CRE Ordered Probit,
                                  month                                                                                {1,2,3}                                                  Linear FE
               1                  1== less than adequate for household needs                                                               41.45       49.27
               2                  2== just adequate for household needs                                                                    51.93       49.97
               3                  3== It was more than adequate for household needs                                                         6.62       24.86


Fertilizer purchase decision      The household purchased fertilizer for agricultural production in the rainy        Binary (0/1)          38.85       48.75      5305   GEE CRE Probit, Linear FE,
(0/1)                             season                                                                                                                                       system ML
Inputs purchase decision (0/1)    The household purchased seeds, fertilizer or other chemicals for                   Binary (0/1)          60.13       48.97      5305   GEE CRE Probit, Linear FE,
                                  agricultural production in the rainy season                                                                                                  system ML
Fertilizer purchase per acre      Value of fertilizer purchased per acre of land cultivated                      Corner solution [0, +)     3.59        9.79      5305     CRE Tobit, Linear FE
(1000MKW)
Inputs purchase per acre          Total Value of seed, fertilizer, and chemicals purchased per acre of land      Corner solution [0, +)     4.10       10.01      5305      CRE Tobit, Linear FE
(1000MKW)                         cultivated
Land cultivated (acres)           Number of acres of cultivated land by household                                Corner solution [0, +)     4.43       52.31      5305      CRE Tobit, Linear FE

                   Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data.




                                                                                                                                                                                  26
Table 2: Household participation in non-farm employment in rural Malawi, 2010/2013

                             Malawi                          Non Poor                             Poor               P-value t-test poor vs. non poor
                                    Share of                         Share of                          Share of                           Share of
                  Participation    Households     Participation     Households    Participation       Households      Participation      Households
                   rates (%)      Income from       rates (%)      Income from     rates (%)         Income from       rates (%)        Income from
                                   Source (%)                       Source (%)                        Source (%)                         Source (%)
                 2010     2013    2010    2013    2010     2013   2010     2013   2010    2013       2010    2013    2010      2013    2010      2013
 Non-
 Agricultural     17.1    15.1        8    6.5    21.6     19     10.6     8.5    9.7      7.4           3.9   2.3   0.000   0.000    0.000    0.000
 wage

 Self
                  18.2    26.8    7.2     11.1    20.3    30.5     9      12.9    14.9    19.4           4.4   7.4   0.002   0.000    0.076    0.000
 Employment

Source: Malawi IHS3 panel sample (2010) and IHPS (2013)




                                                                                                                                                    27
Table 3: Selected characteristics of household enterprises in rural Malawi

                                                                           Rural Malawi               Non Poor                   Poor               p-value difference
 Characteristics of households’ enterprises                               2010        2013        2010        2013        2010          2013       2010            2013
 Age of enterprises (years)                                               11.1         9.0        11.7         9.0        12.9           9.1       0.250           0.821
 Outside partner (%)                                                       3.4         3.2         4.5         3.0         0.7           3.7       0.008           0.727


 Business operating premises (%)
 Home                                                                     47.0         43.3        48.1        44.4       44.6          39.8       0.592           0.356
 Market place and commercial area shop                                    31.5         38.0        29.8        36.6       35.5          42.8       0.285           0.198
 Roadside and other areas                                                 21.4         18.6        22.1        19.0       19.9          17.4       0.671           0.712


 Formal registration (%)                                                   7.1          7.9         9.1         9.3        2.4           3.3       0.003           0.008
 FBPEa (%)                                                                14.3         14.3        10.1        13.4       23.7          17.5       0.001           0.282
 Access to electricity (%)                                                 8.0         13.6        13.8        15.8       0.0            0.0       0.141           0.069
 Number of enterprises per household (1 to 4)                              1.1          1.1         1.0         1.1        1.1           1.0       0.907           0.027
 Owner if household head (%)                                              73.6         69.5        75.6        72.3       69.1          60.4       0.233           0.008
 Age of owner (%)                                                         38.3         38.5        37.4        38.4       40.4          39.0       0.056           0.651


 Education of enterprise owner (%)
 None                                                                     77.2         74.1        74.7        70.3       82.8          86.6       0.116           0.000
 PSLCb                                                                    10.2         12.7        9.6         14.2       11.5           8.0       0.673           0.009
 JCEc                                                                      8.1          7.9         9.6         8.7        4.7           5.1       0.078           0.091
 MSCEd                                                                     3.7          4.5         4.9         5.7        1.0           0.4       0.010           0.000
 Non-university diploma                                                    0.5          0.5         0.7         0.6        0.0           0.0       0.117           0.044
 University diploma                                                        0.4          0.4         0.5         0.5        0.0           0.0       0.311           0.135
 Post-graduate degree                                                      0.0          0.0         0.0         0.0        0.0           0.0                       0.322


Source: Malawi IHS3 panel sample (2010) and IHPS (2013).
Note: a Forest Based Products Enterprise. b Primary School Leaving Certificate. c Junior Certificate Examination. d Malawi School Certificate of Education Examination




                                                                                                                                                                           28
Table 4: Distribution of non-farm household enterprises and returns by Sector, by poverty status, in Rural Malawi, 2010/2013


                                   Sector                                        Rural Malawi             Non Poor                   Poor         p-value difference
                                                                                2010      2013         2010      2013         2010      2013      2010        2013

 Participation                                                                      Proportion of enterprises by sector of industry (%)

 Primary sector
                                                                                 1.6       2.7          0.8       1.9          3.4          5.4   0.161       0.183
 (mostly charcoal related activities and stone quarrying)
 Food, beverage, tobacco manufacturing
                                                                                 26.1     25.6          22.3     25.3         34.8      26.6      0.036       0.81
 (mostly food and drinks street vendors)
 Non-food manufacturing
                                                                                 16.2     13.6          15.9     12.7         16.9      16.7      0.786       0.248
 (mostly mats, baskets, and pottery, tailor, metal tinsmith)
 Wholesale and retail trade + restaurant + hotels
                                                                                 46.4     49.2          50.4     50.9         37.3      43.4      0.016       0.121
 (include a wide range of commerce & tourism related activities)

 Construction, services, and other sectors
                                                                                 9.7       8.9          10.7      9.1          7.6          8     0.329       0.674
 (mostly electrical and other repair shops, barber shop, hair salon)


 Returns                                                                                    Profit of enterprises by industry (1000 KW)

 Primary sector                                                                  4.6       3.2          6.1       3.4          3.8          3.1     -         0.651

 Food, beverage, tobacco manufacturing                                           3.8       3.7          5.1       4.3          1.7          2.1   0.038       0.006
 Non-food manufacturing                                                          4.8       5.8          5.9       6.7          2.4          3.1   0.052       0.086

 Wholesale and retail trade and restaurant & hotels                              6.6        7           7.6       8            3.6          3.3     0           0

 Construction, services, and other sectors                                       8.6      12.2           10      13.8          2.8          6.5   0.017       0.109
 Overall                                                                           5.7        6.4          7       7.3           2.6     3.2      0.000        0.000
   Source: Malawi IHS3 panel sample (2010) and IHPS (2013).
   Note: The information in this table is at the enterprise level. Profit is the net profit generated by the enterprise over the month of operation prior to the
   interview, as reported by the enterprise owner. Kwachas (MWK), local currency used in Malawi.




                                                                                                                                                                      29
Table 5: Distribution of non-farm wage employment and returns by Sector, by poverty status, in Rural Malawi, 2010/2013


                                  Sector                                      Rural Malawi            Non Poor              Poor          p-value difference
                                                                              2010      2013        2010    2013        2010    2013      2010       2013
 Participation                                                                       Proportion of participants by non-farm wage employment sector (%)

 Professional, technical, & related workers                                     24.3      24.8       26.7      28        15.3       7.1    0.037         0.000
 Administration and managerial workers                                           1.3       1.7        1.5        2        0.8        0     0.441         0.022
 Clerical and related worker                                                     5.7       4.6        7.2     5.4           0        0     0.000         0.000
 Sales workers                                                                   4.8         5        4.9     4.6         4.3       7.4    0.848         0.496
 Service workers                                                                34.4      30.2       30.3    27.6        50.1      44.4    0.002         0.046
 Forestry workers, fishermen and hunters                                         1.8       3.8        2.2     2.7         0.2       9.6    0.074         0.165
 Transport equipment operators and laborers not elsewhere classified            27.6       30        27.2    29.6        29.3      31.5    0.745         0.785


 Return                                                                                 Average monthly wages of participants by Sector (1000 KW)
 Professional, technical, & related workers                                     16.3      16.8       16.8    17.3        12.8       6.2    0.281      0.000
 Administration and managerial workers                                          10.6       2.9       11.5     2.9           4         -    0.012               -
 Clerical and related worker                                                    10.4      10.9       10.4    10.9           -         -          -             -
 Sales workers                                                                   5.6       6.8        6.5     7.4           2       4.8    0.000         0.065
 Service workers                                                                 4.7       4.9        4.6     5.2         4.9       4.1    0.659         0.131
 Forestry workers, fishermen and hunters                                        14.6       3.3       14.8        5        4.4       0.7    0.072               -

 Transport equipment operators and laborers not elsewhere classified             7.3       5.7        7.6     6.2         5.9        3     0.239         0.001

 Overall                                                                         8.1       7.6        8.8     8.4         5.5       3.7    0.000         0.000

    Source: Malawi IHS3 panel sample (2010) and IHPS (2013).
    Note: Wage is the estimated monthly salary using the last payment reported by the participant member and the period of time covered by that payment.
    Kwachas (MWK), local currency used in Malawi.




                                                                                                                                                            30
Table 6: Average partial effects estimates of determinants of non-farm employment
participation
                                                    Non-farm wage employment   Non-farm self-employment
VARIABLES                                            CRE Probit    Linear FE   CRE Probit     Linear FE
                                                       model         model       model          model

Age of the household head                              -0.000       -0.000        0.000        0.001
                                                      [0.863]      [0.751]       [0.988]      [0.631]
Male-headed household (0/1)                          0.072***     0.072***        0.017        0.008
                                                      [0.001]      [0.002]       [0.552]      [0.783]

Highest level of formal education acquired by
household head

PSLC                                                   0.035        0.039         0.003        0.010
                                                      [0.194]      [0.202]       [0.937]      [0.803]
JCE                                                  0.130***     0.120***        0.046        0.055
                                                      [0.007]      [0.008]       [0.365]      [0.290]
MSCE                                                 0.236***     0.257***        0.033        0.029
                                                      [0.004]      [0.000]       [0.651]      [0.697]
Non-University Diploma and above                       0.198        0.222         0.286       0.249+
                                                      [0.294]      [0.228]       [0.184]      [0.102]

Maximum level of formal education acquired in the
household

PSLC                                                   0.017        0.016         0.017         0.014
                                                      [0.478]      [0.495]      [0.578]       [0.680]
JCE                                                    0.016        0.015        -0.041        -0.058
                                                      [0.579]      [0.628]      [0.224]       [0.165]
MSCE                                                  0.079+       0.102**       -0.052        -0.056
                                                      [0.105]      [0.030]      [0.271]       [0.294]
Non-University Diploma and above                       0.262       0.263+      -0.184***      -0.294*
                                                      [0.167]      [0.127]      [0.000]       [0.095]


Number of infant (<5yo) in HH                           0.001        0.006       0.022**       0.019+
                                                      [0.903]      [0.535]       [0.036]      [0.128]
Number of children (5-14yo) in the household         0.015***      0.017**         0.001       -0.000
                                                      [0.006]      [0.011]       [0.930]      [0.974]
Number of prime adults (15-60yo) in HH                 -0.003       -0.002      0.022**        0.021*
                                                      [0.669]      [0.793]       [0.022]      [0.065]
Number of elderly (60yo+) in HH                        -0.019      -0.023+        -0.006       -0.004
                                                      [0.383]      [0.149]       [0.844]      [0.872]
Household access to loan (0/1)                         -0.006       -0.001      0.083***     0.105***
                                                      [0.695]      [0.931]       [0.000]      [0.000]
Normalized wealth index                              0.301***     0.519***      0.450***     0.567***
                                                      [0.003]      [0.001]       [0.000]      [0.000]
Normalized TLU index                                  -0.432*       -0.268       0.503+         0.176
                                                      [0.086]      [0.506]       [0.117]      [0.717]
Total land area owned by HH in Acres                   0.006*        0.000        -0.000       -0.000
                                                      [0.100]      [0.735]       [0.825]      [0.860]
Household was affected negatively by some income        0.017        0.021        -0.018      -0.037+
Shock During the last 12 months (0/1)



                                                                                                        31
                                                           [0.297]        [0.195]         [0.420]        [0.118]
Household has a migrant network (0/1)                       0.010          0.008           0.005          0.007
                                                           [0.532]        [0.669]         [0.799]        [0.774]

Rain - EA level CoV of Dec-Jan rainfall from             -0.886***                         0.229
1983/84 - 2012/13
                                                           [0.006]                        [0.526]
Average 12-month total rainfall (mm)                       -0.000          0.000           0.000          0.000
                                                           [0.500]        [0.721]         [0.227]        [0.741]
Annual Mean Temperature (∞C * 10)                           0.000          0.000           -0.000         -0.002
                                                           [0.838]        [0.909]         [0.839]        [0.419]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Road                        -0.002         -0.004          -0.002         0.000
                                                           [0.326]        [0.263]         [0.589]        [0.948]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Population Center           -0.000        -0.001          -0.000          0.001
with +20,000
                                                           [0.953]        [0.542]         [0.851]        [0.574]
Value of daily ganyu wage salary in the EA                  -0.000         -0.000          0.000        0.000**
                                                           [0.465]        [0.282]         [0.301]        [0.023]
Price of fertilizer in the EA                              -0.000+         -0.000          -0.000        -0.000*
                                                           [0.106]        [0.233]         [0.638]        [0.090]
Price of maize grains in the EA                             -0.000        -0.000           0.000          0.000*
                                                           [0.449]        [0.457]         [0.299]        [0.070]
EA neighbor’s wage employment participation               0.002***       0.003***         0.001*         0.002**
                                                           [0.001]        [0.003]         [0.088]        [0.026]
EA neighbor’s self-employment participation               0.001***       0.001**         0.004***       0.004***
                                                           [0.010]        [0.016]         [0.000]        [0.000]
Time dummy (year 2010=1)                                    -0.002         -0.004          -0.008         -0.022
                                                           [0.929]        [0.888]         [0.787]        [0.363]

District dummies (27 -1 dummies)                          Included        Included       Included        Included

Time average of explanatory variables                     Included                       Included

Constant                                                                   -0.856                         0.805
                                                                          [0.276]                        [0.369]

 Number of observations                                      5,286          5,286             5,286          5,286
 Number of households                                                       2,751                            2,751
Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data
Note: ***, **, *, and + indicate that the corresponding regression APE is statistically significant at the 1%, 5%,
10%, and 15% levels, respectively. The CRE model is estimated using GEE approach with cluster robust standard
errors. The linear FE results are presented for comparison. Pvalues between brackets.




                                                                                                                    32
Table 7: Effect of participation in the non-farm activities on various outcomes in rural Malawi
                                         Effects of non-farm wage employment participation             Effects of non-farm self-employment participation
              VARIABLES                CRE Probit/fractional Probit / CRE Tobit     Linear FE     CRE Probit/fractional Probit /  CRE Tobit        Linear FE
                                             ordered Probit                                             ordered Probit

Objective welfare outcomes (N=5321)
HHPCE (1000 MKW)                                                                       4.476                                                       7.003***
                                                                                      [0.158]                                                       [0.000]
Log HHPCE                                                                             0.102**                                                      0.129***
                                                                                      [0.022]                                                       [0.000]
Poverty incidence                                -0.074**                  .         -0.072**              -0.085***                              -0.083***
                                                  [0.012]                             [0.022]                [0.000]                                [0.000]
Poverty gap                                     -0.034***              -0.033**      -0.034**              -0.035***              -0.035***       -0.030***
                                                  [0.007]               [0.011]       [0.018]                [0.000]                [0.000]         [0.002]
Squared poverty gap                              -0.018**              -0.017**      -0.019**              -0.018***              -0.017***        -0.014**
                                                  [0.021]               [0.017]       [0.045]                [0.000]                [0.000]         [0.011]

Subjective welfare outcomes
(N=5321)
Food insecurity (0/1)                            -0.047+                             -0.065**               -0.034+                                  -0.027
                                                 [0.125]                              [0.041]               [0.140]                                 [0.281]
Food consumption adequacy (1-3)                  0.177**                             0.104**                 0.057                                   0.025
                                                 [0.037]                              [0.021]               [0.379]                                 [0.482]

Agricultural outcomes (N=5038)

Fertilizer purchase decision (0/1)                0.039                                0.037                0.045**                                0.055**
                                                 [0.190]                              [0.303]               [0.043]                                [0.036]
Inputs purchase decision (0/1)                    0.046                                0.037                0.053**                                0.060**
                                                 [0.160]                              [0.260]               [0.031]                                [0.039]
Value of fertilizer purchase (1000                                       0.156        -0.638                                        0.388           0.136
MKW)
                                                                        [0.745]       [0.419]                                      [0.225]          [0.786]
Value of inputs purchase (1000 MKW)                                      -0.124        -0.874                                       0.234            0.085
                                                                        [0.802]       [0.305]                                      [0.495]          [0.870]
Land cultivated (1000 acres)                                             -0.292         0.274                                       0.710            -0.576
                                                                        [0.699]       [0.800]                                      [0.561]          [0.893]
Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data
Note: ***, **, *, and + indicate that the corresponding regression APE is statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, respectively. The table
presents only APEs on our main treatment variables. The APEs from the CRE Probit models are estimated using GEE approach. The CRE fractional Probit APEs
are from GLM estimation. The unconditional APEs from CRE Tobit are estimated using pooled Tobit regression methods. The linear FE results are presented
for comparison purpose. The full results tables are in appendices 2, 4, 5, and 6. P-values between brackets are based on cluster robust standard errors.



                                                                                                                                                               33
34
Table 8: Distributional effects of participation in the non-farm activities on HHPCE in
Malawi (Quantile regression results)
           VARIABLES                     p10        p20         p25        p50          p75          p80         p90


Effects of non-farm wage               2.611+    2.634+      4.639*** 6.198*** 6.386**           6.214*       2.709
employment participation
                                       [0.114]   [0.138]     [0.006]    [0.005]     [0.016]      [0.086]      [0.714]


Effects of non-farm self-              2.347** 4.209*** 4.303*** 6.503*** 10.804*** 13.041*** 16.227**
employment participation
                                       [0.018]   [0.001]     [0.000]    [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.016]

 Other controls included                Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 Time averages included                 Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 Observations                           5321        5321        5321      5321        5321         5321          5321
Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data
Note: ***, **, *, and + indicate that the corresponding regression coefficient is statistically significant at the 1%,
5%, 10%, and 15% levels, respectively. The table presents quantile partial effects of our main treatment variables
from 10th to the 90th percentile. The full results tables are in appendix 3. P-values between. Also the results without
inclusion of time averages of explanatory variables yields the same conclusions. For the sake of conciseness, they
are not presented here, but are available from authors upon request.

Figure 1: Quantile effects of non-farm wage and self-employment on HHPCE in rural
Malawi




Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data
Note: The graph presents quantile partial effects of our main treatment variables. Other controls were included in the
estimation



                                                                                                                       35
Appendix 1: Description and summary statistics of the covariates used in this paper, household level, 2010-2013, rural Malawi

 Variables                                                       Definition                                                                     Overall    SD
                                                                                                                                                Mean


 Age of the household head                                       Age of the household head                                                      44.04     16.52
 Male headed-household                                           Male headed-household                                                          76.16     42.62

 Highest level of formal education acquired by household head
 None                                                            The household head never attended formal school                                77.17     41.98
 PSLC                                                            PSLC is the highest formal level of education of household head                10.03     30.05
 JCE                                                             JCE is the highest formal level of education of household head                  6.87     25.30
 MSCE                                                            MSCE is the highest formal level of education of household head                 4.68     21.13
 Non-Univ Diploma and above                                      Non-Univ Diploma and above                                                      1.25     11.10

 Highest level of formal education acquired in the household
 None                                                            No member of the household ever attended formal school                         63.41     48.17
 PSLC                                                            PSLC is the highest formal level of education of the most educated             15.20     35.91
                                                                 household member
 JCE                                                             JCE is the highest formal level of education of the most educated household    12.22     32.75
                                                                 member
 MSCE                                                            MSCE is the highest formal level of education of the most educated              7.66     26.61
                                                                 household member
 Non-Univ Diploma and above                                      Non-Univ Diploma and above                                                      1.50     12.16


 Size of the household                                           Number of people living in the household at the time of the interview           5.22      2.42
 Number of infant (<5yo) in HH                                   Number of infant living in the household at the time of the interview           0.84     0.85
 Number of children (5-14yo) in the household                    Number of children living in the household at the time of the interview         1.62      1.41
 Number of prime adults (15-60yo) in HH                          Number of prime adults living in the household at the time of the interview     2.46      1.39
 Number of elderly (60yo+) in HH                                 Number of elderly living in the household at the time of the interview          0.29      0.57
 Household access to loan (0/1)                                  A member of the household received a loan in the year prior to the interview   16.63     37.24
 Normalized wealth index                                         Principal component analysis estimate of asset index                            0.05      0.08
 Normalized TLU index                                            Total livestock unit index tlu=cattle*0.5+pigs*0.2+sheep*0.1+goats*0.1          0.01      0.03
 Total land area owned by HH in Acres                            Total land area owned by HH in Acres                                            3.35     49.13
 Household was affected negatively by some income Shock During   Household was affected negatively by some income Shock During the last 12      86.37     34.31
 the last 12 months (0/1)                                        months (0/1)
 Household has a migrant network (0/1)                           A member of the household is living outside of the EA                          35.65     47.90
 Rain variability                                                Rain - EA level Coefficient of Variation of Dec-Jan rainfall from 1983/84 -     0.25     0.04
                                                                 2012/13
 Rainfall (mm)                                                   Average 12-month total rainfall (mm)                                           850.32    89.24
 Temperature (∞C * 10)                                           Annual Mean Temperature (∞C * 10)                                              216.31    19.12



                                                                                                                                                                36
 HH Distance to Nearest Road                                Household Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Road                                 9.84     9.85
 HH Distance to Population Center                           Household Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Population Center with +20,000      37.67     17.95
 ganyu wage salary in the EA (MKW)                          Value of daily ganyu wage salary in the EA (MKW)                           566.22   599.87
 Price of maize grains in the EA (MKW)                      Price of maize grains in the EA (MKW)                                      198.59   112.66
 Price of fertilizer in the EA (MKW)                        Price of fertilizer in the EA (MKW)                                        62.27     39.34
 EA neighbor’s wage employment participation                Participation rate in non-farm wage employment by other household in the   15.11     14.90
                                                            same EA
 EA neighbor’s self-employment participation                Participation rate in non-farm self-employment by other household in the   21.58    15.27
                                                            same EA

 Share of total land cultivated in crops (crop mix)
 Grains                                                     Share of total land cultivated in grains                                   64.53    26.22
 Legumes                                                    Share of total land cultivated in legumes                                  23.00    22.86
 Tubers                                                     Share of total land cultivated in tubers                                    1.55     7.75
 Oils crops                                                 Share of total land cultivated in oil crops                                 0.43     3.86
 Horticulture crops                                         Share of total land cultivated in horticulture crops                        4.03    11.10
 Cotton                                                     Share of total land cultivated in cotton                                    1.29    7.29
 Tobacco                                                    Share of total land cultivated in tobacco                                  4.19     11.79
Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data

Note: PSLC=Primary School Leaving Certificate. JCE=Junior Certificate Examination. MSCE=Malawi School Certificate of Education Examination.




                                                                                                                                                    37
Appendix 2: Test of balancing of covariates between non-farm wage employment participants and non-participants households, 2010-
2013, rural Malawi
                                                 Wage employment Non participants   Wage employment participants    t-test difference

 Variables                                          Mean                  SD          Mean                  SD          pvalue


 Treatment variables
 Non-farm wage employment (0/1)                     0.00                  0.00       100.00                0.00
 Non-farm self-employment (0/1)                     21.53                41.11       21.89                41.37          0.668

 Outcome variables
 HHPCE                                            53,903.41            40,631.58    79,420.64           67,908.37        0.000
 Log of HHPCE                                       10.70                 0.62        11.04                0.67          0.000
 Poverty incidence                                  40.03                49.00        21.29               40.96          0.000
 Poverty gap
 Poverty severity
 Food insecurity (0/1)                              34.01                47.38       24.52                43.05          0.001

 Food consumption adequacy
 1                                                  43.51                49.58       29.90                45.81          0.000
 2                                                  50.45                50.00       60.29                48.96          0.002
 3                                                   6.05                23.84        9.81                29.76          0.003

 Seeds purchase decision (0/1)                      39.52                48.89       50.07                50.03          0.000
 Fertilizer purchase decision (0/1)                 36.71                48.21       51.79                50.00          0.000
 Inputs purchase decision (0/1)                     58.35                49.30       70.92                45.45          0.000
 Seed purchase per acre (1000MKW)                    0.46                 1.56        0.91                 2.26          0.000
 Fertilizer purchase per acre (1000MKW)              3.10                 8.51        6.57                15.06          0.001
 Inputs purchase per acre (1000MKW)                  3.57                 8.92        7.31                14.60          0.000
 Land cultivated (acres)                             4.63                55.98        3.20                18.04          0.194

 Covariates
 Age of the household head                          44.53                17.00       41.30                13.22          0.000
 Male headed-household                              74.25                43.73       86.84                33.82          0.000

 Highest level of formal education acquired by
 household head
 None                                               82.54                37.97       47.01                49.94          0.000
 PSLC                                               9.71                 29.61       11.84                32.33          0.012



                                                                                                                                        38
JCE                                              5.64    23.08    13.76    34.46    0.000
MSCE                                             1.96    13.86    19.98    40.01    0.000
Non-Univ Diploma and above                       0.15     3.86     7.42    26.22    0.000

Highest level of formal education acquired in
the household
None                                            68.70    46.38    33.73    47.31    0.000
PSLC                                            15.63    36.32    12.80    33.43    0.926
JCE                                             11.07    31.38    18.66    38.98    0.000
MSCE                                             4.34    20.39    26.32    44.06    0.000
Non-Univ Diploma and above                       0.26     5.05     8.49    27.89    0.000


Size of the household                           5.17     2.40     5.47     2.55     0.701
Number of infant (<5yo) in HH                   0.85     0.85     0.82      0.82    0.027
Number of children (5-14yo) in the household     1.62     1.41     1.66     1.41    0.826
Number of prime adults (15-60yo) in HH           2.39     1.36     2.84     1.50    0.000
Number of elderly (60yo+) in HH                  0.32     0.59     0.16     0.45    0.000
Household access to loan (0/1)                  15.48    36.18    23.09    42.16    0.010
Normalized wealth index                          0.04     0.06     0.11     0.13    0.000
Normalized TLU index                             0.01     0.03     0.01     0.02    0.901
Total land area owned by HH in Acres             3.55    52.84     2.26    16.94    0.202
Household was affected negatively by some       86.71    33.95    84.45    36.26    0.104
income Shock During the last 12 months (0/1)
Household has a migrant network (0/1)           36.52    48.15    30.74    46.17    0.028
Rain - EA level CoV of Dec-Jan rainfall from    0.25     0.04     0.26     0.04     0.017
1983/84 - 2012/13
Average 12-month total rainfall (mm)            850.57   87.09    848.91   100.55   0.017
Annual Mean Temperature (∞C * 10)               215.97   18.97    218.22   19.84    0.587
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Road            10.43    10.05     6.53     7.89    0.000
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Population      38.11    17.87    35.17    18.26    0.012
Center with +20,000
Value of daily ganyu wage salary in the EA      561.67   599.41   592.09   602.18   0.820
(MKW)
Price of maize grains in the EA (MKW)           201.75   112.90   180.81   109.70   0.001
Price of fertilizer in the EA (MKW)             62.12    38.98    63.14    41.31    0.731
EA neighbor’s wage employment                   13.26    13.52    25.50    17.79    0.000
participation
EA neighbor’s self-employment participation     20.74    14.92    26.32    16.28    0.000




                                                                                            39
 Share of total land cultivated in crops (crop
 mix)
 Grains                                              64.31                26.17            65.90                26.52                0.370
 Legumes                                             22.81                22.73            24.16                23.63                0.173
 Tubers                                               1.55                 7.65             1.55                 8.33                0.035
 Oils crops                                           0.48                 4.09            0.13                  1.90                0.107
 Horticulture crops                                   4.14                11.28             3.38                 9.93                0.271
 Cotton                                               1.29                 7.29             1.34                 7.31                0.900
 Tobacco                                              4.48                12.20             2.41                8.64                 0.000
Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data
Notes: PSLC=Primary School Leaving Certificate. JCE=Junior Certificate Examination. MSCE=Malawi School Certificate of Education Examination.




                                                                                                                                               40
Appendix 3: Test of balancing of covariates between non-farm self-employment participants and non-participants, 2010-2013, rural
Malawi
                                                 Self-employment Non participants    Self-employment participants    t-test difference

 Variables                                         Mean                   SD         Mean                   SD           p-value

 Treatment variables
 Non-farm wage employment (0/1)                    15.05                 35.76       15.33                 36.04          0.668
 Non-farm self-employment (0/1)                    0.00                  0.00        100.00                0.00

 Outcome variables
 HHPCE                                           54,741.65             43,462.77    68,724.30            55,600.92        0.000
 Log of HHPCE                                      10.70                 0.63         10.91                0.66           0.000
 Poverty incidence                                 39.81                 48.96        27.72                44.78          0.000
 Poverty gap
 Poverty severity
 Food insecurity (0/1)                             33.24                 47.11       30.15                 45.91          0.213

 Food consumption adequacy
 1                                                 42.81                 49.49       36.52                 48.17          0.063
 2                                                 50.90                 50.00       55.70                 49.70          0.369
 3                                                 6.29                  24.29        7.79                 26.81          0.094

 Seeds purchase decision (0/1)                     39.27                 48.84       47.51                 49.96          0.000
 Fertilizer purchase decision (0/1)                36.73                 48.21       46.71                 49.91          0.000
 Inputs purchase decision (0/1)                    57.48                 49.44       69.98                 45.85          0.000
 Seed purchase per acre (1000MKW)                  0.49                  1.66         0.65                 1.78           0.011
 Fertilizer purchase per acre (1000MKW)            3.48                  9.62         4.00                 10.38          0.215
 Inputs purchase per acre (1000MKW)                3.96                  9.96         4.60                 10.16          0.078
 Land cultivated (acres)                           4.09                  51.38        5.67                 55.60          0.903

 Covariates
 Age of the household head                         44.72                 17.01       41.58                 14.37          0.000
 Male headed-household                             74.92                 43.35       80.65                 39.52          0.014

 Highest level of formal education acquired by
 household head
 None                                              78.33                 41.20       72.95                 44.44          0.010
 PSLC                                              9.70                  29.61       11.22                 31.58          0.194



                                                                                                                                         41
JCE                                              6.27    24.25     9.05    28.69    0.106
MSCE                                             4.52    20.77     5.28    22.37    0.354
Non-Univ Diploma and above                       1.18    10.78     1.51    12.19    0.126

Highest level of formal education acquired in
the household
None                                            65.42    47.57    56.11    49.65    0.000
PSLC                                            14.29    35.00    18.51    38.85    0.000
JCE                                             11.60    32.02    14.49    35.21    0.246
MSCE                                            7.26     25.95     9.13    28.81    0.248
Non-Univ Diploma and above                       1.43    11.87     1.76    13.15    0.211


Size of the household                           5.12     2.39     5.56     2.50     0.000
Number of infant (<5yo) in HH                   0.82     0.83     0.94     0.89     0.004
Number of children (5-14yo) in the household    1.59     1.41      1.75     1.41    0.001
Number of prime adults (15-60yo) in HH           2.40     1.39     2.67     1.38    0.000
Number of elderly (60yo+) in HH                 0.32      0.59     0.19     0.48    0.000
Household access to loan (0/1)                  13.53    34.21    27.89    44.86    0.000
Normalized wealth index                          0.05     0.07     0.08     0.11    0.000
Normalized TLU index                             0.01     0.02     0.01     0.06    0.097
Total land area owned by HH in Acres             3.19    49.77     3.97    46.75    0.598
Household was affected negatively by some       85.75    34.96    88.61    31.78    0.027
income Shock During the last 12 months (0/1)
Household has a migrant network (0/1)           36.75    48.22    31.66    46.53    0.070
Rain - EA level CoV of Dec-Jan rainfall from    0.25     0.04     0.26     0.04     0.002
1983/84 - 2012/13
Average 12-month total rainfall (mm)            853.06   89.51    840.36   87.59    0.012
Annual Mean Temperature (∞C * 10)               215.84   19.15    218.01   18.92    0.026
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Road             10.11   9.92      8.87    9.54     0.013
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Population       38.05   18.05    36.28    17.55    0.343
Center with +20,000
Value of daily ganyu wage salary in the EA      548.59   564.61   630.35   710.21   0.005
(MKW)
Price of maize grains in the EA (MKW)           196.70   111.45   205.43   116.73   0.014
Price of fertilizer in the EA (MKW)             60.87    39.22    67.36    39.37    0.000
EA neighbor’s wage employment participation     14.20    14.52    18.43    15.76    0.000
EA neighbor’s self employment participation     19.74    14.32    28.28    16.68    0.000

Share of total land cultivated in crops (crop



                                                                                            42
 mix)
 Grains                                               65.45                26.17           61.15                26.15                0.001
 Legumes                                              22.18                22.64           26.00                23.42                0.007
 Tubers                                                1.51                 7.71            1.68                 7.88                0.758
 Oils crops                                            0.47                4.01             0.28                 3.26                0.589
 Horticulture crops                                    3.92                10.98            4.42                11.53                0.183
 Cotton                                                1.22                7.23             1.57                 7.52                0.149
 Tobacco                                               4.36                12.04            3.57                10.79                0.078
Note: PSLC=Primary School Leaving Certificate. JCE=Junior Certificate Examination. MSCE=Malawi School Certificate of Education Examination.




                                                                                                                                              43
Appendix 4: Test of balancing of covariates between poor and non-poor households, 2010-2013, rural Malawi

                                                       NON POOR                           POOR              t-test difference

 Variables                                     Mean                  SD        Mean                SD           p-value

 Treatment variables
 Non-farm wage employment (0/1)                18.94               39.19       8.65               28.12          0.000
 Non-farm self-employment (0/1)                24.84               43.22       16.08              36.75          0.000

 Outcome variables
 HHPCE                                        76,672.85           49,807.94   25,833.13          7,228.67        0.000
 Log of HHPCE                                   11.13               0.45        10.11              0.33          0.000
 Poverty incidence                               0.00               0.00       100.00              0.00
 Poverty gap
 Poverty severity
 Food insecurity (0/1)                         25.07               43.35       45.24              49.78          0.000

 Food consumption adequacy
 1                                             33.02               47.03       55.69              49.69          0.000
 2                                             58.29               49.32       41.21              49.23          0.000
 3                                              8.69               28.18        3.11              17.36          0.000

 Seeds purchase decision (0/1)                 42.10               49.38       39.26              48.84          0.177
 Fertilizer purchase decision (0/1)            45.93               49.84       27.30              44.56          0.000
 Inputs purchase decision (0/1)                63.68               48.10       54.34              49.82          0.000
 Seed purchase per acre (1000MKW)               0.61               1.94         0.39              1.16           0.000
 Fertilizer purchase per acre (1000MKW)         4.57               11.40        1.99              6.00           0.000
 Inputs purchase per acre (1000MKW)             5.15               11.59        2.38              6.28           0.000
 Land cultivated (acres)                        4.93               62.06        3.60              30.21          0.599

 Covariates
 Age of the household head                     43.51               16.88       44.93              15.87          0.025
 Male headed-household                         77.49               41.77       73.91              43.93          0.026

 Highest level of formal education acquired
 by household head
 None                                          71.53               45.13       86.69              33.98          0.000
 PSLC                                          11.34               31.71       7.82               26.86          0.000
 JCE                                            8.72               28.22       3.74               18.98          0.000


                                                                                                                                44
MSCE                                          6.51    24.67     1.60    12.56    0.000
Non-Univ Diploma and above                    1.90    13.65     0.15     3.82    0.000

Highest level of formal education acquired
in the household
None                                         57.11    49.50    74.05    43.85    0.000
PSLC                                         16.41    37.04    13.17    33.82    0.001
JCE                                          14.16    34.87     8.94    28.54    0.000
MSCE                                         10.02    30.03     3.69    18.86    0.000
Non-Univ Diploma and above                    2.30    15.00     0.15     3.82    0.000


Size of the household                         4.68     2.35     6.12     2.27    0.000
Number of infant (<5yo) in HH                 0.73     0.80     1.03     0.89    0.000
Number of children (5-14yo) in the            1.32     1.33     2.12     1.40    0.000
household
Number of prime adults (15-60yo) in HH        2.34     1.37     2.65     1.41    0.000
Number of elderly (60yo+) in HH               0.28     0.56     0.31     0.59    0.141
Household access to loan (0/1)               18.42    38.77    13.61    34.29    0.003
Normalized wealth index                       0.07     0.10     0.02     0.03    0.000
Normalized TLU index                          0.01     0.04     0.00     0.01    0.000
Total land area owned by HH in Acres          3.88    59.96     2.46    20.45    0.448
Household was affected negatively by         86.41    34.27    86.30    34.40    0.640
some income Shock During the last 12
months (0/1)
Household has a migrant network (0/1)        36.30    48.09    34.55    47.56    0.737
Rain - EA level CoV of Dec-Jan rainfall      0.25     0.04     0.26     0.04     0.706
from 1983/84 - 2012/13
Average 12-month total rainfall (mm)         846.63   83.60    856.55   97.75    0.158
Annual Mean Temperature (∞C * 10)            215.16   18.38    218.25   20.17    0.030
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Road          9.05     9.26    11.19    10.65    0.000
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest              37.05    17.71    38.70    18.31    0.121
Population Center with +20,000
Value of daily ganyu wage salary in the EA   596.44   628.35   515.51   545.18   0.042
(MKW)
Price of maize grains in the EA (MKW)        204.00   113.01   189.44   111.50   0.006
Price of fertilizer in the EA (MKW)          64.59    39.75    58.36    38.34    0.000
EA neighbor’s wage employment                16.49    15.74    12.79    13.04    0.000
participation
EA neighbor’s self-employment                22.60    15.62    19.87    14.49    0.000



                                                                                         45
 participation

 Share of total land cultivated in crops (crop
 mix)
 Grains                                               63.34                    26.30           66.47               25.99              0.000
 Legumes                                              23.73                    22.88           21.82               22.79              0.004
 Tubers                                                1.69                     8.23            1.31                6.89              0.577
 Oils crops                                            0.41                    3.85             0.47                3.88              0.403
 Horticulture crops                                    3.95                    10.95            4.17               11.35              0.862
 Cotton                                                1.21                    7.18             1.44                7.47              0.493
 Tobacco                                               4.76                    12.69            3.26               10.08              0.004
Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data
Note: PSLC=Primary School Leaving Certificate. JCE=Junior Certificate Examination. MSCE=Malawi School Certificate of Education Examination.




                                                                                                                                              46
Appendix 5: Seemingly unrelated system equation estimates of non-farm wage employment and non-farm self-employment
participation model

                                                                GHK Simulated bivariate ML   Seemingly unrelated bivariate ML Probit
                                                                       estimates                           estimates
                              VARIABLES                          Wage               Self     Wage employment        Self employment
                                                               employment       employment

Age of the household head                                         -0.000          -0.000           -0.000                -0.000
                                                                 [0.982]         [0.977]          [0.984]               [0.983]
Male-headed household (0/1)                                     0.423***          0.061          0.423***                0.061
                                                                 [0.003]         [0.599]          [0.003]               [0.596]

Highest level of formal education acquired by household head

PSLC                                                              0.192           0.003            0.192                 0.001
                                                                 [0.270]         [0.984]          [0.270]               [0.993]
JCE                                                             0.621***          0.158          0.622***                0.156
                                                                 [0.004]         [0.425]          [0.004]               [0.430]
MSCE                                                            0.991***          0.117          0.991***                0.118
                                                                 [0.001]         [0.685]          [0.001]               [0.683]
Non-University Diploma and above                                  0.894          0.942+            0.896                0.934+
                                                                 [0.169]         [0.127]          [0.169]               [0.130]

Maximum level of formal education acquired in the household

PSLC                                                              0.097           0.071            0.098                  0.072
                                                                 [0.525]         [0.568]          [0.524]               [0.565]
JCE                                                               0.102          -0.157            0.102                 -0.154
                                                                 [0.579]         [0.332]          [0.580]               [0.341]
MSCE                                                             0.408*          -0.211           0.408*                 -0.211
                                                                 [0.094]         [0.360]          [0.094]               [0.360]
Non-University Diploma and above                                 1.099*         -1.195**          1.098*               -1.192**
                                                                 [0.066]         [0.037]          [0.067]               [0.038]


Number of infant (<5yo) in HH                                    0.007           0.086*            0.007                0.087*
                                                                [0.906]          [0.064]          [0.904]               [0.062]
Number of children (5-14yo) in the household                    0.087**           0.003           0.087**                0.003



                                                                                                                                   47
                                                                     [0.024]    [0.925]    [0.024]     [0.923]
Number of prime adults (15-60yo) in HH                                -0.022   0.087**      -0.022    0.087**
                                                                     [0.604]    [0.015]    [0.602]     [0.015]
Number of elderly (60yo+) in HH                                       -0.103     -0.016     -0.102      -0.015
                                                                     [0.499]    [0.897]    [0.502]     [0.905]
Household access to loan (0/1)                                        -0.042   0.329***     -0.042    0.329***
                                                                     [0.674]    [0.000]    [0.671]     [0.000]
Normalized wealth index                                             1.813***   1.776***   1.810***    1.771***
                                                                     [0.005]    [0.002]    [0.005]     [0.002]
Normalized TLU index                                                 -2.788+     1.882     -2.791+      1.873
                                                                     [0.117]    [0.192]    [0.117]     [0.194]
Total land area owned by HH in Acres                                 0.042**     -0.000   0.042**       -0.000
                                                                     [0.011]    [0.794]    [0.011]     [0.788]
Household was affected negatively by some income Shock During the      0.104     -0.064      0.104      -0.063
last 12 months (0/1)
                                                                    [0.364]    [0.501]      [0.364]    [0.510]
Household has a migrant network (0/1)                                0.042      0.021         0.042      0.021
                                                                    [0.711]    [0.819]      [0.713]    [0.821]
Rain - EA level CoV of Dec-Jan rainfall from 1983/84 - 2012/13                            -5.370***     1.022
                                                                                            [0.002]    [0.454]
Average 12-month total rainfall (mm)                                  -0.001     0.002       -0.001     0.002
                                                                     [0.571]    [0.265]     [0.570]    [0.266]
Annual Mean Temperature (∞C * 10)                                     0.002      -0.002       0.002     -0.002
                                                                     [0.828]    [0.814]     [0.825]    [0.816]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Road                                  -0.014     -0.008      -0.014     -0.008
                                                                     [0.318]    [0.544]     [0.316]    [0.548]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Population Center with +20,000        0.001      -0.001       0.001     -0.001
                                                                     [0.936]    [0.860]     [0.938]    [0.871]
Value of daily ganyu wage salary in the EA                            -0.000     0.000       -0.000      0.000
                                                                     [0.544]    [0.329]     [0.544]    [0.322]
Price of fertilizer in the EA                                        -0.001+     -0.000     -0.001+     -0.000
                                                                     [0.120]    [0.764]     [0.120]    [0.754]
Price of maize grains in the EA                                       -0.001     0.001       -0.001      0.001
                                                                     [0.445]    [0.404]     [0.446]    [0.398]
EA neighbor’s wage employment participation                         0.012***    0.006*     0.012***    0.006*
                                                                     [0.003]    [0.091]     [0.003]    [0.087]
EA neighbor’s self employment participation                         0.007**    0.016***    0.007**    0.016***
                                                                     [0.028]    [0.000]     [0.028]    [0.000]
Time dummy (year 2010=1)                                              -0.029     -0.020      -0.029     -0.019
                                                                     [0.852]    [0.878]     [0.852]    [0.883]



                                                                                                                 48
District dummies (27 -1 dummies)                                              Included           Included            Included               Included

Time average of explanatory variables                                         Included           Included            Included               Included

rho                                                                                             -0.145***                                   -0.150***
                                                                                                  [0.000]                                     [0.000]
Constant                                                                        -0.885           -2.354**              -0.890                -2.358**
                                                                               [0.437]            [0.013]             [0.434]                 [0.012]

 Observations                                                                    5,286                  5,286                   5,286               5,286
Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data
Note: The symbols ***, **, *, and + indicate that the corresponding regression coefficient is statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels,
respectively. P-values between brackets. The GHK estimates are generated using the mvprobit command with 100 draws in STATA. The bivariate ML estimates
are generated using the biprobit command in STATA. The parameters in the table are coefficients and not APEs.




                                                                                                                                                        49
Appendix 6: Effect of participation in the non-farm activities on HHPCE in Malawi, FE
estimates
                                                                              (2)           (4)
VARIABLES                                                                    HHPCE      Log HHPCE
                                                                              FE            FE


Wage employment participation                                                 4.476       0.102**
                                                                             [0.158]      [0.022]
Self-employment participation                                               7.003***     0.129***
                                                                             [0.000]      [0.000]
Age of the household head                                                     -0.053       -0.002
                                                                             [0.633]      [0.232]
Male-headed household (0/1)                                                   2.895       0.063+
                                                                             [0.269]      [0.101]
Highest level of formal education acquired by household head

PSLC                                                                         6.198**       0.036
                                                                             [0.048]      [0.401]
JCE                                                                         15.719***    0.187***
                                                                             [0.005]      [0.005]
MSCE                                                                         20.869*     0.197**
                                                                             [0.054]      [0.049]
Maximum level of formal education acquired in the household

PSLC                                                                          -2.228      -0.011
                                                                             [0.350]     [0.765]
JCE                                                                           -0.755      0.020
                                                                             [0.814]     [0.667]
MSCE                                                                          -1.458      0.004
                                                                             [0.774]     [0.950]

Number of infant (<5yo) in HH                                               -9.266***   -0.139***
                                                                              [0.000]     [0.000]
Number of children (5-14yo) in the household                                -8.872***   -0.136***
                                                                              [0.000]     [0.000]
Number of prime adults (15-60yo) in HH                                      -6.768***   -0.094***
                                                                              [0.000]     [0.000]
Number of elderly (60yo+) in HH                                             -7.836***   -0.118***
                                                                              [0.002]     [0.001]
Household access to loan (0/1)                                                 1.635       0.034
                                                                              [0.436]     [0.221]
Normalized TLU index                                                        140.889**    1.326**
                                                                              [0.045]     [0.032]
Normalized agricultural asset index + Normalized land holdings              41.423***   0.689***
                                                                              [0.000]     [0.000]
Household was affected negatively by some income Shock During the last 12      1.644       0.027
months (0/1)
                                                                             [0.473]     [0.446]
Household has a migrant network (0/1)                                         -1.124      -0.004
                                                                             [0.585]     [0.906]
Rain - EA level CoV of Dec-Jan rainfall from 1983/84 - 2012/13

Average 12-month total rainfall (mm)                                          0.064       0.001+



                                                                                                    50
                                                                                      [0.228]        [0.134]
Annual Mean Temperature (∞C * 10)                                                      0.413           0.000
                                                                                      [0.261]        [0.931]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Road                                                   0.006          -0.001
                                                                                      [0.987]        [0.784]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Population Center with +20,000                         -0.085         -0.003
                                                                                      [0.689]        [0.160]
Price of fertilizer in the EA                                                          -0.013         -0.000
                                                                                      [0.403]        [0.604]
Price of maize grains in the EA                                                       0.083**        0.001**
                                                                                      [0.024]        [0.029]
Time dummy (year 2010=1)                                                               -2.343         -0.037
                                                                                      [0.567]        [0.623]

District dummies                                                                      Included       Included

Time average of explanatory variables

Constant                                                                              -100.016       9.223***
                                                                                       [0.354]        [0.000]

 Observations                                                                            5,321           5,321
 Number of households                                                                    2,764           2,764
Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data
Note: PSLC=Primary School Leaving Certificate. JCE=Junior Certificate Examination. MSCE=Malawi School
Certificate of Education Examination.
The dependent variable in column 1 and 2 are levels of HHPCE. In column 3 and 4, the dependent variable is Log
(HHPCE). The symbols ***, **, *, and + indicate that the corresponding regression coefficients are statistically
significant at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, respectively. P-values based on clustered robust standard errors
between brackets.




                                                                                                                51
 Appendix 7: Effects of participation in the RNFE on quintiles of HHPCE
                                                                 p10         p20        p25        p50        p75          p80         p90
VARIABLES



Wage employment participation                                  2.611+       2.634+    4.639***   6.198***    6.386**      6.214*       2.709
                                                               [0.114]      [0.138]    [0.006]    [0.005]    [0.016]     [0.086]      [0.714]
Self-employment participation                                  2.347**     4.209***   4.303***   6.503***   10.804***   13.041***    16.227**
                                                               [0.018]      [0.001]    [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.016]
Age of the household head                                       -0.042       0.005     -0.013     -0.079      -0.161     -0.192+      -0.392*
                                                               [0.524]      [0.939]    [0.829]    [0.341]    [0.198]     [0.144]      [0.057]
Male-headed household (0/1)                                     1.870       2.858*      1.598      2.211     6.659*       6.856*       2.388
                                                               [0.268]      [0.063]    [0.335]    [0.399]    [0.060]     [0.091]      [0.740]

Highest level of formal education acquired by household head

PSLC                                                            -0.349       -1.262    -0.916      0.929     9.709*     10.191*        6.786
                                                               [0.828]      [0.423]   [0.658]     [0.717]    [0.055]     [0.070]      [0.466]
JCE                                                            5.945**     8.658***   7.995**    9.316**    21.622***   18.744**      20.544
                                                               [0.011]      [0.004]   [0.011]     [0.033]    [0.006]     [0.034]      [0.210]
MSCE                                                            2.274        4.883     5.615     16.777**   36.827***   43.716**      28.356
                                                               [0.479]      [0.444]   [0.348]     [0.014]    [0.009]     [0.016]      [0.424]
Maximum level of formal education acquired in the household

PSLC                                                             0.626       0.779     0.259     -0.171      -4.342       -6.652      -1.599
                                                                [0.734]     [0.693]   [0.915]    [0.943]     [0.316]     [0.223]      [0.829]
JCE                                                              0.325       1.269     0.372      1.340      -5.894       -4.363      -1.536
                                                                [0.887]     [0.539]   [0.885]    [0.703]     [0.265]     [0.521]      [0.881]
MSCE                                                             2.153       1.823    -0.258     -0.767     -15.890+     -10.826       -0.373
                                                                [0.397]     [0.678]   [0.957]    [0.896]     [0.135]     [0.405]      [0.983]

Number of infant (<5yo) in HH                                  -2.766***   -4.092*** -4.592*** -6.785***    -9.154***   -10.031***   -9.751***
                                                                 [0.000]    [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.000]       [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]
Number of children (5-14yo) in the household                   -3.433***   -4.063*** -4.556*** -5.737***    -6.848***    -7.026***   -8.640***
                                                                 [0.000]    [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.000]       [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]
Number of prime adults (15-60yo) in HH                         -2.939***   -3.856*** -4.221*** -4.003***    -4.337***    -5.659***   -8.076***
                                                                 [0.000]    [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.000]       [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]
Number of elderly (60yo+) in HH                                 -3.744**   -7.800*** -6.678*** -4.867**      -7.138*       -6.759      -1.831
                                                                 [0.022]    [0.000]   [0.001]   [0.024]       [0.086]     [0.199]     [0.780]
Household access to loan (0/1)                                   2.727**     1.593     1.089     0.723         0.871        0.757       2.754
                                                                 [0.048]    [0.318]   [0.452]   [0.728]       [0.632]     [0.784]     [0.549]
Normalized TLU index                                              32.917     12.544    48.236   89.698*      99.853+       19.958      13.738



                                                                                                                                         52
                                                                                      [0.242]   [0.790]   [0.281]   [0.097]          [0.138]       [0.759]      [0.912]
Normalized agricultural asset index + Normalized land holdings                       19.665*** 22.493*** 23.349*** 27.503***        32.530***     32.966***    46.026***
                                                                                      [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.000]          [0.001]       [0.002]      [0.006]
Household was affected negatively by some income Shock During the last 12 months       0.662     0.474     1.783     0.960           4.360+        6.643+       5.915+
(0/1)
                                                                                      [0.593]     [0.644]    [0.167]     [0.647]      [0.131]      [0.115]      [0.110]
Household has a migrant network (0/1)                                                  -0.970     -1.881+     -1.215       0.127        0.220        2.956       2.504
                                                                                      [0.340]     [0.121]    [0.396]     [0.948]      [0.938]      [0.361]      [0.583]
Rain - EA level CoV of Dec-Jan rainfall from 1983/84 - 2012/13                        -13.093     -22.098    -28.994    -39.669*     -60.347+      -71.742       34.300
                                                                                      [0.515]     [0.348]    [0.247]     [0.087]      [0.141]      [0.187]      [0.677]
Average 12-month total rainfall (mm)                                                    0.019       0.013      0.011       0.019       0.026         0.025        0.014
                                                                                      [0.443]     [0.634]    [0.733]     [0.561]      [0.508]      [0.566]      [0.857]
Annual Mean Temperature (∞C * 10)                                                      -0.096      -0.076     -0.022      -0.003       0.201         0.528       1.146*
                                                                                      [0.406]     [0.537]    [0.886]     [0.988]      [0.683]      [0.244]      [0.077]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Road                                                   -0.100      -0.151     -0.148      -0.034       -0.189       -0.365       -0.212
                                                                                      [0.640]     [0.382]    [0.437]     [0.859]      [0.694]      [0.483]      [0.772]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Population Center with +20,000                          0.052       0.062      0.026      -0.109      -0.045        -0.043      -0.555+
                                                                                      [0.635]     [0.642]    [0.817]     [0.431]      [0.758]      [0.870]      [0.116]
Price of fertilizer in the EA                                                          -0.006    -0.012**    -0.011*     -0.014*       -0.018       -0.017       -0.010
                                                                                      [0.390]     [0.038]    [0.064]     [0.086]      [0.173]      [0.295]      [0.731]
Price of maize grains in the EA                                                       0.056**       0.033      0.026    0.073***     0.082***      0.097**      0.195**
                                                                                      [0.024]     [0.154]    [0.323]     [0.009]      [0.003]      [0.011]      [0.010]
Time dummy (year 2010=1)                                                                0.005     -3.124+    -3.459*      -2.524       -3.625       -2.797        4.653
                                                                                      [0.998]     [0.138]    [0.075]     [0.341]      [0.297]      [0.388]      [0.571]
                                                                                                                                                                    [.]
Time average of explanatory variables

District dummies

Constant                                                                             36.094**    33.481**   30.597**    44.849***    62.689*       65.833+      34.729
                                                                                      [0.011]     [0.016]    [0.028]     [0.002]     [0.079]       [0.100]      [0.489]

                                                                                       5,321      5,321       5,321       5,321       5,321         5,321        5,321
  Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data
  Note: PSLC=Primary School Leaving Certificate. JCE=Junior Certificate Examination. MSCE=Malawi School Certificate of Education Examination.
  ***, **, *, and + indicate that the corresponding regression coefficient is statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, respectively. The table
  presents quantile partial effects of explanatory variables from 10th to the 90th percentile. P-values between.




                                                                                                                                                                      53
 Appendix 8: Effects of participation in the non-farm activities on poverty incidence, gap and severity in rural Malawi
                                                                 Poverty incidence                         Poverty gap                                        Poverty severity
                       VARIABLES                               CRE Probit Linear FE     CRE        Fractional CRE      CRE      Linear FE    CRE        Fractional CRE        CRE       Linear
                                                                                        Probit         Probit          Tobit                 Probit         Probit            Tobit      FE

Wage employment participation                                   -0.074**    -0.072**   -0.034***      -0.034**       -0.033**    -0.034**    -0.018**      -0.018*          -0.017**   -0.019**
                                                                 [0.012]     [0.022]     [0.007]       [0.019]        [0.011]     [0.018]     [0.021]       [0.056]          [0.017]    [0.045]
Self-employment participation                                  -0.085***   -0.083***   -0.035***     -0.035***      -0.035***   -0.030***   -0.018***     -0.018***        -0.017***   -0.014**
                                                                 [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.000]     [0.002]     [0.000]       [0.001]          [0.000]    [0.011]
Age of the household head                                       0.003**      0.002*      0.001+         0.001         0.001*       0.001      0.000+         0.000           0.000*      0.000
                                                                 [0.027]     [0.069]     [0.110]       [0.154]        [0.064]     [0.279]     [0.142]       [0.195]          [0.058]    [0.301]
Male-headed household (0/1)                                      -0.044+      -0.045    -0.025**      -0.026**       -0.023**     -0.022+     -0.010*      -0.011*           -0.010*     -0.008
                                                                 [0.120]     [0.206]     [0.020]       [0.020]        [0.035]     [0.103]     [0.091]       [0.077]          [0.076]    [0.315]

Highest level of formal education acquired by household head

PSLC                                                              0.043     0.060+        0.005         0.003           0.008      0.016     -0.000         -0.001            0.003     0.007
                                                                [0.288]     [0.142]      [0.775]       [0.849]        [0.611]    [0.272]     [0.990]        [0.939]         [0.676]    [0.392]
JCE                                                             -0.096*     -0.061     -0.044***      -0.046**       -0.042**     -0.015    -0.019**       -0.020**        -0.018**     -0.001
                                                                [0.051]     [0.282]      [0.004]       [0.012]        [0.017]    [0.431]     [0.013]        [0.030]         [0.031]    [0.954]
MSCE                                                             -0.075     -0.010       -0.037        -0.040          -0.035     0.004      -0.014         -0.015           -0.013     0.008
                                                                [0.347]     [0.888]      [0.185]       [0.176]        [0.217]    [0.869]     [0.376]        [0.342]         [0.318]    [0.576]
Maximum level of formal education acquired in the
household

PSLC                                                             -0.002      -0.016      0.008         0.008            0.004     -0.004      0.004          0.004            0.002     -0.003
                                                                [0.949]     [0.644]     [0.554]       [0.565]         [0.729]    [0.750]     [0.577]        [0.598]         [0.783]    [0.694]
JCE                                                             -0.070*     -0.069+      -0.014        -0.015          -0.020     -0.015     -0.009         -0.009          -0.011+     -0.009
                                                                [0.077]     [0.119]     [0.328]       [0.345]         [0.162]    [0.347]     [0.280]        [0.312]         [0.113]    [0.331]
MSCE                                                            -0.090+      -0.077     -0.026        -0.026           -0.030     -0.026     -0.012         -0.012           -0.015     -0.012
                                                                [0.122]     [0.201]     [0.227]       [0.299]         [0.166]    [0.304]     [0.377]        [0.422]         [0.174]    [0.394]

Number of infant (<5yo) in HH                                  0.074***    0.078***    0.028***      0.028***        0.030***   0.030***     0.013***      0.013***        0.015***    0.014***
                                                                [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]       [0.000]         [0.000]    [0.000]      [0.000]       [0.000]         [0.000]     [0.000]
Number of children (5-14yo) in the household                   0.074***    0.081***    0.029***      0.029***        0.030***   0.030***     0.014***      0.014***        0.015***    0.014***
                                                                [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]       [0.000]         [0.000]    [0.000]      [0.000]       [0.000]         [0.000]     [0.000]
Number of prime adults (15-60yo) in HH                         0.052***    0.047***    0.024***      0.024***        0.024***   0.021***     0.012***      0.012***        0.012***    0.010***
                                                                [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]       [0.000]         [0.000]    [0.000]      [0.000]       [0.000]         [0.000]     [0.000]
Number of elderly (60yo+) in HH                                0.104***    0.103***    0.040***      0.040***        0.042***   0.034***     0.019***      0.019***        0.020***    0.015**
                                                                [0.001]     [0.003]     [0.000]       [0.000]         [0.000]    [0.010]      [0.001]       [0.002]         [0.000]     [0.048]
Household access to loan (0/1)                                   -0.000      -0.003     -0.015*       -0.015*          -0.010   -0.019**    -0.013***     -0.013***         -0.008*         -
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.016***
                                                                 [0.984]     [0.921]     [0.091]       [0.091]       [0.277]     [0.030]      [0.008]       [0.006]         [0.066]     [0.001]
Normalized TLU index                                            -1.535**    -0.921*       -0.426        -0.434       -0.537*      -0.102      -0.224        -0.222          -0.262*      -0.018
                                                                 [0.045]     [0.086]     [0.181]       [0.201]       [0.056]     [0.554]      [0.217]       [0.256]         [0.057]     [0.835]
Normalized agricultural asset index + Normalized land          -0.478***   -0.465***   -0.195***     -0.197***      -0.198***   -0.194***   -0.102***     -0.103***        -0.101***        -
holdings                                                                                                                                                                               0.100***
                                                                [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]       [0.000]         [0.000]    [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.000]         [0.000]     [0.000]
Household was affected negatively by some income Shock           -0.015      -0.023     -0.006        -0.005           -0.005     -0.003      0.001          0.001           -0.000       0.004



                                                                                                                                                                                          54
During the last 12 months (0/1)
                                                         [0.541]    [0.477]    [0.523]    [0.608]      [0.613]   [0.818]    [0.844]        [0.856]    [1.000]    [0.593]
Household has a migrant network (0/1)                     0.007      0.016     -0.006     -0.006        -0.001    -0.007    -0.004         -0.005      -0.001     -0.006
                                                         [0.769]    [0.551]    [0.517]    [0.528]      [0.875]   [0.519]    [0.367]        [0.375]    [0.787]    [0.368]
Rain - EA level CoV of Dec-Jan rainfall from 1983/84 -   0.900**                0.171      0.164         0.239               0.057          0.056       0.098
2012/13
                                                         [0.018]               [0.223]    [0.431]      [0.249]              [0.448]        [0.603]    [0.317]
Average 12-month total rainfall (mm)                      -0.000     -0.001   -0.000**    -0.000*       -0.000   -0.000*   -0.000**        -0.000*     -0.000   -0.000+
                                                         [0.745]    [0.209]    [0.020]    [0.061]      [0.201]   [0.100]    [0.013]        [0.055]    [0.190]   [0.130]
Annual Mean Temperature (∞C * 10)                          0.001     -0.000     0.001      0.001         0.001    0.001      0.000          -0.000      0.000    -0.000
                                                         [0.659]    [0.919]    [0.515]    [0.554]      [0.494]   [0.632]    [0.975]        [0.988]    [0.667]   [0.968]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Road                      -0.001     -0.000     -0.001     -0.001       -0.000    -0.002    -0.001          -0.001     -0.000    -0.001
                                                         [0.835]    [0.949]    [0.466]    [0.502]      [0.787]   [0.249]    [0.355]        [0.360]    [0.660]   [0.246]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Population Center with    -0.001     0.000      0.000      0.000        -0.000   0.001+      0.000           0.000      0.000     0.000
+20,000
                                                          [0.510]   [0.897]     [0.890]   [0.885]     [0.863]    [0.128]     [0.539]       [0.527]    [0.959]   [0.193]
Price of fertilizer in the EA                              0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000         0.000      0.000     0.000
                                                          [0.632]   [0.892]     [0.341]   [0.413]     [0.486]    [0.792]     [0.450]       [0.520]    [0.484]   [0.767]
Price of maize grains in the EA                          -0.001**   -0.001+   -0.000***   -0.000*     -0.000*    -0.000*   -0.000***       -0.000*    -0.000*   -0.000*
                                                          [0.022]   [0.112]     [0.003]   [0.055]     [0.054]    [0.059]     [0.008]       [0.083]    [0.063]   [0.084]
Time dummy (year 2010=1)                                   0.010     0.011       0.015     0.015       0.013      0.012       0.010         0.011      0.008     0.010
                                                          [0.786]   [0.857]     [0.273]   [0.436]     [0.513]    [0.586]     [0.177]       [0.332]    [0.409]   [0.462]

Time average included                                    Included             Included    Included    Included             Included    Included      Included

District dummies included                                Included             Included    Included    Included             Included    Included      Included

Constant                                                            1.578+                                       0.629+                                          0.388*
                                                                    [0.137]                                      [0.131]                                         [0.099]

Observations                                              5,317      5,321      5,317      5,321       5,321      5,321      5,317          5,321      5,321     5,321
R-squared                                                            0.130                                        0.141                                          0.107
Number of households                                                 2,764                                        2,764                                          2,764
  Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data
  Note: PSLC=Primary School Leaving Certificate. JCE=Junior Certificate Examination. MSCE=Malawi School Certificate of Education Examination.
   ***, **, *, and + indicate that the corresponding regression APE is statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, respectively. The table presents
  APEs on all explanatory variables. The APEs from the CRE Probit models are estimated using GEE approach. The CRE fractional Probit APEs are from GLM
  estimation. The unconditional APEs from CRE Tobit are estimated using pooled Tobit regression methods. The linear FE results are presented for comparison
  purpose. P-values between brackets are based on cluster robust standard errors




                                                                                                                                                                   55
Appendix 9: Effects of participation in the non-farm activities on food security and subjective well being
                                                                               Food insecure           Adequacy of food consumption
                                         VARIABLES                        CRE Probit     Linear FE   CRE ordered Probit      Linear FE

Wage employment participation                                              -0.047+        -0.065**        0.177**            0.104**
                                                                           [0.125]         [0.041]        [0.037]            [0.021]
Self-employment participation                                              -0.034+          -0.027          0.057              0.025
                                                                           [0.140]         [0.281]        [0.379]            [0.482]
Age of the household head                                                   0.000          -0.000          -0.002             -0.000
                                                                           [0.743]         [0.952]        [0.591]            [0.793]
Male-headed household (0/1)                                                 0.016           0.009           0.103              0.045
                                                                           [0.596]         [0.792]        [0.268]            [0.372]

Highest level of formal education acquired by household head

PSLC                                                                        0.071+        0.074+           -0.068              -0.027
                                                                            [0.121]       [0.146]         [0.576]             [0.691]
JCE                                                                         -0.053        -0.067           0.055               0.038
                                                                            [0.355]       [0.252]         [0.730]             [0.607]
MSCE                                                                       -0.141**       -0.119          0.344+              0.180+
                                                                            [0.036]       [0.151]         [0.116]             [0.108]
Maximum level of formal education acquired in the household

PSLC                                                                       -0.029          -0.029          0.107               0.042
                                                                           [0.385]        [0.430]         [0.290]             [0.442]
JCE                                                                        0.087*         0.095*           0.177               0.083
                                                                           [0.072]        [0.055]         [0.169]             [0.236]
MSCE                                                                        0.092         0.113+           -0.069              -0.066
                                                                           [0.188]        [0.137]         [0.698]             [0.504]

Number of infant (<5yo) in HH                                               0.023*        0.026*          -0.063*             -0.032+
                                                                           [0.073]        [0.056]         [0.093]             [0.102]
Number of children (5-14yo) in the household                               0.019**       0.024***        -0.057**            -0.031**
                                                                           [0.029]        [0.007]         [0.025]             [0.032]
Number of prime adults (15-60yo) in HH                                      0.008          0.010         -0.073**             -0.034*
                                                                           [0.461]        [0.506]         [0.011]             [0.089]
Number of elderly (60yo+) in HH                                             0.035          0.021          -0.157*             -0.073+
                                                                           [0.301]        [0.613]         [0.095]             [0.117]
Household access to loan (0/1)                                              0.022          0.024          -0.135*             -0.067*
                                                                           [0.377]        [0.403]         [0.052]             [0.087]
Normalized TLU index                                                       -1.001+        -0.904*          1.198               1.257
                                                                           [0.103]        [0.068]         [0.295]             [0.163]
Normalized agricultural asset index + Normalized land holdings            -0.179***      -0.173**        0.876***            0.414***



                                                                                                                                         56
                                                                                                [0.006]         [0.022]              [0.000]            [0.000]
Household was affected negatively by some income Shock During the last 12 months (0/1)         0.112***        0.107***            -0.274***           -0.147***
                                                                                                [0.000]         [0.000]              [0.000]            [0.002]
Household has a migrant network (0/1)                                                            0.019           0.030                0.023              -0.001
                                                                                                [0.465]         [0.296]              [0.754]            [0.977]
                 Rain - EA level CoV of Dec-Jan rainfall from 1983/84 - 2012/13                  0.425                                -0.531
                                                                                                [0.270]                              [0.616]
Average 12-month total rainfall (mm)                                                              0.001          0.001                -0.001              -0.001
                                                                                                [0.291]         [0.184]              [0.613]             [0.399]
Annual Mean Temperature (∞C * 10)                                                                -0.000          0.001                 0.006               0.003
                                                                                                [0.832]         [0.784]              [0.330]             [0.450]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Road                                                            0.006+           0.004                 0.001               0.005
                                                                                                [0.123]         [0.293]              [0.919]             [0.331]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Population Center with +20,000                                   0.002           0.000               -0.004               -0.003
                                                                                                [0.337]         [0.909]              [0.404]             [0.444]
Price of fertilizer in the EA                                                                     0.000          0.000                 0.000               0.000
                                                                                                [0.222]         [0.203]              [0.740]             [0.895]
Price of maize grains in the EA                                                                0.002***        0.002***             -0.002**             -0.001*
                                                                                                [0.000]         [0.002]              [0.026]             [0.078]
year_2011                                                                                      0.101***         0.122**               -0.114              -0.066
                                                                                                [0.009]         [0.036]              [0.263]             [0.335]


Constant                                                                                                        -2.209*                                  2.298+
                                                                                                                [0.061]                                  [0.115]

Observations                                                                                     5,317           5,321               5,321               5,321
R-squared                                                                                                        0.058                                   0.044
Number of Households                                                                                             2,764               2,764               2,764
Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data
Note: PSLC=Primary School Leaving Certificate. JCE=Junior Certificate Examination. MSCE=Malawi School Certificate of Education Examination.
 ***, **, *, and + indicate that the corresponding regression APE is statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, respectively. The table presents
APEs except in the ordered Probit cases. The APEs from the CRE Probit models are estimated using GEE approach. The coefficients form the CRE ordered
Probit are from pooled ordered Probit. The linear FE results are presented for comparison purpose. P-values between brackets are based on cluster robust
standard errors.




                                                                                                                                                                   57
Appendix 10: Effects of participation in non-farm activities on inputs purchases for farm households only
                                                  Fertilizer purchase    Inputs purchase decision   Value of fertilizer purchase per   Value of inputs purchase per acre   Land cultivated in
                                                    decision (0/1                  (0/1)                acre of land cultivated               of land cultivated                 acre

VARIABLES                                       CRE Probit   Linear FE   CRE Probit   Linear FE     CRE Tobit           Linear FE       CRE Tobit          Linear FE        CRE       Linear
                                                                                                                                                                            Tobit      FE

Wage employment participation                      0.039         0.037      0.046        0.037          0.156              -0.638          -0.124            -0.874         -0.292     0.274
                                                 [0.190]       [0.303]    [0.160]      [0.260]        [0.745]             [0.419]         [0.802]            [0.305]       [0.699]   [0.800]
Self-employment participation                    0.045**       0.055**    0.053**      0.060**         0.388               0.136            0.234             0.085         0.710     -0.576
                                                 [0.043]       [0.036]    [0.031]      [0.039]        [0.225]             [0.786]         [0.495]            [0.870]       [0.561]   [0.893]
Age of the household head                       -0.004***     -0.003**     -0.001       -0.000        -0.034+              -0.001          -0.007            -0.011          0.031     0.303
                                                 [0.003]       [0.015]    [0.654]      [0.777]        [0.111]             [0.961]         [0.714]            [0.639]       [0.241]   [0.312]
Male-headed household (0/1)                       -0.013        -0.003     -0.035       -0.027         -0.707            -1.346**        -1.105**           -1.417**        -1.272     3.526
                                                 [0.689]       [0.942]    [0.311]      [0.535]        [0.211]             [0.026]         [0.030]            [0.023]       [0.179]   [0.623]

Highest level of formal education acquired by
household head

PSLC                                              -0.006        -0.017       0.022        0.017        -0.395             -0.887           -0.226           -0.764         0.895+    13.556
                                                 [0.882]       [0.693]     [0.620]      [0.708]       [0.458]            [0.291]          [0.702]           [0.392]        [0.138]   [0.270]
JCE                                               0.075         0.077       -0.026       -0.061        0.976              1.177             0.496            1.481          1.209     6.053
                                                 [0.182]       [0.165]     [0.684]      [0.287]       [0.260]            [0.423]          [0.602]           [0.339]        [0.270]   [0.264]
MSCE                                              0.062         0.065       -0.033       -0.028        0.755              2.555            0.489             3.071          1.690     8.861
                                                 [0.442]       [0.385]     [0.712]      [0.719]       [0.590]            [0.346]          [0.760]           [0.279]        [0.273]   [0.158]
Maximum level of formal education acquired
in the household

PSLC                                               0.015        0.017       -0.003       -0.010        0.243               0.151            0.058            0.199         -1.708*   -17.457
                                                 [0.644]       [0.644]     [0.931]      [0.806]       [0.647]             [0.803]         [0.909]           [0.756]        [0.065]   [0.267]
JCE                                               -0.032       -0.002       0.059        0.067        -1.003*            -1.702**          -0.428           -1.653*         -1.362    -9.212
                                                 [0.457]       [0.973]     [0.221]      [0.171]       [0.079]             [0.046]         [0.506]           [0.074]        [0.159]   [0.299]
MSCE                                              -0.013        0.038      0.092+       0.122*         0.288               1.060           1.623             1.620         -2.040*   -11.930
                                                 [0.822]       [0.550]     [0.148]      [0.078]       [0.819]             [0.617]         [0.310]           [0.472]        [0.096]   [0.217]

Number of infant (<5yo) in HH                    -0.024*       -0.022*      -0.001       0.003         -0.214             -0.023           -0.047            -0.039          2.165     9.402
                                                 [0.054]       [0.090]     [0.953]      [0.849]       [0.319]            [0.938]          [0.818]           [0.904]        [0.296]   [0.304]
Number of children (5-14yo) in the household       0.006         0.003       0.004       0.006         -0.095            -0.314+           -0.149            -0.301          0.525     2.975
                                                 [0.529]       [0.765]     [0.664]      [0.549]       [0.505]            [0.125]          [0.345]           [0.194]        [0.460]   [0.477]
Number of prime adults (15-60yo) in HH          0.027***       0.021**      0.014        0.011          0.189             -0.109            0.040            -0.106          0.243    -0.202
                                                 [0.008]       [0.049]     [0.221]      [0.326]       [0.232]            [0.642]          [0.809]           [0.665]        [0.248]   [0.776]
Number of elderly (60yo+) in HH                   -0.003        -0.011      -0.007       -0.014        -0.161             -0.376           -0.312            -0.365         -0.151    -6.750
                                                 [0.927]       [0.734]     [0.837]      [0.687]       [0.743]            [0.549]          [0.555]           [0.604]        [0.777]   [0.340]
Household access to loan (0/1)                    0.013         0.017       0.030       0.046+       0.833**              1.291*          0.918**           1.170*          -0.166     1.353
                                                 [0.566]       [0.504]     [0.263]      [0.111]       [0.035]            [0.065]          [0.025]           [0.080]        [0.896]   [0.702]
Normalized TLU index                               0.519        0.941*       0.552        0.436      16.426**           47.688***         14.816*          45.936***        1.380    13.952
                                                 [0.278]       [0.067]     [0.473]      [0.433]       [0.013]            [0.005]          [0.075]           [0.008]        [0.678]   [0.549]
Normalized agricultural asset index +           0.260***      0.252***    0.210***     0.219***      2.757***              1.438          2.326**             1.643         2.436     -7.698
Normalized land holdings



                                                                                                                                                                                           58
                                                [0.000]     [0.000]    [0.001]    [0.000]    [0.001]     [0.286]     [0.013]     [0.263]    [0.198]   [0.321]
Household was affected negatively by some        -0.006      0.000      -0.008     -0.005     0.030       0.712       0.194       0.588     1.490+    4.532+
income Shock During the last 12 months (0/1)
                                                [0.815]     [0.989]    [0.765]    [0.873]    [0.940]     [0.211]     [0.653]     [0.294]    [0.131]   [0.123]
Household has a migrant network (0/1)            0.027       0.013      -0.035    -0.046+     -0.180     -0.794+     -0.622+      -0.692     0.555     4.839
                                                [0.281]     [0.639]    [0.204]    [0.129]    [0.662]     [0.104]     [0.135]     [0.175]    [0.363]   [0.174]
Rain - EA level CoV of Dec-Jan rainfall from   -1.141***                 0.253              -13.870+                  2.814                 -25.396
1983/84 - 2012/13
                                                [0.005]                 [0.559]               [0.147]                 [0.749]               [0.483]
Average 12-month total rainfall (mm)             -0.001       0.000      -0.001    -0.000    -0.020**     -0.035     -0.026**    -0.042+     -0.009    -0.081
                                                [0.150]     [0.899]     [0.203]   [0.938]     [0.036]    [0.154]      [0.045]    [0.145]    [0.474]   [0.175]
Annual Mean Temperature (∞C * 10)              -0.007***     -0.002    -0.006**   -0.004+   -0.095***    -0.110+    -0.113***   -0.138**      0.026    0.278
                                                [0.004]     [0.479]     [0.025]   [0.102]     [0.001]    [0.107]      [0.000]    [0.035]    [0.609]   [0.212]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Road             -0.001      -0.003      -0.002    -0.005     -0.115*   -0.266**     -0.156**   -0.302**      0.165    0.034
                                                [0.764]     [0.644]     [0.691]   [0.308]     [0.057]    [0.024]      [0.011]    [0.014]    [0.279]   [0.860]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Population       -0.003     -0.003       -0.003    -0.001      -0.000      0.067       0.023      0.095      -0.037    0.114
Center with +20,000
                                                [0.171]     [0.244]    [0.217]    [0.768]    [0.994]     [0.609]     [0.669]     [0.550]    [0.267]   [0.532]
Price of fertilizer in the EA                   -0.000+     -0.000      -0.000     -0.000    -0.004*      -0.002      -0.001     -0.002       0.003    0.072
                                                [0.109]     [0.162]    [0.437]    [0.442]    [0.058]     [0.416]     [0.634]     [0.428]    [0.327]   [0.231]
Price of maize grains in the EA                  -0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000     0.006       0.011       0.010       0.013      -0.007    0.022
                                                [0.982]     [0.950]    [0.541]    [0.969]    [0.371]     [0.181]     [0.211]     [0.151]    [0.669]   [0.768]

Share of total land cultivated in crops

grains crops                                      0.001     -0.006**   -0.004**    -0.004     0.027      0.081*       -0.001     0.088*      0.012     -0.124
                                                [0.348]      [0.045]    [0.016]   [0.189]    [0.281]     [0.083]     [0.923]     [0.065]    [0.600]   [0.371]
legumes crops                                     0.001     -0.006**    -0.003*    -0.004     -0.003      0.032      -0.026*      0.037      0.018     -0.121
                                                [0.650]      [0.029]    [0.053]   [0.294]    [0.916]     [0.514]     [0.096]     [0.452]    [0.460]   [0.431]
tubers crops                                     -0.001    -0.008***   -0.005**   -0.005+     -0.014      0.040       -0.030      0.054     -0.027+    -0.243
                                                [0.647]      [0.009]    [0.013]   [0.148]    [0.654]     [0.415]     [0.207]     [0.297]    [0.108]   [0.162]
oil crops                                      0.007***                  0.001                0.044                   -0.010                 0.026
                                                [0.007]                 [0.811]              [0.372]                 [0.828]                [0.497]
Horticulture crops                                0.001     -0.006**     -0.002    -0.002     -0.004       0.033      -0.019       0.037     0.010     -0.210
                                                [0.472]      [0.038]    [0.336]   [0.503]    [0.875]     [0.493]     [0.320]      [0.450]   [0.434]   [0.371]
cotton crops                                     -0.002    -0.009***     -0.003    -0.004    -0.060*      -0.020    -0.049***     -0.013     0.003     -0.149
                                                [0.346]      [0.006]    [0.227]   [0.313]    [0.092]     [0.690]     [0.010]      [0.789]   [0.927]   [0.290]
tobacco crops                                  0.007***       0.000      0.002     0.001    0.095***    0.158***    0.065***    0.159***     0.110     0.089
                                                [0.000]      [0.999]    [0.366]   [0.866]    [0.001]     [0.002]     [0.000]      [0.002]   [0.294]   [0.295]
Other crops                                                 -0.007**               -0.001                  0.044                   0.046               -0.475
                                                             [0.032]              [0.820]                [0.384]                  [0.372]             [0.376]
Total value of crop sales (MKW)                   0.000       0.000     -0.000     -0.000    0.000***   0.000***    0.000***     0.000***    -0.000    -0.000
                                                [0.793]      [0.891]   [0.787]    [0.409]     [0.001]    [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.000]   [0.532]   [0.621]
Time dummy (year 2010=1)                         -0.045      -0.028     0.001      -0.015   -1.800***   -2.110***   -1.294**    -2.397***    0.088    15.212
                                                [0.206]      [0.490]   [0.989]    [0.741]     [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.046]      [0.002]   [0.964]   [0.339]
District dummies included


Constant                                                     0.873                1.835+                43.646+                 55.424*               -46.400
                                                            [0.455]               [0.105]               [0.117]                 [0.076]               [0.430]




                                                                                                                                                           59
Observations                               5,038       5,038      5,038      5,038        5,038          5,038           5,038          5,038       5,038    5,038
R-squared                                              0.073                 0.049                       0.119                          0.131                0.033
Number of households                                   2,675                 2,675                       2,675                          2,675                2,675
Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data
Note: PSLC=Primary School Leaving Certificate. JCE=Junior Certificate Examination. MSCE=Malawi School Certificate of Education Examination.
***, **, *, and + indicate that the corresponding regression APE is statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, respectively. The table presents
APEs on all explanatory variables. The APEs from the CRE Probit models are estimated using GEE approach. The unconditional APEs from CRE Tobit are
estimated using pooled Tobit regression methods. The linear FE results are presented for comparison purpose. P-values between brackets are based on cluster
robust standard errors.




                                                                                                                                                                 60
Appendix 11: Multivariate recursive Probit estimation of effects of non-farm employment participation on activities on inputs
purchases for farm households only.
                                                                 Fertilizer purchase                             Inputs purchase
                                                        (1)               (2)             (3)
VARIABLES                                             Wage               Self-         Fertilizer     Wage            Self-          Inputs
                                                    employment      employment         purchased    employment     employment      purchased

Wage employment participation                            .                              0.437***         .                          0.271*
                                                                                         [0.002]                                    [0.053]
Self-employment participation                                             .             0.339***                         .          0.237*
                                                                                         [0.007]                                    [0.051]
Age of the household head                              0.002            0.002          -0.013***       0.002           0.001         -0.002
                                                      [0.722]          [0.743]           [0.008]      [0.761]         [0.775]       [0.679]
Male-headed household (0/1)                          0.445***           0.031             -0.062     0.447***          0.026         -0.107
                                                      [0.003]          [0.795]           [0.585]      [0.003]         [0.826]       [0.315]

Highest level of formal education acquired by
household head

PSLC                                                   0.199            0.075            -0.039        0.208           0.077          0.053
                                                      [0.274]          [0.629]          [0.793]       [0.255]         [0.623]       [0.717]
JCE                                                  0.700***           0.208             0.189      0.698***          0.211         -0.085
                                                      [0.002]          [0.305]          [0.333]       [0.002]         [0.297]       [0.666]
MSCE                                                 1.172***           0.272             0.077      1.169***          0.277         -0.140
                                                      [0.000]          [0.334]          [0.782]       [0.000]         [0.324]       [0.624]
Maximum level of formal education acquired in the
household

PSLC                                                   0.127            0.044             0.038        0.122           0.041         -0.016
                                                      [0.427]         [0.733]           [0.760]       [0.446]        [0.749]        [0.897]
JCE                                                    0.064           -0.219            -0.133        0.068          -0.219          0.168
                                                      [0.736]         [0.188]           [0.393]       [0.724]        [0.187]        [0.275]
MSCE                                                   0.335          -0.365+            -0.074        0.343         -0.361+          0.275
                                                      [0.175]         [0.115]           [0.737]       [0.166]        [0.119]        [0.213]

Number of infant (<5yo) in HH                         0.030            0.087*           -0.083*       0.031           0.089*         -0.004
                                                     [0.607]           [0.067]          [0.070]      [0.590]          [0.063]       [0.932]
Number of children (5-14yo) in the household         0.094**            0.001            0.012       0.094**           0.002          0.011
                                                     [0.018]           [0.975]          [0.699]      [0.018]          [0.953]       [0.719]


                                                                                                                                               61
Number of prime adults (15-60yo) in HH                   -0.023    0.085**    0.084**      -0.019    0.085**      0.041
                                                        [0.605]     [0.021]    [0.019]    [0.671]     [0.021]    [0.239]
Number of elderly (60yo+) in HH                          -0.079     -0.023      -0.004     -0.082      -0.019     -0.027
                                                        [0.612]     [0.855]    [0.969]    [0.600]     [0.880]    [0.804]
Household access to loan (0/1)                           -0.030    0.346***     0.016      -0.025    0.346***     0.076
                                                        [0.769]     [0.000]    [0.852]    [0.812]     [0.000]    [0.369]
Normalized TLU index                                    -2.637+      1.632      2.046     -2.536+      1.661      1.912
                                                        [0.130]     [0.252]    [0.201]    [0.149]     [0.241]    [0.354]
Normalized agricultural asset index + Normalized land                         0.846***                          0.614***
holdings
                                                                               [0.000]                          [0.003]
Household was affected negatively by some income         0.158      -0.052      -0.036     0.163      -0.052     -0.027
Shock During the last 12 months (0/1)
                                                        [0.191]    [0.594]     [0.683]    [0.178]    [0.596]     [0.760]
Household has a migrant network (0/1)                    0.066      -0.017       0.083      0.076     -0.016      -0.103
                                                        [0.573]    [0.855]     [0.358]    [0.517]    [0.868]     [0.230]
Average 12-month total rainfall (mm)                    -0.002      0.001       -0.002     -0.001     0.001       -0.002
                                                        [0.416]    [0.444]     [0.199]    [0.469]    [0.426]     [0.207]
Annual Mean Temperature (∞C * 10)                        0.007      -0.002    -0.022***     0.006     -0.002    -0.017**
                                                        [0.478]    [0.843]     [0.007]    [0.498]    [0.815]     [0.036]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Road                    -0.014      -0.006      -0.003     -0.015     -0.006      -0.006
                                                        [0.334]    [0.643]     [0.831]    [0.303]    [0.635]     [0.626]
HH Distance in (KMs) to Nearest Population Center        0.004      -0.000     -0.011*     0.004      -0.000      -0.008
with +20,000
                                                         [0.561]    [0.965]    [0.070]     [0.547]    [0.957]   [0.208]
Price of fertilizer in the EA                            -0.001*     -0.000     -0.001     -0.001*     -0.000    -0.000
                                                         [0.085]    [0.473]    [0.251]     [0.084]    [0.460]   [0.513]
Price of maize grains in the EA                           -0.002      0.002      0.000      -0.002      0.002     0.001
                                                         [0.229]    [0.317]    [0.893]     [0.246]    [0.290]   [0.614]
Total land area owned by HH in Acres                      -0.000     0.000                  -0.000      0.000
                                                         [0.746]    [0.755]                [0.733]    [0.804]
value of ganyu salary in the area                          0.000      0.000                  0.000      0.000
                                                         [0.538]    [0.373]                [0.501]    [0.370]
EA neighbor’s wage employment participation             0.010***   0.005***               0.010***   0.005***
                                                         [0.000]    [0.005]                [0.000]    [0.005]
EA neighbor’s self-employment participation             0.006***   0.013***               0.006***   0.013***
                                                         [0.004]    [0.000]                [0.006]    [0.000]

Share of total land cultivated in crops




                                                                                                                           62
grains crops                                                                    0.005                          -0.011**
                                                                              [0.364]                           [0.033]
legumes crops                                                                   0.003                           -0.009*
                                                                              [0.638]                           [0.088]
tubers crops                                                                   -0.003                          -0.014**
                                                                              [0.714]                           [0.039]
oil crops                                                                    0.024**                              0.002
                                                                              [0.023]                           [0.829]
Horticulture crops                                                              0.004                            -0.005
                                                                              [0.498]                           [0.386]
cotton crops                                                                   -0.007                            -0.010
                                                                              [0.343]                           [0.163]
tobacco crops                                                                0.022***                             0.005
                                                                              [0.000]                           [0.377]
Total value of crop sales (MKW)                                                 0.000                            -0.000
                                                                              [0.439]                           [0.665]
Time dummy (year 2010=1)                                 -0.048     -0.050     -0.128      -0.048     -0.048      0.000
                                                        [0.763]    [0.700]    [0.339]     [0.765]    [0.714]    [1.000]
Normalized wealth index                                2.175***   2.298***               2.082***   2.207***
                                                        [0.000]    [0.000]                [0.000]    [0.000]

District dummies                                       included   included   included    included   included   included

Time average of explanatory variables                  included   included   included    included   included   included

atrho21                                                                      -0.107***                         -0.111***
                                                                              [0.000]                           [0.000]
atrho31                                                                      -0.157***                           -0.068
                                                                              [0.004]                           [0.191]
atrho32                                                                       -0.100*                            -0.037
                                                                              [0.089]                           [0.513]

Likelihood ratio test of joint significance of rhos:                         28.09***                          16.13***
Chi2(3)
                                                                             [0.000]                            [0.001]
Constant                                                -0.796    -2.522**   2.460**      -0.816    -2.553**     0.558
                                                       [0.564]     [0.025]   [0.022]     [0.555]     [0.023]    [0.583]

 Observations                                           5,018      5,018       5,018      5,018      5,018       5,018
Source: Generated by authors using LSMS data



                                                                                                                           63
Note: PSLC=Primary School Leaving Certificate. JCE=Junior Certificate Examination. MSCE=Malawi School Certificate of Education Examination.
The symbols ***, **, *, and + indicate that the corresponding regression coefficient is statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15% levels, respectively.
P-values between brackets. The GHK estimates are generated using the mvprobit command with 100 draws in STATA. The parameters in the table are
coefficients and not APEs.




                                                                                                                                                                64
