                                                   WPS8137


Policy Research Working Paper                     8137




          Taxation without Representation?
       Experimental Evidence from Ghana and Uganda
        on Citizen Action toward Taxes, Oil, and Aid

                           Brandon de la Cuesta
                             Helen V. Milner
                              Daniel Nielson
                              Stephen Knack




Development Research Group
Macroeconomics and Growth Team
July 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8137


  Abstract
  Seminal arguments in political economy hold that citizens                         for tax revenues than for oil or aid. The results also suggest
  will more readily demand accountability from governments                          no differences among taxes, oil, and aid in citizens’ per-
  for taxes than for non-tax revenue from oil or aid. Two                           ceptions of transparency, misappropriation risk, or public
  identical experiments on large, representative subject pools                      goods provision. The results are robust to several alternative
  in Ghana and Uganda probe the effects of different revenue                        specifications and subgroup partitions, including the better
  types on citizens’ actions to monitor government spending.                        educated, wealthier, and taxpaying population, suggesting a
  Roughly half of all subjects willingly sign petitions and                         need for rethinking the axiom that taxation strengthens cit-
  donate money to scrutinize all three sources. However, nei-                       izens’ demands for accountability in developing countries.
  ther Ghanaians nor Ugandans are more likely to take action




  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Growth Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors
  may be contacted at sknack@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
      Taxation without Representation? Experimental
  Evidence from Ghana and Uganda on Citizen Action
                       toward Taxes, Oil, and Aid

  Brandon de la Cuesta, Princeton University   Helen V. Milner, Princeton University
      Daniel Nielson, Brigham Young University     Stephen Knack, World Bank




JEL codes: O10, O19
Key words: resource curse, accountability, endowment eﬀect, development
1    Introduction
Social scientists have long believed that taxes have a special power to move citizens to action.
Taxation implies a bargain in which constituents quasi-voluntarily give revenue to leaders in return
for government services (Levi 1988, North 1990, Ross 2004). While leaders can coerce citizens to
pay, frustrated citizens can, among other actions, exit the polity, reduce production, evade taxes,
coordinate oversight, or organize a revolt, all of which are costly for rulers and presumably place
limits on their ability to extort. Indeed, seminal accounts of political economy rest on taxpayers’
capacity to demand policies in exchange for taxes (Levi 1988, North and Weingast 1989, Schumpeter
1991). In particular, taxes are thought to heighten citizens’ attention to government accountability
and thus make political elites more likely to provide public goods or face sanctions if tax revenues
are misused (Bates and Lien 1985, Huntington 1991, Paler 2013, Robinson, Torvik and Verdier 2006,
Ross 2001, 2004, 2012).
    Oil and foreign aid, on the other hand, are said to move governments away from the “taxation-
causes-accountability” model. Funds from oil and aid are believed to be “windfall revenues” that
relieve tax burdens and pacify citizens (Morrison 2009, 2015). Because citizens do not pay direct
costs to furnish non-tax revenue, they are less motivated to engage in oversight or demand policies
in compensation. Windfalls thus enable elites to divert more funds to corruption and clientelism
relatively free from citizen scrutiny; or, the money can buy citizen quiescence and repress the would-
be monitors (Beblawi and Luciani 1987, Chaudhry 1997, Mahdavi 1970, Waterbury 1998). Oil
and aid thus are claimed to enable corruption, undermine governance, foster repression, prolong
                                         autigam and Knack 2004, Caselli and Cunningham 2009,
autocratic rule, and increase conﬂict (Br¨
Djankov, Montalvo and Reynal-Querol 2008, Morrison 2009, 2015, Smith 2008). The implications
are clear: taxes promote citizen engagement and representation through heightening government
accountability; oil and aid cause citizen disengagement and quiescence.
    If the above arguments are correct, citizens’ willingness to undertake political action to monitor
spending should diﬀer by revenue source. This was our expectation in designing the experiments.
However, real-world governance settings may create conditions in which taxation does not cause
greater citizen engagement in monitoring than windfalls. Indeed, current research rests on mixed
ﬁndings, almost all of which are observational in nature and therefore suﬀer from well-known prob-
lems with causal identiﬁcation. A stronger evidence base is thus needed for the claim that alternate
types of revenue cause diﬀerential taxpayer scrutiny of government ﬁnances. Better empirical foun-
dations for the claims that diﬀerent revenue sources motivate divergent citizen action could also

                                                  1
inform important policy arenas in which international organizations advocate higher tax collection
in poor countries, activists mobilize to discourage the exploration and use of natural resources, and
donor governments look to cut aid budgets.
      To test the eﬀects of diﬀerent revenue sources on citizen action toward monitoring, we conducted
substantively identical large-N experiments with attitudinal and behavioral outcomes on nationally
representative samples of Ghanaian and Ugandan citizens. To our knowledge this paper reports the
ﬁrst multi-country experimental tests of the argument that taxes motivate citizen action diﬀerently
than oil or aid. Selected to be representative of developing countries, Ghana and Uganda are both
within a standard deviation of the mean across a wide array of indicators. However, Ghana is toward
the high end of oil rents as a share of GDP (81st percentile) and Uganda is likewise high in terms
of aid as a percentage of national income (77th percentile).1 Both countries depend on all three
sources of revenue, unlike some oil-exporting countries that depend solely on oil revenues and have
no experience with aid or taxes. They thus serve as useful cases in which to evaluate the power of
taxes to motivate citizen action compared to windfalls.
      Respondents were randomized into one of three treatment conditions testing the between-subjects
eﬀects on behavior and attitudes of citizens toward taxes compared to oil revenue and aid funds
managed by the government. In each condition, respondents heard a short statement about actual
government spending. The statement included truthful information on the amount (held constant)
and source (randomly assigned) of revenue that would be available to the government in the near
future. Citizens were then invited to sign an anti-corruption petition (both anonymously and in
their own name), send supportive SMS text messages, and donate money to their choice of good-
government organizations. Leveraging the between-subjects design that avoided priming subjects to
think about alternative revenue sources, we also asked them how transparent and accountable they
believed management of the revenue would be, how susceptible it might be to misappropriation, and
how likely it was to be used for the provision of public goods.
      The ﬁndings suggest that Ghanaians and Ugandans are, on average, no more likely to take
political action to monitor or encourage transparency of funds for tax-based revenue than for oil
or aid money. Moreover, there were no average diﬀerences across revenue sources on attitudinal
outcomes measuring perceptions of the revenues’ transparency, their likelihood of misappropriation,
or their propensity to provide for public goods. The point estimates are small in substantive terms
and precisely estimated. These ﬁndings are robust to numerous alternative speciﬁcations, including
  1
      Calculated using oil rents and net oﬃcial development assistance data from World Bank (2016).



                                                          2
scrutiny of many subgroup eﬀects, including those on the wealthiest, best-educated, and income-
taxpaying segment of the population and on supporters of opposition parties. Likewise, no indirect
eﬀects appear when examining diﬀerent causal mechanisms through mediation analysis.
    Importantly, our ﬁndings are not the result of general citizen indiﬀerence to bad governance. In
both countries more than half of subjects signed transparency petitions and roughly half donated
money to good-government NGOs aimed at scrutinizing government spending. Citizens were sim-
ply not diﬀerentially motivated toward political action across the revenue conditions. We suggest
that these results are due to the institutional environment common to many developing countries.
These ﬁndings should help to lead to a rethinking of the taxation-causes-accountability argument in
developing-country contexts, as well as its corollary that non-tax revenue causes citizen quiescence.
In what follows we situate the study in the relevant literature, develop hypotheses, describe the
research design, and present the data and ﬁndings.

2    Revenue and Accountability
The intellectual history of the idea that taxation causes accountability runs through Joseph Schum-
peter, Samuel Huntington, Douglass North and Barry Weingast, to Margaret Levi, Charles Tilly,
Robert Bates, Paul Collier, Anke Hoeﬄer, Michael Ross, and numerous others, forming an impor-
tant foundational concept in theories of democratization. Its essence was ﬁrst and perhaps most
famously intoned by Boston’s Old West Church Reverend Jonathan Mayhew in 1750 as “no tax-
ation without representation,” becoming a rallying cry of the American Revolution. The logic is
straightforward. Leaders need money to buy arms and enlist militaries in order to ﬁght wars to
secure and expand their realms. The increasing cost of militaries caused leaders to seek money from
private sources through credit or expropriation through taxes. On the one hand, well-armed leaders
are particularly bad credit risks; they can coerce creditors with relative impunity. On the other,
mobile capital (including human capital) is more able than ﬁxed capital to ﬂee despots, so leaders
are forced to bargain with private citizens in an exchange of public services for tax payments. Given
their credibility problems in enticing creditors to ﬁnance their militaries or in persuading citizens to
pay taxes, successful leaders oﬀered a say in government in return, thus tying their hands against
future coercion.
    These mechanisms thus connect taxation to accountability. As Bates and Lien (1985, p. 53)
write, “[r]evenue-seeking governments may well ﬁnd it to their advantage to strike bargains with
citizens whose assets they seek to tax. To induce a greater willingness to pay taxes, they may defer



                                                   3
to the citizens’ policy preferences. Such bargains may become more beneﬁcial from the citizens’ point
of view the more mobile the assets the citizens hold.” Mick Moore (2004, p. 307) makes a similar
argument in reverse, claiming that “the absence of direct taxes reduces the likelihood that citizens
will be motivated to engage in politics through a sense of a right to inﬂuence the use of ‘their’ own
money.” Chaudhry (1997, p. 50) in an early analysis of the resource curse says “demands for political
participation have more often than not been a response to taxation.” Ross (2004) advances a more
nuanced argument that taxes will only motivate citizens to demand representation to the degree
that public goods are underprovided in relation to taxes. Yet this ratio will necessarily increase as
oil or aid substitute for taxes.
   Thus, the lack of accountability in resource- and aid-rich states follows logically from these
arguments: if citizens are not taxed, accountability pressures will decrease. Huntington (1991, p.
65) articulates this point clearly: “Oil revenues accrue to the state: they therefore increase the
power of the state bureaucracy and, because they reduce or eliminate the need for taxation, they
also reduce the need for the government to solicit the acquiescence of its subjects to taxation.” Ross
(2001, p. 332) echoes this point, arguing that “when governments derive suﬃcient revenues from
the sale of oil, they are likely to tax their populations less heavily or not at all, and the public in
turn will be less likely to demand accountability from—and representation in—their government.”
Others note that the “rentier social contract [is such that] the state provides goods and services to
society (such as subsidies on basic commodities) without imposing economic burdens, while society
provides state oﬃcials with a degree of autonomy in decision-making and policy” (Wiktorowicz 1999,
p. 608).
   When leaders of developing countries structure their economies around the extraction of export-
based natural resources, the literature holds that citizens are signiﬁcantly less motivated to monitor
and sanction the mismanagement of natural resource windfalls compared to taxes (Morrison 2015,
Robinson, Torvik and Verdier 2006, Ross 2001, 2004, 2012). This phenomenon is believed to enable
the “resource curse,” at least in part, by undermining good governance and, as a result, economic
development. Because governments engaged in natural resource exploitation receive large amounts
of revenue from sources unattached to the democratic process, mechanisms for accountability weaken
(Bulte, Damania and Deacon 2005, Dunning 2005). For leaders the returns to rent seeking outpace
the returns of creating socially productive skills and knowledge. The value of public oﬃce spikes,
causing leaders to increase internal security against uprisings and spend more to buy public support
(Caselli and Cunningham 2009, Robinson, Torvik and Verdier 2006, Ross 2001). Thus, such govern-


                                                  4
ments often become more autocratic and prone to corruption and clientelism (Collier and Hoeﬄer
2005, Robinson, Torvik and Verdier 2006).
      Foreign aid may be similar in its eﬀects. Critics charge that both natural resource rents and
foreign aid are “windfall revenues” or “sovereign rents” that promote corruption, undermine gov-
                                                                autigam and Knack 2004, Collier
ernance, increase violence, and stabilize autocratic regimes (Br¨
and Hoeﬄer 2005, Djankov, Montalvo and Reynal-Querol 2008, Humphreys 2005, Morrison 2009,
Smith 2008). Moreover, because aid allocations from donors ﬂuctuate, governments receiving large
amounts of aid can experience economic and political instability, and when aid is suddenly reduced
the likelihood of conﬂict appears to increase (Nielsen et al. 2011). Critically, natural resource and aid
windfalls relieve leaders of the need to ﬁnance government through taxation (Beblawi and Luciani
1987, Mahdavi 1970, Morrison 2009, 2015).2
      More recent scholarship has linked taxation to the well-known psychological phenomena of loss
aversion and the endowment eﬀect (Martin 2014, Paler 2013), in which people disproportionately fear
losses and overvalue possessions, respectively (Kahneman and Tversky 1979, Kahneman, Knetsch
and Thaler 1990). These studies activate psychological mechanisms related to endowments of income
and losses in taxes and suggest that income taxes can motivate citizen action in poor countries as
they are believed to do in rich nations (Martin 2014, Paler 2013). The theoretical and empirical
foundations of the endowment eﬀect and loss aversion are strong. But we emphasize that the
prominent arguments reviewed above by Schumpeter, Huntington, North, Weingast, Bates, Tilly,
Collier, Hoeﬄer, Levi, Ross, and others do not reference psychological biases. Rather, the taxation-
causes-accountability argument and its resource-curse corollary are founded upon the presumption
of rational action: because taxes prove costly to citizens and windfalls do not, taxes are more likely
to motivate citizens to take action to obtain the beneﬁcial public goods they desire and windfalls to
cause quiescence. This argument underpins the key hypotheses the study was designed to test:

        Hypothesis 1 Taxation causes accountability. Tax revenues should motivate citi-
        zens to take more action to monitor public spending, particularly compared with oil and
        aid.

        Hypothesis 2 Windfalls cause quiescence. Revenues from oil or aid should fail to
        motivate citizens to take action to monitor spending, particularly compared to taxes.

      However, some scholars have questioned the inevitability of the resource curse and claimed that
  2
    Collier (2006) argues that aid revenues are more accountable than oil revenues, in part because donors pursue
“governance conditionality.”


                                                       5
the eﬀects of resources on governance are contingent on other factors (Dunning 2005, Haber and
Menaldo 2011, Jensen and Wantchekon 2004).3 More recent studies cast further doubt on the
resource curse (Borge, Parmer and Torvik 2015, O’Connor, Blanco and Nugent 2016, van der Ploeg
and Poelhekke 2009). This debate remains unresolved even in the context of large-N observational
studies. As Ahmadov (2014, p. 1239) points out, examining “29 such studies that in total report 246
empirical estimates of the impact of resources [on democracy], they [...] range from negative through
no association to positive. While 86% of statistically signiﬁcant ﬁndings report negative coeﬃcients,
14% ﬁnd a positive link. Twenty-one percent do not ﬁnd any statistically signiﬁcant relationship.”
The majority of existing research on the resource curse has utilized such cross-national, observational
data, limiting the ability to make causal inferences or address micro-level mechanisms. A similar set
of points could be made about the mixed results reporting the eﬀects of aid on governance (Bueno
                                        oning 2009, Djankov, Montalvo and Reynal-Querol 2008,
de Mesquita and Smith 2013, Busse and Gr¨
         erez-Li˜
Finkel, P´      n´an and Seligson 2007, Knack 2004, Moss, Pettersson and Van de Walle 2008, Tavares
2003, Wright 2009).
    Yet if the seminal arguments linking taxes to citizen action hold, taxes should also cause trans-
parency and accountability. The bargain described by Bates and Lien (1985) referenced above
requires that citizens know they are being taxed and can follow the money from their pockets to the
production of public goods. As Manin, Przeworski and Stokes (1999, p. 40) explain, accountability
implies that citizens can “discern whether governments are acting in their interest and sanction
them appropriately.” Even Morrison’s (2009, 2015) more general argument that taxes lead not to
representation but to regime instability implies microfoundations resting on an assumption that cit-
izens are informed about their tax burden or at least feel it in a way that induces action. On the
other hand, windfalls may lack transparency: “low levels of budget transparency in oil-dependent
countries are common and may lead to poor management of resource wealth” (Devarajan, Le and
Raballand 2010, p. 4). Likewise, the more nuanced point that Ross (2004) makes regarding taxes
in relation to public services implies that citizens have a general sense of both their tax burden and
the public services provided.
    This argument has a similar implication for the likelihood of misappropriation. The taxation-
causes-accountability argument holds that, because citizens care more about taxes than windfalls
and therefore will more readily scrutinize spending from taxation, the risk of misappropriation for
oil or aid should be signiﬁcantly greater than for taxes. This is conceptually related to what Ross
   3
     Alexeev and Conrad (2009) even claim that natural resources such as oil are strongly positive for economic growth
and have no negative eﬀect on political institutions.


                                                          6
(2001, p. 333) calls the “spending eﬀect” which predicts that “oil wealth may lead to greater
spending on patronage, which in turn dampens latent pressures for democratization.” Resource
wealth and foreign aid both increase the size of government budgets and, critically, enable less
budgetary restraint, presumably due to lower citizen scrutiny and engagement (Morrison 2009, 2015).
Indeed, windfalls may enable governments to reduce tax burdens at the same time as they improve
public goods (Morrison 2009, 2015, Ross 2001). Citizens may therefore be inclined to look the other
way when leaders divert a greater share of resource windfalls than taxes to political or even personal
ends. Finally, resource “revenues increase the returns to holding oﬃce, raising the stakes of winning
reelection. Incumbents therefore have strong incentives to skim oﬀ at least some resource revenues
to help them stay in power” (Bhavnani and Lupu 2016, p. 3-4).
      Moreover, the foundational bargain of leaders with citizens requires an exchange of tax revenue
for inﬂuence over public policy in order to produce services that citizens value (Bates and Lien 1985,
Levi 1988, Ross 2004). Indeed, Ross (2004) holds that citizens will only tolerate taxes if the public
revenue produces actual public goods. As he writes, “[d]emocracy in this case is not necessarily a
way for citizens to reduce their taxes, or to increase spending, but to get more for their money”
(Ross 2004, p. 234-235). Citizens should therefore expect taxes to increase public-goods provision
and should thus be more inclined to pay costs to monitor tax money. Or as Collier and Hoeﬄer
(2005, p. 8) claim, “For a given total income, revenue for patronage rises as a result of resource
rents not because the government commands more money, but because it is able to raise the same
money while arousing less public scrutiny. As a result, less needs to be diverted to the provision of
public goods.”
      Three additional observable implications thus ﬂow from the argument that taxes cause account-
ability and its corollary that windfalls cause quiescence. We state them here as the conditions under
which taxation should be most likely to lead to greater accountability. They are as follows:

        Hypothesis 3 Transparency. Citizens should realize they are being taxed and be able
        to track the spending of tax revenue better than windfalls.

        Hypothesis 4 Misappropriation. Citizens should perceive that elites can less readily
        misappropriate taxes than other revenues for personal or political gain.

        Hypothesis 5 Public Goods Beneﬁts. Citizens should judge that leaders will use
        taxes more than oil or aid to provide public goods. They should thus expect greater public
        beneﬁt from tax-based spending than from oil- or aid-based spending.4
  4
      In the pre-analysis plan ﬁled in advance of researcher access to outcome data, we labeled these three categories


                                                           7
    Nevertheless, there may be reasons to believe that these conditions are unlikely to be satisﬁed in
many poor, developing countries. In institutional environments of low information, high corruption
and a limited tax-base, respondents may not believe that the source of government revenues matters,
since all revenues are likely to be equally opaque and vulnerable to corruption. If transparency is
low and misappropriation risk high, it will be equally diﬃcult to discover if funds have been misused
across revenue sources. Waterbury (1994, p. 30), for example, counters the resource curse claims
and notes that in developing countries few pay direct taxes and paying indirect taxes does not
have the same eﬀect as direct ones. He notes “the relation of taxation to political demands is
not at all straightforward. On the one hand, there are the ‘hard’ states of East Asia which tax
their populations heavily, but only recently and grudgingly have made any concessions to demands
for accountability. . . there must be a number of intermediate variables between levels and kinds of
taxation and demands for accountability, and until we are able to specify those variables we will
only have an intuitive, and often inaccurate, appreciation of the dynamics at work” (p. 30). Thus,
the strong theoretical claims that taxation causes accountability and windfalls demotivate citizen
monitoring may not hold in developing countries. This brings us to the design of the experiment.

3    Experimental Design
The experimental strategy and data analysis plan were registered with the Evidence in Governance
and Politics network prior to researcher access to the outcome data. For this experiment, we drew
sizable samples of Ghanaian (n = 3,653) and Ugandan citizens (n = 3,186) that are nationally
representative in most respects, except that we oversampled districts that are nearest the sites of
oil exploration. We selected the two countries with attention to the representativeness of Ghana
and Uganda among developing countries generally and among Sub-Saharan African countries in
particular. Across a basket of conventional development indicators, including life expectancy, under-
ﬁve mortality, adult literacy, unemployment, proportion of the population living on less than $1.90
per day, and many others, both countries in 2014 were at or near the means for lower-middle-income
countries (World Bank 2016). In terms of generalizability, selecting typical developing countries
is important. Focusing on extreme outliers here, as in nearly all social scientiﬁc endeavors, could
introduce serious bias and undermine external validity. Thus, studying exceptionally oil- or aid-
dependent countries would not provide a basis for generalizing to most other developing countries,
“Accountability,” “Repression,” and “Spending”. They are substantively similar with the exception that “Misappro-
priation” is a broader category that includes money spent to repress as well as to buy support and personally enrich
oﬃcials.




                                                         8
which ought to be the objective in testing such general arguments as taxation causes accountability
and windfalls cause quiescence.
      However, selecting representative subjects from countries at either end of the normal range of
developing nations (say, within one standard deviation of the mean) provides an opportunity to
delineate the scope of populations to which the ﬁndings might generalize. Thus, within the typical
span of low- to middle-income countries we selected Ghana and Uganda to provide some divergence
across a set of important covariates. Critically, Ghana has been receiving revenues from oil since
2010, while Uganda’s oil is not yet ﬂowing in large amounts. In comparative terms, Ghana’s oil
rents of 5.7 percent of GDP in 2014 place the country near the higher end of the distribution at
the 81st percentile among the 137 developing countries reporting data (just seven, six, and ﬁve
ranks below the Republic of Yemen, the Russian Federation, and Nigeria, respectively, and ahead
of other well-known oil producers such as Norway, Bahrain, and Mexico).5 Uganda does not report
this statistic, but its lack of current oil rents would obviously place it at the low end. Moreover,
the public in both countries knows about the oil ﬁnds. In our sample for example, 85 percent of
Ghanaians and 75 percent of Ugandans knew of the oil ﬁelds. Likewise, Uganda’s relatively high
aid dependence of 6.0 percent of GNI places the country in the 77th percentile among all developing
countries; Ghana’s aid per GNI of 3.1 percent is roughly half the value of Uganda’s. Aid comprises
roughly 21 percent of Ghana’s government expenses (in 2011, the last year reported) compared to
aid’s 48.3 percent share of Uganda’s government expenditure in 2014. Notably, Ghana and Uganda
depend on all three sources of revenues, while the large oil-exporters rarely show any dependence on
taxes or foreign aid.
      The selection of the two countries was also done to consider diﬀerences in political system and
economic outlook while holding constant the broad geographic region. Ghana is a stable democracy,
scoring near the top of political rights and civil liberties scales; Uganda is labeled as an anocracy
with worsening rights and liberties, especially recently (Freedom House 2016, Marshall, Gurr and
Jaggers 2016). As a middle-income country, Ghana is more than twice as wealthy as low-income
Uganda, with Ghana’s GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power parity at $3,784 compared
to Uganda’s $1,634 (World Bank 2016). Consistent results across the two disparate settings should
increase the study’s external validity.
      In interviews with the Ghanaian and Ugandan citizens, native enumerators presented a randomly
assigned statement about the source of signiﬁcant public funds and then invited subjects to partici-
  5
      See World Bank (2016).



                                                   9
pate in actions to monitor the money. Enumerators then asked subjects a series of questions about
what they thought the eﬀects of the funds would be and how they thought the money should be
spent. The amounts of these revenue streams were held constant across conditions in each coun-
try. All were based on best estimates of plausible future budget sources given publicly available
information; thus, no deception was used in the experiment.6
    The survey ﬁrst asked questions covering a wide array of standard demographic characteristics.
After this, we randomly assigned subjects to receive a statement about revenues from one of three
sources: domestic taxes, oil receipts, and aid ﬂows through government. Randomization of treat-
ment assignment allows us to uncover systematic diﬀerences in subject actions and responses across
conditions. We incentivized respondents to take the survey by giving them either 6 Ghanaian cedis
or 1,000 Ugandan shillings at the start.7 Later we invited them to donate (parts of these) sums to
watchdog non-governmental organizations (NGOs) as a behavioral outcome. We tested the eﬀects
of the diﬀerent revenue conditions both on subjects’ attitudes and on their willingness to take action
imposing personal costs by signing a petition calling for an independent resource tracking agency,
sending an SMS message to their MP, and donating survey remuneration to watchdog NGOs.
    The treatment conditions are as follows (with diﬀerences highlighted in boldface)8 :

      “As part of this survey, we are also providing important information to [Ghanaians/Ugandans]
      about ﬁnances in [Ghana/Uganda]. In next few years, government agencies of [Ghana/Uganda]
      will receive at least [2.1 billion cedis/5 trillion shillings]. This money will come from [the
      sale of the oil that was recently discovered in [Ghana/Uganda]/taxes on wages
      and purchases that will be paid by all [Ghanaians/Ugandans]/aid given by
      foreign governments]. This money will become part of the [Ghanaian/Ugandan] gov-
      ernment budget. Lawmakers and the President are supposed to use the money to improve
      the lives of [Ghanaians/Ugandans].”

    Two features of these conditions are particularly important. First, the prompts are identical
in terms of the absolute amount of revenue accruing to the government. By holding the absolute
amount constant, the design attempts to isolate the eﬀect of source from that of the source’s size.
Second, the prompt does not contain any additional information about government spending or
   6
     We also included a fourth condition in which the aid money was described as channeled through non-governmental
organizations. We focus here only on two of the possible pairs: oil versus taxes and aid versus taxes, respectively. The
remaining comparisons are the focus of ongoing research and will be reported elsewhere.
   7
     At the time of the experiment 6 cedis were worth about $2.40 and 1000 shillings were worth about 40 cents at
current exchange rates, or about $6 and $1 respectively in terms of local purchasing power.
   8
     See Section A in the appendix for information on the randomization protocol.


                                                          10
budget behavior beyond the source and (ﬁxed) amount to be derived from it. This is important
for ecological validity, since the knowledge and transparency necessary for greater monitoring and
sanctioning of tax-based revenue may be lacking in much of the developing world.

3.1      Survey and Key Outcomes of Interest

Following the experimental condition text, subjects could voice their support to create an indepen-
dent agency to track the revenue and sign a petition anonymously or in their actual name that
would later be sent to their constituency MP stating the respondent’s desire for the agency to be
created. Subjects were also invited to send an SMS text message reinforcing their position to their
MP. Finally, they were invited to donate a portion of the money paid them for taking part in the
survey—1,000 shillings for Ugandans and 6 cedis for Ghanaians—to watchdog groups promoting
government accountability. With the exception of the donation amount, all measures are binary and
take a value of one if the respondent acted aﬃrmatively and zero otherwise. The prompt for the
donation measure is in the appendix.
      The behavioral measures were designed with two principles in mind. First, to ensure we captured
not only whether someone would take costly action but how costly an action they were willing to
take, we crafted behavioral measures that imposed increasing political and economic costs. Signing
an anonymous petition is a statement of intent, while signing a named petition is more costly,
particularly given the contentious partisan politics in Ghana or especially under Uganda’s quasi-
authoritarian regime. Sending an SMS message entails a small economic cost that many Sub-
Saharan Africans expend only reluctantly. In Uganda, for example, SMS texts cost between 50 and
130 shillings. In view of the average subject’s low daily income of 2,035 shillings or $1.08 US dollars,
for the vast majority of subjects the cost likely appeared meaningful.9 Finally, with the ability to
pocket up to 6 cedis or 1,000 shillings by refusing to donate, the donation experiment is the most
costly: because respondents were notiﬁed their donation would be given directly to the NGO of their
choice, it constitutes action that is at once a political and economic cost. This sum is important:
6 cedis in Ghana or 1,000 shillings in Uganda may be as much as an entire day’s wage for petty
traders and manual laborers in rural areas, who constituted the majority of our subjects.
      Following the behavioral outcomes, subjects were asked a series of questions about how trans-
parent spending ﬁnanced by the revenue source was likely to be. They were also asked to report
how likely it was that elites would be able to misappropriate the money to themselves, their families,
or for their political advancement (e.g., clientelism). The survey further queried them about the
  9
      All subjects were later reimbursed for the costs of their texts but this intent was not conveyed during the survey.


                                                            11
likelihood that the money would be used to supply public goods. Finally, questions probed whether
subjects would be willing to pay taxes to ﬁnance a transparency agency to monitor the revenue or
to contact local or national elected oﬃcials in the event the revenue was misused.

4         Data and Method
The sample contains 3,653 observations in Ghana and 3,186 in Uganda, which were collected using an
area-probability sample designed to achieve national representativeness. Data collection in Uganda
occurred from May to June 2014 and in Ghana during March and April 2015. To enhance the
validity of our estimates, we implemented block randomization within each enumerator, resulting in
perfect or near-perfect balance in the number of treatments of each type delivered by enumerators.
Due to random selection of primary sampling units (polling stations), this resulted in a form of
enumerator-PSU blocking that ensured assignment to our treatment conditions was balanced both
across enumerators and across PSUs. Balance at the level of the PSU allows us to exploit not only the
spatial correlation between many important respondent characteristics, such as education, wealth,
and access to information, but also the strong spatial correlation between respondents’ political
experiences.10 Blocking at the PSU increases the probability that our sample is balanced with
respect to a range of macro-level political variables that might aﬀect political behavior, including
partisanship, corruption, and the responsiveness of local politicians. In terms of covariate balance, as
expected, the block randomization algorithm was successful in randomizing respondents into equally
sized treatment groups within our primary sampling unit, the polling station.11
         We report results below for all subjects using randomization inference. Although we employ
traditional diﬀerence-in-means and block-adjusted regression results as robustness tests, our primary
analysis uses randomization inference, an assumption-free non-parametric estimation strategy that
has become increasingly common in the analysis of randomized experiments in political science.12
First, unlike traditional parametric estimation, which relies on the t or Normal distribution to
establish statistical signiﬁcance, randomization inference makes no distributional assumptions about
the test statistic used. Instead, the distribution used to recover the test statistic’s p-value is generated
    10
     In a randomization inference framework, the practical eﬀect of blocking is to preclude randomization vectors that
would violate the blocking algorithm—that is, vectors in which the proportion of treated and control units in a given
block are not consistent with equal probability of assignment to each treatment group within the block. Intuitively,
the eﬀect is not to reduce bias—a wide range of test statistics are unbiased even under naive randomization—but to
reduce noise by decreasing the probability that treatment and control groups are unbalanced along key covariates.
  11
     See Table A.3 in the appendix for results of balance tests designed to test successful randomization.
  12
     See Tables B.4 and B.5 in the appendix for these results. All regression speciﬁcations include block ﬁxed-eﬀects
as well as the covariates reported in Table A.3. Given the eﬃciency gains from adjustment, this is an especially
conservative robustness check as it increases the probability of obtaining signiﬁcant results.



                                                         12
directly from the data. This is accomplished by considering all possible treatment assignment vectors,
calculating the test statistic for each, and using these estimates to construct a distribution that
represents the range of potential treatment eﬀects that might arise purely from chance alone. In
doing so, it accounts for treatment assignment vectors that would be both highly favorable to the
experimenters—for example, those in which most or all treated units were also those with high values
on the dependent variable of interest—as well as those that would be unfavorable.
    Although the ﬂexibility in choosing a substantively meaningful test statistic is another advantage
of randomization inference, we focus here, as pre-registered, on a traditional test: a diﬀerence-in-
means between the reference and comparison groups. Estimates from randomization inference can
thus be interpreted similarly to conventional diﬀerences estimates, with one critical distinction: the
distribution of the test statistic under the null hypothesis is generated from the data rather than
assumed using the normality properties of random variables.

5    Analysis
In terms of descriptive statistics, a majority of subjects were willing to undertake political actions to
promote budget transparency and monitor government spending, as shown in Table 1. In Ghana and
Uganda, 53.2 and 50.7 percent of participants, respectively, signed the petition in their own name.
An additional 8.3 percent in Ghana and 7.9 percent in Uganda signed the anonymous petition, for
a total of 61.6 percent and 58.6 percent signing either the named or anonymous petition in Ghana
and Uganda, respectively. Also, 48 percent of Ghanaian participants and 57.5 percent of Ugandans
donated money to the good-government NGOs, and on average they donated 2.1 (of 6) cedis and
386 (of 1,000) shillings, which both constituted sizable shares of their grants for participating in the
study. Table 1 shows that across many types of actions, citizens in both countries are not apathetic;
they are willing to act to obtain public goods, as might be expected in these poor countries. It is
also important to note that while norms of reciprocity or social desirability bias may artiﬁcially raise
the absolute levels of donation, these norms are constant across all treatment conditions and would
therefore not threaten any inference about relative diﬀerences across conditions.
    Do we see diﬀerences in citizens’ willingness to take action to monitor and sanction leaders
across the revenue sources? Figures 1 and 2 directly test our ﬁrst two hypotheses about diﬀerential
action in favor of taxes. Figure 1 shows the tax treatment relative to the oil control, and Figure 2
shows the tax treatment relative to the aid control. We asked citizens to undertake various costly
actions, and thus our measure reﬂects the nature and intensity of their preferences. The top panes of



                                                   13
                                                                          Ghana                 Uganda
                                                                N           3563                   3186

                                                                     Frequ.     Share      Frequ.      Share
                             Signed Anon. Petition                    295       0.083        251       0.079
                            Signed Named Petition                     1878      0.532       1589       0.507
                              Willing to Send SMS                     1146      0.327       1514       0.486
                                  Donated to NGO                      1712       0.48       1833       0.575
                           Mean Amount Donated                         2.1      Cedis       385.7     Shillings
    Likely or Very Likely to Contact Village Elder                    1628       0.46       1871       0.594
 Likely or Very Likely to Contact Local Councilor                     1786      0.506       1687       0.536
              Likely or Very Likely to Contact MP                     1241       0.35       1259       0.402

Table 1: Frequencies and Proportions of Subjects Taking Action and Expressing Willingness to
Take Action to Monitor Revenue. Results show that large proportions of respondents are willing to take
various forms of costly political action to monitor spending or to strengthen transparency institutions.


Figures 1 and 2 report the treatment eﬀects across experimental conditions on our primary outcomes
of interest: the rate with which subjects sign anonymous or named petitions stating they would like
for a new agency to be created to monitor revenues from either taxes, oil, or aid through government
(Anon.    Petition and Named Petition, respectively), whether they sent an SMS stating as much
(Sent SMS), whether they donated to a third party transparency organization (Donated Any) and,
if they donated, the amount (Donated Amount).13
    Hypotheses 1 and 2 imply that we should see positive treatment eﬀects, in which citizens are
more likely to act for taxes. As is clear, there are few meaningful diﬀerences between the tax
and oil conditions or between the tax and aid prompts on any of the outcomes. For all tests the
relatively tight conﬁdence intervals reﬂect comparatively good statistical power and mitigate against
the possibility of small sample size masking non-zero eﬀects. Due to the large number of tests,
and given our commitments in the registered pre-analysis plan, we also implement multiple-testing
corrections by controlling the false discovery rate (FDR) at an alpha of 0.05 for all individual tests.
The FDR correction eliminates the two marginally signiﬁcant results. We thus ﬁnd no support for
Hypothesis 1 or Hypothesis 2 for both Ghana and Uganda.
  13
     For illustration purposes, the donation amount measure is standardized to more closely match the scale of the
remaining variables.




                                                       14
                                                     Behavioral Measures
                                                                              q
            Sign Petition (Named)                                     q
                                                                                                           Country

                                                                      q                                     q Ghana
              Sign Petition (Anon)                                            q
                                                                                                            q Uganda
                                                                              q
                       Sent SMS                                           q

                                                                          q
                    Donate (Any)                                          q

                                                                                           q
                Donate (Amount)                                                   q


                                            −0.2                          0.0                        0.2
                                                          Average Treatment Effect

                                                    Theoretical Willingness
                                                                          q
                     Willing SMS                                          q
                                                                                                           Country
                                                                                   q
                   Create Agency                                                  q                         q Ghana

                                                          q                                                 q Uganda
                      Contact MP                                                       q

                                                                              q
           Contact LC3/Assembly                                                            q

                                                                          q
                    Contact Elder                                                      q

                                                              q
             Agency WTP (Taxes)                                   q


                                     −0.4          −0.2                   0.0                  0.2                   0.4
                                                          Average Treatment Effect


Figure 1: Main Tax Treatment Eﬀects, Oil as Control. Eﬀects in standard deviation units shown for
both behavioral (top pane) and attitudinal measures (bottom pane). Estimates obtained using randomization
inference with 10,000 draws to approximate the exact distribution. 95 percent Rosenbaum-style conﬁdence
intervals obtained via inversion of constant eﬀects hypothesis as implemented in ri package.




                                                     15
                                                            Behavioral Measures
                                                                             q
               Sign Petition (Named)                                          q
                                                                                                                 Country

                                                                                 q                                q Ghana
                 Sign Petition (Anon)                                             q
                                                                                                                  q Uganda
                                                                                  q
                            Sent SMS                                              q

                                                                                      q
                         Donate (Any)                                        q

                                                                                                 q
                    Donate (Amount)                                              q


                                                   −0.2                          0.0                       0.2
                                                                  Average Treatment Effect

                                                           Theoretical Willingness
                                                                                 q
                          Willing SMS                                             q
                                                                                                                 Country
                                                                                         q
                       Create Agency                                             q                                q Ghana

                                                                                 q                                q Uganda
                          Contact MP                                                         q

                                                                     q
              Contact LC3/Assembly                                               q

                                                                                          q
                        Contact Elder                                                q

                                                                             q
                Agency WTP (Taxes)                                       q


                                        −0.4              −0.2                   0.0                 0.2                   0.4
                                                                  Average Treatment Effect


Figure 2: Main Tax Treatment Eﬀects, Aid as Control. Eﬀects in standard deviation units shown for
both behavioral (top pane) and attitudinal measures (bottom pane). Estimates obtained using randomization
inference with 10,000 draws to approximate the exact distribution. 95 percent Rosenbaum-style conﬁdence
intervals obtained via inversion of constant eﬀects hypothesis as implemented in ri package.


      We also included several measures designed to capture respondents’ willingness to both monitor
the treatment source as well as sanction its misuse. Speciﬁcally, we asked respondents whether
they desired an independent monitoring agency to be created to monitor spending from the revenue
(Create Agency), how much in taxes they would be willing to pay monthly to fund it (Agency WTP),
whether they would be willing to send an SMS to their MP stating their support for the agency
(Willing SMS), and how likely the respondent was to contact their local village elder, LC3 Chairman
(roughly equivalent to a US mayor), or MP in the event money from the source was misused (Contact
Elder, Contact LC3, and Contact MP respectively).14 The bottom panes of Figure 1 and Figure 2
report the treatment eﬀects on these measures, with positive average treatment eﬀects (ATEs) for
respondents implying that the tax treatment induced more action, as Hypotheses 1 and 2 suggest.
As with our behavioral measures, we see little diﬀerential willingness for respondents in the tax
condition relative to those in oil (Figure 1) and aid (Figure 2) conditions for either Ugandan or
Ghanaian subjects.
 14
      The equivalent in Ghana was the district chief executive.


                                                            16
   We also presented three additional empirical implications that ﬂow from the taxation-causes-
accountability hypothesis. First, according to Hypothesis 3 citizens should realize they are being
taxed and be able to track the spending of tax revenue better than windfalls. Second, according
to Hypothesis 4, because of heightened accountability, citizens should perceive that elites can less
readily misappropriate taxes than other revenues for personal or political gain. And third, according
to Hypothesis 5, citizens should judge that leaders will use taxes more than oil or aid to provide
public goods. Our results suggest that none of these three conditions holds in Ghana or Uganda.
   To measure transparency and misappropriation risk, we asked respondents how likely it was that
they would be able to observe how the new revenue was spent (Difficulty Observe), how likely
their MP would be able to do so (MP Know), and the likelihood that politicians would use the new
revenue to beneﬁt themselves and their families (Politicians Steal). In the event that social
desirability bias might drive respondents to under-report on the third measure, we also conducted
a list experiment that contained as its sensitive item an option identical to the direct measure,
asking subjects whether politicians might “use the [tax/oil] money to do favors for people and try
to win their votes.” We then took the subset of respondents who (randomly) were assigned to see
the sensitive item and compared them across treatment groups (Politicians Steal (List Exp)).
To measure the likelihood that spending from a given source would yield a measurable increase
in the quality of public goods, we asked participants about the likelihood that the revenue would
be used for public goods provision by helping their families, their communities, and the economy
(Help Family, Help Commun, Help Econ). The conditions yield three empirical implications: that
perceptions of misappropriation risk should be lower for taxes, and that transparency and public
goods beneﬁt should be higher.




                                                 17
                                                      Misappropriation Risk
                                                                        q
           Politicians Steal (List)                                 q                                           Country
                                                                                                                 q Ghana
                                                                                            q
                 Politicians Steal                                                  q                            q Uganda


                                                                                                q
                   MP Will Know                                                         q


                                                                            q
               Difficulty Observe                                       q


                                      −0.4          −0.2                0.0                         0.2                   0.4
                                                            Average Treatment Effect

                                                           Expected Benefits
                                                                                        q                       Country
                     Help Family                                                            q
                                                                                                                 q Ghana

                                                                                                                 q Uganda
                                                                q
                  Help Economy                                          q



                                                                                q
                Help Community                                                          q



                                             −0.2                       0.0                               0.2
                                                            Average Treatment Effect


Figure 3: Tax Treatment Eﬀects, Oil as Control. Eﬀects in standard deviation units shown for
transparency and misappropriation (top pane) and potential public goods beneﬁt measures (bottom pane).
Estimates obtained using randomization inference with 10,000 draws to approximate the exact distribution.
95 percent Rosenbaum-style conﬁdence intervals obtained via inversion of constant eﬀects hypothesis as im-
plemented in ri package.


   Figures 3 and 4 report the results of randomization inference tests for these measures of trans-
parency, misappropriation risk and potential beneﬁt for three diﬀerent revenue sources: oil, taxes,
and aid. Both ﬁgures take non-tax revenue as the control condition and tax-based revenue as the
treatment, such that positive values represent a positive treatment eﬀect for taxes. Hypotheses 3- 5
ﬁnd no support in our data. Consistent with the prior reported results, we ﬁnd that respondents
perceive very few diﬀerences between tax and non-tax revenue. All told, we ﬁnd little evidence
that perceptions of transparency, misappropriation risk, or propensity for public-goods provision are
operating as expected by the argument that taxation causes accountability. Overall, there is no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between tax and non-tax revenues in these key areas.




                                                       18
                                                       Misappropriation Risk
                                                                                q
            Politicians Steal (List)                                q                                       Country
                                                                                                             q Ghana
                                                                                    q
                  Politicians Steal                                                         q                q Uganda


                                                                                q
                    MP Will Know                                                q


                                                                        q
                Difficulty Observe                              q


                                       −0.4          −0.2               0.0                     0.2                   0.4
                                                             Average Treatment Effect

                                                            Expected Benefits
                                                                                        q                   Country
                      Help Family                                           q
                                                                                                             q Ghana

                                                                                                             q Uganda
                                                                            q
                   Help Economy                                             q



                                                                                q
                 Help Community                                                 q



                                              −0.2                      0.0                           0.2
                                                             Average Treatment Effect


Figure 4: Tax Treatment Eﬀects, Aid as Control. Eﬀects in standard deviation units shown for trans-
parency and misappropriation (top pane) and potential public goods beneﬁt measures (bottom). Estimates
obtained using randomization inference with 10,000 draws to approximate the exact distribution. 95 percent
Rosenbaum-style conﬁdence intervals obtained via inversion of constant eﬀects hypothesis as implemented in
ri package.


   Yet, the general lack of diﬀerences is not a function of a common belief in good behavior on the
part of government actors: for example, in a separate item, an overwhelming majority (82 percent) of
Ghanaian respondents reported that it was “very important” (the highest item in the scale) that the
revenue be tracked, a proportion that is nearly invariant across treatments. Moreover, disaggregating
the misappropriation measures demonstrates the high degree of cynicism that Ghanaians share with
citizens in other African countries about elites’ use of public funds for private gain: over 80 percent of
the sample reported it was likely or somewhat likely their MP would know how the funds were spent,
while 70 percent of the sample believed people like them would be unlikely or somewhat unlikely to
learn how the money was spent. These quantities are similarly high in Uganda. In light of the absence
of the diﬀerences we would expect according to the taxation-causes-accountability hypothesis, it
remains an open question whether taxation leads to greater accountability in developing-country
contexts.




                                                        19
6     Robustness Checks
We conduct three additional sets of analyses as robustness checks. We examine the subset who passed
the manipulation checks to see if those who were treated still show null eﬀects; we test whether our
null eﬀects derive from various subgroup eﬀects that cancel each other out; and we explore whether
prominent mechanisms may lead to indirect eﬀects that are not null.
    First, while enumerators delivered the prompt with special emphasis on the source of the revenue,
not all respondents passed the post-treatment manipulation check. Thus, despite having received
the treatment prompt, these respondents have not been “treated” insofar as they may not have ade-
quately understood the critical piece of the prompt: the source of the additional revenues.15 Because
the treatment was a prompt rather than a more intense intervention, we crafted the manipulation
check to be especially diﬃcult: the test came many questions after the intervention and prompted
respondents to recall the source of the new government revenue. Enumerators were instructed not to
read any answer choices or give any assistance to respondents as they answered this question. Only
an unassisted answer matching exactly the experimental source was coded as correct.
    To see if non-compliers drive the intent-to-treat estimates towards a null result, we estimated
the treatment eﬀects for the subgroup of respondents who passed the manipulation check. Given
the diﬃculty of passing the manipulation check in an open-ended prompt coming many questions
after the intervention, passage rates were relatively high, averaging 70 percent across conditions
and countries. However, subjects failed the manipulation check signiﬁcantly more often for the
tax condition, which may be one sign of how few people pay taxes in either country. There were
thus signiﬁcant selection eﬀects across experimental conditions for correctly identifying the revenue
source, and as a result it is not possible to make causal claims from these tests. Nonetheless, this
restricted sample does pass balance tests for both the Tax-Oil and Tax-Aid comparisons. We report
these results in Figures A.5 and A.6 in the appendix, with behavioral measures in the top panes and
our theoretical willingness measures in the bottom panes. We also note that, if the most attentive
subjects were those passing the manipulation check, the subgroup analysis should bias the ﬁndings
in favor of the taxation-causes-accountability argument: those most attuned to taxes should be the
subjects most willing to take action to monitor the use of tax money. The tax condition thus selects
for a smaller, more exclusive group of subjects especially attentive to the mention of taxes. Yet
   15
      We reported results above for all subjects, which capture the eﬀects of the intent to treat. We note that estimating
the complier average causal eﬀect (CACE) is not advised in this case because we did not employ a standard control
condition; rather, we are comparing multiple treatment conditions against each other, so double-sided non-compliance
is not symmetric.



                                                           20
as with the prior ﬁndings, most results are null with narrow conﬁdence intervals suggesting precise
estimation.
      Second, our ﬁnding of null eﬀects may not mean there are no causal eﬀects if we are confounding
diﬀerent causal eﬀects for diﬀerent subgroups. Hence it is important to examine whether our results
vary by subgroups that might experience the revenues in distinct ways. There may be subsets of
respondents that are more able and willing to monitor and sanction tax-based revenues. We identify
two important groups here, but examine many others in the appendix. Previous work suggests that
wealthy, informed, income-tax-paying citizens are going to be most susceptible to the taxation leads
to accountability eﬀect (Bates and Lien 1985, Levi 1988). The logic is straightforward: because
they are more likely to be paying income taxes, they should be both more likely to desire greater
transparency as well as more likely to act on that desire. To capture these types of respondents, we
created an indicator variable for those who reported paying both direct and indirect taxes and were
urban (and thus more educated and wealthy, on average, than rural respondents). We classify these
subjects as “high-type” respondents—that is, as people who were likely to have both the ability and
desire to monitor tax-based revenues more closely than oil or aid money.
      We also examined members of the opposition party in both countries since they may be most
likely to feel that tax-based revenues will not be used to beneﬁt them, and hence should seek greater
transparency and stricter oversight of tax-based expenditures. We subset respondents by whether or
not they self-identiﬁed as supporters of the governing party, which may proxy for expectations that
the government will be more likely to spend revenues according to their preferences. We examined
these two subgroups to learn if they can help us understand the diﬀerences or lack of them across the
revenue sources, estimating ATEs for the same measures as above for both “low-type” and “high-
type” respondents. In neither case do we see signiﬁcantly diﬀerent treatment eﬀects for high- and
low-type respondents.16
      Taxpayers do not diﬀer from non-taxpayers and opponents and supporters of the government do
not diﬀer from one another in terms of diﬀerential monitoring on taxes on our measures in response to
experimental conditions. But might other factors condition reactions to these revenue sources? We
investigated many other subgroups to learn if there were distinct causal reactions in eﬀect leading to
our null results. We examined respondents from oil regions and those not, those who were coethnic
with the president, those who had high levels of trust in the government (as proxied by trust in the
president), and those who had high levels of approval of central government’s handling of a host
 16
      See Appendix D for a visualization and discussion of these results.



                                                           21
of public goods issues. These results are reported in the appendix in Tables B.6-B.9. In no case
do we see signiﬁcant subgroup eﬀects after controlling for the false discovery rate. Critically, this
holds even when testing for interactions between oil- and non-oil producing regions in both countries.
Residents of oil-producing regions do not donate or sign the petition at diﬀerential rates, nor are
they more likely to express a willingness to take actions such as contacting their local leaders or
MPs. We do not think that our null eﬀects on diﬀerential treatment result from combining groups
who have opposing causal reactions to the revenue sources. All subgroup types in our representative
samples seem to react the same way: they are willing to monitor or sanction at relatively high rates
regardless of the source of revenue, arguably because all revenue sources are equally opaque, equally
misappropriated, and equally likely to produce public goods.
   Finally, some might argue that taxes could have an indirect eﬀect on citizens’ willingness to take
action for greater government accountability. This may be especially plausible if subjects found
our behavioral measures too costly to undertake at high rates but were nonetheless aﬀected by
the treatment in less concrete ways. While this possibility seems remote given the failure to ﬁnd
meaningful eﬀects on our theoretical measures, it is nonetheless possible that such indirect eﬀects
exist. In order to examine some possible mechanisms by which such indirect eﬀects could arise, we
performed a mediation analysis on three particularly meaningful outcomes of interest: whether a
subject donated to a transparency or good governance organization, how much they donated, and
whether they signed the petition using their name.
   There are two primary channels through which indirect eﬀects are likely to occur. First, subjects
may make inferences about the beneﬁt that is likely to accrue to the public or to their community
according to the revenue source. An endowment-eﬀect type story would suggest, for example, that
subjects will infer a greater likelihood of personal or communal beneﬁt from tax revenues relative to
oil and aid revenues because of the greater accountability pressures that is assumed to accompany
tax-based expenditures. To test for this indirect eﬀect, we modeled as mediators the survey items
that asked subjects about the likelihood that their community, family, or the economy as a whole
would beneﬁt from the new revenue.
   Second, subjects may be more willing to monitor oil or aid-based revenues out of a concern that
such revenues will be misused at higher rates. To test for indirect eﬀects from this channel, we
modeled the items from the misappopriation index as mediators. Tables C.10 and C.11, available in
the appendix, report a selection of estimates of the Average Causal Mediation Eﬀect (ACME) in both
Ghana and Uganda for the Tax-Oil comparison (e.g. tax-based revenue as the treatment condition


                                                 22
and oil-based revenue as the control condition). Similar results hold for the Tax-Aid comparison. In
neither case do any of the mediation eﬀects approach signiﬁcance.17

7    Discussion
In this section we discuss possible objections to our claims and ﬁndings. Our most notable result is
that the reported ﬁndings are not consistent with what we might expect if diﬀerent revenue sources
cause variation in citizen monitoring: there was no greater willingness to take action to increase the
likelihood of transparency or accountability among those who received the tax treatment relative to
the oil and aid treatments. Respondents in both countries are, in general, willing to take political
action to monitor and sanction spending behavior of politicians, but not diﬀerentially. That is, they
are equally willing to act in favor of better governance and more public goods, just not diﬀerently
according to revenue source.
    A skeptic may ask what theory we are examining and whether we are testing it fairly. Our
project focuses on the argument that taxation causes representation, one made both in seminal
works (Bates and Lien 1985, Huntington 1991, Levi 1988, North and Weingast 1989, Robinson,
Torvik and Verdier 2006, Ross 2001, 2004, Schumpeter 1991) as well as more recent studies (Martin
2014, Paler 2013, Ross 2012). This claim is often connected to the resource curse, which argues
that non-tax revenues cause great political (and economic) damage to countries at least in part
because the impetus to monitor and sanction elected oﬃcials for the misappropriation of government
revenues is thought to be weaker than with taxes. Nevertheless, we emphasize that our project does
not test all hypotheses suggested by the broader resource curse phenomenon that posits multiple
causal mechanisms involving macro political and economic processes unsuited to an experiment on
individual citizens. Rather, this paper explores the single resource-curse implication that windfalls
cause citizen quiescence relative to taxes.
    Nor does this study test the endowment eﬀect, which is the psychological bias that has recently
been proposed as a micro-level mechanism driving the (macro-level) resource curse (Martin 2014,
Paler 2013). Discussion of the endowment eﬀect was absent from earlier studies on publics’ will-
ingness to monitor and sanction governments. Instead, this literature suggested that, in a rational
choice framework, the source of the diﬀerential eﬀects is the costs to taxpayers caused by the misuse
of tax funds not spent on public goods. Taxes are a critical part of the social contract citizens make
  17
     We use a standard battery of demographic controls to model the value of the mediator, but our results are robust
to more extensive controls that include partisan aﬃliation and levels of political knowledge. All ACME estimates are
produced using the mediation package in R.




                                                         23
with their government in return for public goods. As such, the failure to use tax revenues to provide
public goods is considered by citizens as an abrogation of that contract.
      Thus, in line with seminal contributions and consistent with our pre-analysis plan, we assumed
that citizens would be more willing to pay greater costs to monitor and sanction the government
when taxes were in play than when non-tax revenues such as aid and oil were invoked. Our results
suggest that, counter to our expectations and existing theory, the public does not react diﬀerentially
to these revenue sources. Yet our results also show that publics do care and will pay costs to take
action when they think government funds are being diverted from public-goods provision. Social
desirability bias might elevate levels of these actions, but our list experiment suggests little of such
bias and any bias should operate across the revenue sources similarly. It simply appears that subjects
are equally willing to take actions to monitor public money whether the revenues come from taxes,
aid or oil. Contra expectations, there is no diﬀerential willingness to act in the case of taxes.
      Why do we ﬁnd that citizens are both willing to act and yet not at greater rates for taxes compared
to windfalls? First, it could be related to our tax treatment. Many Ghanaians and Ugandans do
not face tax obligations, especially direct income ones. According to the Afrobarometer survey, only
48 percent of Ghanaians and 24 percent of Ugandans believe they are obligated to pay income tax,
and the proportions are still only 72 percent and 35 percent, respectively, for general sales tax.           18


So, perhaps subjects’ relative inexperience with taxes makes them equally willing to pay costs to
monitor all revenue sources. However, as we show, even those who are much more likely to pay
taxes react the same to the three revenues sources, suggesting that experience with taxation does
not account for the lack of diﬀerences.
      Second, it could be that the treatment we gave subjects was too weak and failed to elicit the
taxation-as-representation eﬀect. We did not provide voluminous information to subjects but simply
told them a certain sum of revenue was coming to the government from a particular source and that
the money was intended for public goods. This approach has the dual advantage of being both clear
and realistic. The revenue source was stated in a straightforward manner, and the vast majority of
subjects understood it and could recall it in the manipulation check. The taxation-as-representation
literature cited above suggests that identiﬁcation of the revenue source as taxes should be suﬃcient
to provoke the expected eﬀect. Yet we reiterate that subjects who passed the manipulation check
also did not act to monitor taxes in greater proportions than aid or oil.
      Moreover, actual petition and fund-raising drives in these countries have a very similar setup to
 18
      See Afrobarometer Data, Ghana and Uganda, Round 5, 2011-2013, available at http://www.afrobarometer.org.



                                                       24
our research design: citizens visit door-to-door or stop their fellows on the street, provide information,
and ask for support. We also did not see signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the type of people who were willing
to take action and donate. So the design—especially the behavioral outcomes—provides relatively
high ecological validity. Moreover, the charge that the treatment is too weak does not square well
with the rest of our ﬁndings. That is, we do see that many in the public are willing to take action and
to pay costs to monitor their government’s use of revenues—no matter the source. So all conditions
were strong enough to elicit costly monitoring behavior. There is simply no diﬀerential eﬀect.
   Potentially, low levels of generalized willingness to act (or to state such a willingness) may be
creating “ﬂoor eﬀects,” making the detection of statistically meaningful (but substantively small)
diﬀerences more diﬃcult. However, we ﬁnd very little evidence for ﬂoor eﬀects; in fact, precisely the
opposite is the case. We report in Table 1 the mean proportion of respondents who are willing to
engage in both actual and hypothetical monitoring or sanctioning across experimental conditions.
Consistent with other work (see e.g., Paler 2013), Table 1 reveals that respondents in both Ghana
and Uganda are generally willing to act in order to monitor a given revenue source or, in the case of
the Contact measures, sanction its misuse.
   A further criticism could be raised that, had we invoked the endowment eﬀect for taxes by
providing a windfall and then taxing it—compared with simply providing a windfall equal to the
after-tax amount—we could have obtained a reaction that was diﬀerent for taxes. We acknowledge
this likelihood and point to well-designed studies both using this approach and ﬁnding some sig-
niﬁcant eﬀects (Martin 2014, Paler 2013). However, we also worry that such an intervention may
not reﬂect real-world conditions well in our research context. Income taxes are not relevant for the
majority of subjects in Ghana and Uganda, and the indirect taxes they do experience obscure the
actual amounts paid in ways that likely fail to invoke the endowment eﬀect. Yet, in our study, even
income taxpayers did not evince behavioral diﬀerences between treatment conditions, suggesting
that the explanation for the null result lies elsewhere.
   Our interpretation of the null ﬁndings focuses on the institutional contexts in low-income devel-
oping countries: in environments of low information, high corruption and a limited tax-base, there
may be little reason for respondents to believe that the source of government revenues matters. Our
results suggest that respondents generally view these diﬀerent revenue sources as equally opaque
and equally susceptible to corruption. If transparency is low and misappropriation risk high, it will
be equally diﬃcult to discover if funds have been misused across revenue sources. Likewise, in the
presence of high corruption, the source of a revenue stream is unlikely to make a diﬀerence in citi-


                                                   25
zens’ ability to beneﬁt in purely welfare terms. As Waterbury (1994) noted, the relationship between
revenue sources and political accountability is complex and there may be many intermediate factors
that shape the impact that taxes and resource rents have on politics.
    However, citizens in such poor countries may be willing to act because any resource their country
possesses may acquire endowment eﬀects. In a sense, the endowment eﬀect may operate for all three
types of sources, a ﬁnding seen in recent work (Author 2017). Oil revenues are often seen by citizens
as their collective legacy to eﬀect a better future, and therefore not to be squandered. The rhetoric
surrounding the discovery and extraction of oil in both Uganda and Ghana has emphasized that the
revenue resulting from oil exploration is a national good and should be treated as such. The public
awareness and perception of these funds as being critical for development (and being intended for
that purpose) may counteract the predisposition to value revenues raised via taxes more highly. And
citizens may likewise view aid as another resource given to them to improve their lives and again
one to be valued and monitored (Author 2016).
    If this is the case, we should see a combination of high stated and actual willingness to monitor
across all government revenue sources, but no diﬀerences between them in terms of their transparency,
misappropriation risk, or potential beneﬁt. Table 1 demonstrates the ﬁrst point, that of high baseline
willingness to act, while Figures 2-4 in the previous section suggest minimal diﬀerences in willingness
to act, actual behavior, perceptions of transparency, misappropriation risk, or potential beneﬁt across
the revenue sources. In fact, despite large institutional diﬀerences between the two countries, the
propensity to undertake action or to express a desire to do so is quite similar. As Table 1 reveals,
the share of respondents who undertake our behavioral measures or who express a high likelihood
of undertaking other political action is close to 50% for both countries. Ugandans were, in general,
more likely to engage in our behavioral outcomes and also more likely to report that they would
take other forms of political action. However, given Uganda’s relatively higher level of corruption
and lower level of development, these diﬀerences are not as large as one might expect.

8    Conclusion
Using behavioral measures of willingness to monitor elected oﬃcials for the misuse of revenues from
taxes, oil, and aid, we have sought to understand when citizens choose to monitor some sources of
spending and not others. While existing literature argues that a unique feature of taxation—the
loss aversion associated with the appropriation of earned income—can produce strong incentives to
hold politicians accountable for tax-based spending (Martin 2014), we sought to understand whether



                                                  26
taxes led to diﬀerential political action compared to other actual revenue sources such as foreign aid
and oil in a setting that more closely approximated the information stream and political actions
available to most Sub-Saharan Africans, particularly in contrast to controlled laboratory settings.
   We conducted substantively identical large survey experiments in two developing countries to
determine whether diﬀerential revenue sources might, in fact, lead to greater willingness to monitor
and enforce greater transparency for non-tax forms of spending, including oil and aid, which are often
captured by elites. In general, our results suggest that citizens do not take greater action to monitor
taxes over aid or oil. Moreover, they do not perceive greater transparency, misappropriation risk,
or propensity toward public goods for one source over another. We explored many subgroups and
found no signiﬁcant alternative explanations for our null results among them. And we investigated
a number of indirect causal paths that might show a diﬀerential eﬀect for taxes but likewise found
no evidence for them.
   Our tentative answers to why we do not see taxes leading to greater action for accountability
rest on two ideas that require further research. First, citizens in such poor countries may imbue
non-tax resources with endowment eﬀects just as they do taxes, leading them to be willing to take
action at similar levels. All forms of revenue may be seen by citizens as important sources of public
goods that can improve their lives. Second, the institutional environment may aﬀect their ability to
diﬀerentiate taxes from non-tax revenues. The use of obfuscating value-added taxes and very low
reliance on income taxes for government revenue may both be factors. In addition, the degree to
which political institutions within a country enhance transparency about revenues, curb corruption
and clientelism, and allow for punishment of political elites may be critically important mediating
factors. In institutional environments that fail to do these things, citizens may not diﬀerentiate
among revenues both because they believe any source can be diverted away from its intended ends
and they desperately want the public goods that could be provided. Further research should look into
these ideas. In this sense, non-tax revenues thus may produce just as much, or as little, representation
as do taxes.
   Also notably, despite signiﬁcant contextual diﬀerences between Uganda and Ghana, we do not
ﬁnd many diﬀerences in our results across countries. Ghana is signiﬁcantly richer, more urban, more
democratic, and more dependent on oil rents than Uganda, which is much more aid dependent. But
in neither country do tax revenues seem to prompt citizens to demand or pay the costs for greater
monitoring and accountability compared to windfalls. Our data from the two countries increase
conﬁdence in our null results about the lack of diﬀerential willingness to monitor taxes compared


                                                  27
to non-tax revenues from oil exploration and foreign aid. For many poor developing countries then,
taxes and non-tax revenues may have similar eﬀects on citizens and their willingness to monitor their
governments.
   In sum, Ghanaian and Ugandan citizens, when prompted about large revenues coming to their
government, care enough about public spending to be willing to monitor and pay costs to keep
their governments from diverting these funds from public goods provision—no matter the revenue
source. We hope in future research to pinpoint the exact reasons behind such citizen action. But
our results provide a more optimistic picture of non-tax revenues. They may be less of a curse than
is conventionally believed, at least in the minds of citizens who experience their eﬀects. Of course,
our results do not rule out other channels by which aid and resource revenues might constitute a
development “curse,” but they do suggest that taxation revenues compared to aid or oil appear to
cause no greater citizen demands for accountability in developing countries.




                                                 28
References
Ahmadov, Anar K. 2014. “Oil, Democracy, and Context: A Meta-Analysis.” Comparative Political
  Studies 47(9):1238–1267.

Alexeev, Michael and Robert Conrad. 2009. “The Elusive Curse of Oil.” Review of Economics and
  Statistics 91(3):586–598.
  URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/rest.91.3.586

Bates, Robert H and Da-Hsiang Donald Lien. 1985. “A Note on Taxation, Development, and
  Representative Government.” Politics and Society 14(1):53–70.

Beblawi, Hazem and Giacomo Luciani. 1987. The Rentier State. In Nation, State, and Integration
  in the Arab World. London; New York: Croom Helm.

Bhavnani, Rikhil R. and Noam Lupu. 2016. “Oil Windfalls and the Political Resource Curse: Ev-
  idence from a Natural Experiment in Brazil.” Working Paper, University of Wisconsin-Madison
  .

Borge, Lars-Erik, Pernille Parmer and Ragnar Torvik. 2015. “Local natural resource curse?” Journal
  of Public Economics 131:101–114.
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0047272715001504

  autigam, Deborah and Stephen Knack. 2004. “Foreign Aid, Institutions, and Governance in Sub-
Br¨
  Saharan Africa.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 52(2):255–285.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/380592

Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce and Alastair Smith. 2013. “Aid: Blame It All on Easy Money.” Journal
  of Conﬂict Resolution 57(3):524–537.
  URL: http://jcr.sagepub.com/content/57/3/524.abstract

Bulte, Erwin H, Richard Damania and Robert T Deacon. 2005. “Resource Intensity, Institutions,
  and Development.” World Development 33(7):1029–1044.

                             oning. 2009. “Does foreign aid improve governance?” Economics
Busse, Matthias and Steﬀen Gr¨
  Letters 104(2):76–78.




                                               29
Caselli, Francesco and Tom Cunningham. 2009. “Leader Behaviour and the Natural Resource Curse.”
  Oxford Economic Papers 61(4):628–650.
  URL: http://oep.oxfordjournals.org/content/61/4/628.abstract

Chaudhry, Kiren Aziz. 1997. The Price of Wealth: Economies and Institutions in the Middle East.
  Cornell Studies in Political Economy Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Collier, Paul. 2006. “Is Aid Oil? An Analysis Of Whether Africa Can Absorb More Aid.” World
  Development 34(9):1482–1497.
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305750X0600101X

Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeﬄer. 2005. “Resource Rents, Governance, and Conﬂict.” Journal of
  Conﬂict Resolution 49(4):625–633.

Devarajan, Shantayanan, Tuan Minh Le and Gal Raballand. 2010. “Increasing public expenditure
  eﬃciency in oil-rich economies: a proposal.” World Bank Policy Working Paper (WPS 5287).
  URL:        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/599811468192565752/Increasing-public-
  expenditure-eﬃciency-in-oil-rich-economies-a-proposal

Djankov, Simeon, Jose Montalvo and Marta Reynal-Querol. 2008. “The Curse of Aid.” Journal of
  Economic Growth 13(3):169–194.

Dunning, Thad. 2005. “Resource Dependence, Economic Performance, and Political Stability.”
  Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 49(4):451–482.
  URL: http://jcr.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/49/4/451

                    ıbal P´
Finkel, Steven E, An´            n´
                          erez-Li˜ an and Mitchell A Seligson. 2007. “The Eﬀects Of U.S. Foreign
  Assistance On Democracy Building, 1990-2003.” World Politics 59(3):404–439.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/40060164

Freedom House. 2016. Freedom in the World 2016: Anxious Dictators, Wavering Democracies:
  Global Freedom Under Pressure. Washington, D.C.: Freedom House.
  URL: https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/freedom-world-2016

Haber, Stephen H and Victor Menaldo. 2011. “Do Natural Resources Fuel Authoritarianism? A
  Reappraisal of the Resource Curse.” American Political Science Review 105(1):1–26.

Humphreys, Macartan. 2005. “Natural Resources, Conﬂict, and Conﬂict Resolution: Uncovering the
  Mechanisms.” Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 49(4):508–537.

                                                 30
Huntington, Samuel P. 1991. The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century.
  Norman, OK: Oklahoma University Press.

Jensen, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon. 2004. “Resource Wealth and Political Regimes in Africa.”
  Comparative Political Studies 37(7):816–841.
  URL: http://cps.sagepub.com/content/37/7/816.abstract

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under
  Risk.” Econometrica 47(2):263–291.

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L Knetsch and Richard H Thaler. 1990. “Experimental Tests of the En-
  dowment Eﬀect and the Coase Theorem.” Journal of Political Economy 98(6):1325–1348.

Knack, Stephen. 2004. “Does Foreign Aid Promote Democracy?” International Studies Quarterly
  48(1):251–266.

Levi, Margaret. 1988. Of Rule and Revenue. Vol. 13 Berkeley: University of California Press.

Mahdavi, Hossein. 1970. Patterns and Problems of Economic Development in Rentier States: the
  Case of Iran. London: Oxford University Press.

Manin, Bernard, Adam Przeworski and Susan C Stokes. 1999. Elections and Representation. In
  Democracy, Accountability, and Representation. Cambridge University Press chapter 1, pp. 29–
  54.

Marshall, Monty G., Ted Robert Gurr and Keith Jaggers. 2016. Polity IV Project. Center for
  Systematic Peace.
  URL: http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscr/p4manualv2015.pdf

Martin, Lucy. 2014. “Taxation, Loss Aversion, and Accountability: Theory and Experimental
  Evidence for Taxation’s Eﬀect on Citizen Behavior.” Working Paper, Yale University .
  URL: https://docs.google.com/viewer?a=v&pid=sites&srcid=ZGVmYXVsdGRvbWFpbnxsdWN5bWFydGlufGd4

Moore, Mick. 2004. “Revenues, State Formation, and the Quality of Governance in Developing
  Countries.” International Political Science Review 25(3):297–319.

Morrison, Kevin M. 2009. “Oil, Nontax Revenue, and the Redistributional Foundations of Regime
  Stability.” International Organization 63(1):107–138.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/40071885

                                                 31
Morrison, Kevin M. 2015. Nontaxation and Representation: The Fiscal Foundations of Political
  Stability. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Moss, Todd, Gunilla Pettersson and Nicolas Van de Walle. 2008. An aid-institution paradox? A
  review essay on aid dependency and state building in sub-saharan Africa. In Reinventing Foreign
  Aid, ed. William Easterly. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press chapter 8, pp. 255–282.

Nielsen, Richard A, Michael G Findley, Zachary S Davis, Tara Candland and Daniel L Nielson.
  2011. “Foreign Aid Shocks as a Cause of Violent Armed Conﬂict.” American Journal of Political
  Science 55(2):219–232.

North, Douglass C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. New York:
  Cambridge University Press.

North, Douglass C. and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution
  of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England.” The Journal of
  Economic History 49(4):803–832.
  URL: http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?did=3763910&Fmt=7&clientId=17210&RQT=309&VName=PQD

O’Connor, Kelsey J., Luisa R. Blanco and Jeﬀrey B. Nugent. 2016. “Does Oil Hinder Democratic
  Development? A Time-Series Analysis.” Working Paper, University of Southern California .
  URL: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract id=2753462

Paler, Laura. 2013. “Keeping the Public Purse: An Experiment in Windfalls, Taxes, and the
  Incentives to Restrain Government.” American Political Science Review 107(04):706–725.
  URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000415

Robinson, James A, Ragnar Torvik and Thierry Verdier. 2006. “Political Foundations of the Resource
  Curse.” Journal of Development Economics 79(2):447–468.
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304387806000137

Ross, Michael L. 2001. “Does Oil Hinder Democracy?” World Politics 53(3):325–361.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/25054153

Ross, Michael L. 2004. “Does Taxation Lead to Representation?” British Journal of Political Science
  34(2):229–249.

Ross, Michael L. 2012. The Oil Curse: How Petroleum Wealth Shapes the Development of Nations.
  Princeton: Princeton University Press.

                                                32
Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1991. The crisis of the tax state. In The Economics and Sociology of Capi-
  talism, ed. Richard Swedberg. Princeton: Princeton University Press pp. 99–141.

Smith, Alastair. 2008. “The Perils of Unearned Income.” Journal of Politics 70(3):780–793.

            e. 2003. “Does Foreign Aid Corrupt?” Economics Letters 79(1):99–106.
Tavares, Jos´

van der Ploeg, Frederick and Steven Poelhekke. 2009. “Volatility and the natural resource curse.”
  Oxford Economic Papers 61(4):727–760.
  URL: http://oep.oxfordjournals.org/content/61/4/727.abstract

Waterbury, John. 1994. Democracy Without Democrats? The Potential for Political Liberalization
  in the Middle East. In Democracy without democrats?: the renewal of politics in the Muslim world,
  ed. Ghassan Salame. New York: I.B.Tauris & Co Ltd. chapter 1, pp. 23–47.

Waterbury, John. 1998. The State and Economic Transition in the Middle East and North Africa.
  In Prospects for Middle Eastern and North African Economies: From Boom to Bust and Back?,
  ed. Nemat Shaﬁk. Houndmills: MacMillan Press chapter 6, pp. 159–177.

Wiktorowicz, Quintan. 1999. “The Limits of Democracy in the Middle East: The Case of Jordan.”
  Middle East Journal 53(4):606–620.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4329393

World Bank. 2016. World Bank Development Indicators. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
  URL: http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators

Wright, Joseph. 2009. “How Foreign Aid Can Foster Democratization in Authoritarian Regimes.”
  American Journal of Political Science 53(3):552–571.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/25548137




                                                33
  APPENDIX: Taxation without Representation? Experimental
Evidence from Ghana and Uganda on Citizen Action toward Taxes,
                                  Oil, and Aid

 Brandon de la Cuesta, Princeton University     Helen V. Milner, Princeton University
     Daniel Nielson, Brigham Young University       Stephen Knack, World Bank




                                          0
A         Randomization Inference Results
In the paper, Figures 1 and 2 directly test our ﬁrst two hypotheses about diﬀerential action in favor
of taxes. Figure 1 shows the tax treatment relative to the oil control and Figure 2 shows the tax
treatment relative to the aid control. We asked citizens to undertake various costly actions, and thus
our measure reﬂects the nature and intensity of their preferences. The top panes of Figures 1 and 2
report the treatment eﬀects across experimental conditions on our primary outcomes of interest:
the rate with which subjects sign anonymous or named petitions stating they would like for a new
agency to be created to monitor revenues from either taxes, oil, or aid through government (Anon.
Petition and Named Petition, respectively), whether they sent an SMS stating as much (Sent
SMS), whether they donated to a third party transparency organization (Donated Any) and, if they
donated, the amount (Donated Amount). Treatment eﬀects reported in the following tables are on
the original scale of the outcome measure and are not standardized unless otherwise noted. For
illustration purposes, the donation amount measure is standardized to more closely match the scale
of the remaining variables.
        We also included several measures designed to capture respondents’ willingness to both monitor
the treatment source as well as sanction its misuse. Speciﬁcally, we asked respondents whether
they desire an independent monitoring agency to be created to monitor spending from the revenue
(Create Agency), how much in taxes they would be willing to pay monthly to fund it (Agency WTP),
whether they would be willing to send an SMS to their MP stating their support for the agency
(Willing SMS), and how likely the respondent was to contact their local village elder, LC3 Chairman
(roughly equivalent to a US mayor), or MP in the event money from the source was misused (Contact
Elder, Contact LC3, and Contact MP respectively).1 The bottom panes of Figure 1 and Figure 2
report the treatment eﬀects on these measures, with positive average treatment eﬀects (ATEs) for
respondents implying that the tax treatment induced more action, as hypotheses 1 and 2 imply.
Index variables are created for each of the four major families of outcomes by taking the average of
the non-missing values for all items comprising the index. Index variables are reported ﬁrst, followed
by the variables used to create the index.
        Results presented below include the estimates used to produce Figures 1 and 2 in the paper.
Also included are ﬁgures identical to Figures 1 and 2 except analysis is conducted only on those who
passed the manipulation check. Figures A.5 and A.6 show the results from our main test for the
group that passed the manipulation check. Tables A.1 and A.2 report treatment eﬀects as estimated
    1
        The equivalent in Ghana was the district chief executive.


                                                             1
by randomization inference for both Uganda (Columns 1 and 3) and Ghana (Columns 2 and 4),
and for both the Tax-Oil and Tax-Aid comparisons (Columns 1-2 and 3-4, respectively). As in the
paper, positive point estimates represent an increase associated with the tax treatment relative to
the aid or oil treatments. Finally, Table A.3 shows the results of our balance test that veriﬁed
that randomization was successful, producing nearly identical covariate distributions between the
treatment conditions.

                                                    Behavioral Measures
                                                                              q
            Sign Petition (Named)                                             q
                                                                                                              Country

                                                                          q                                    q Ghana
             Sign Petition (Anon)                                             q
                                                                                                               q Uganda
                                                                                  q
                        Sent SMS                                              q

                                                                      q
                    Donate (Any)                                  q

                                                                      q
                Donate (Amount)                               q


                                           −0.2                           0.0                           0.2
                                                         Average Treatment Effect

                                                   Theoretical Willingness
                                                                              q
                     Willing SMS                                      q
                                                                                                              Country
                                                                                          q
                  Create Agency                                                       q                        q Ghana

                                                                                                               q Uganda
                     Contact MP                                                           q

                                                          q
           Contact LC3/Assembly                                                               q

                                                         q
                   Contact Elder                                                              q

                                                              q
            Agency WTP (Taxes)                                q


                                    −0.4          −0.2                    0.0                     0.2                   0.4
                                                         Average Treatment Effect


Figure A.5: Main Tax Treatment Eﬀects, Oil as Control, Manipulation Pass Sample. Eﬀects
in standard deviation units shown for both behavioral (top) and attitudinal measures (bottom pane). 95%
conﬁdence intervals shown for both Uganda and Ghana. Estimates obtained using randomization inference
with 10,000 draws to approximate the exact distribution. 95 percent Rosenbaum-style conﬁdence intervals
obtained via inversion of constant eﬀects hypothesis as implemented in ri package.




                                                    2
                                                      Behavioral Measures
                                                                       q
            Sign Petition (Named)                                       q
                                                                                                               Country

                                                                               q                                q Ghana
              Sign Petition (Anon)                                         q
                                                                                                                q Uganda
                                                                               q
                        Sent SMS                                               q

                                                                                   q
                     Donate (Any)                                  q

                                                                                               q
                 Donate (Amount)                                   q


                                             −0.2                           0.0                          0.2
                                                           Average Treatment Effect

                                                     Theoretical Willingness
                                                                               q
                      Willing SMS                                      q
                                                                                                               Country
                                                                                           q
                   Create Agency                                           q                                    q Ghana

                                                           q                                                    q Uganda
                      Contact MP                                       q

           Contact LC3/Assembly                                    q

                                                               q
                    Contact Elder                                              q

                                                                                       q
             Agency WTP (Taxes)                                q


                                     −0.4           −0.2                    0.0                    0.2                   0.4
                                                           Average Treatment Effect


Figure A.6: Main Tax Treatment Eﬀects, Aid as Control, Manipulation Pass Sample. Eﬀects in
standard deviation units shown for both behavioral (top pane) and attitudinal measures (bottom pane). 95%
conﬁdence intervals shown for both Uganda (solid lines) and Ghana (dashed lines). Estimates obtained using
randomization inference with 10,000 draws to approximate the exact distribution. 95 percent Rosenbaum-style
conﬁdence intervals obtained via inversion of constant eﬀects hypothesis as implemented in ri package.




                                                      3
                                                            Tax-Oil               Tax-Aid
                                                     Uganda        Ghana     Uganda     Ghana
              Behavioral Index                        0.021        −0.010     0.053     −0.041
                                                     (0.662)       (0.414)   (0.853)    (0.192)
              Sign Petition (Anon)                   −0.024         0.010    −0.010     −0.001
                                                     (0.151)       (0.816)   (0.347)    (0.442)
              Sign Petition (Named)                   0.006        −0.025    −0.022     −0.013
                                                     (0.611)       (0.142)   (0.173)    (0.314)
              Sent SMS                                0.014        −0.007     0.001     −0.001
                                                     (0.980)       (0.175)   (0.493)    (0.506)
              Donate (Any)                           −0.012        −0.007     0.009     −0.022
                                                     (0.304)       (0.403)   (0.663)    (0.170)
              Donate (Amount)                        17.419         0.038    15.463     −0.015
                                                     (0.849)       (0.640)   (0.823)    (0.434)
              Willingness Index                      −0.002         0.036     0.001     −0.010
                                                     (0.478)       (0.777)   (0.512)    (0.418)
              Create Agency                           0.038         0.026     0.025     −0.007
                                                     (0.945)       (0.904)   (0.856)    (0.348)
              Agency WTP (Taxes)                     −0.107        −0.057∗   −0.025    −0.080∗∗
                                                     (0.168)       (0.056)   (0.414)    (0.013)
              Willing SMS                            −0.017        −0.016    −0.012     −0.004
                                                     (0.231)       (0.225)   (0.332)    (0.419)
              Contact Elder                          −0.011         0.069     0.030      0.004
                                                     (0.450)       (0.798)   (0.630)    (0.519)
              Contact LC3/Assembly                    0.014         0.094    −0.094     −0.008
                                                     (0.572)       (0.879)   (0.156)    (0.457)
              Contact MP                             −0.140∗        0.064    −0.011      0.042
                                                     (0.061)       (0.785)   (0.454)    (0.694)
               ∗p   < .1;   ∗∗ p   < .05;   ∗∗∗ p   < .01

Table A.1: Behavioral and Willingness Measures, Randomization Inference. Columns 1 and 3 report the
Ugandan results while Columns 2 and 4 Report the Ghanaian estimates. Two-tailed p-values in parentheses.
None of the signiﬁcant results survive a multiple testing correction.




                                                               4
                                                              Oil-Tax              Aid-Tax
                                                       Uganda      Ghana      Uganda     Ghana
                Misappropriation Index                  0.069       0.087     0.0003     0.037
                                                       (0.919)     (0.964)    (0.494)   (0.790)
                Diﬃculty Observe                       −0.002      −0.024     −0.022    −0.101∗
                                                       (0.501)     (0.366)    (0.394)   (0.088)
                MP Will Know                            0.124       0.063      0.048     0.045
                                                       (0.984)     (0.885)    (0.788)   (0.807)
                Politicians Steal                       0.101       0.049      0.060     0.107
                                                       (0.903)     (0.792)    (0.777)   (0.958)
                Politicians Steal (List)               −0.014      −0.042      0.048    −0.076
                                                       (0.405)     (0.250)    (0.777)   (0.109)
                Beneﬁt Index                            0.040       0.024      0.015     0.041
                                                       (0.781)     (0.689)    (0.617)   (0.795)
                Beneﬁt Family                           0.055       0.073      0.068    −0.001
                                                       (0.855)     (0.928)    (0.895)   (0.485)
                Beneﬁt Community                        0.018       0.057      0.026     0.022
                                                       (0.645)     (0.885)    (0.725)   (0.679)
                Beneﬁt Economy                         −0.065∗     −0.016      0.005     0.006
                                                       (0.058)     (0.357)    (0.564)   (0.565)
                Beneﬁt Country                          0.096      −0.028     −0.049     0.056
                                                       (0.898)     (0.317)    (0.259)   (0.825)
                 ∗p   < .1;   ∗∗ p   < .05;   ∗∗∗ p   < .01

Table A.2: Misappropriation Risk and Potential Beneﬁt Measures, Randomization Inference. Columns 1
and 3 report the Ugandan results while Columns 2 and 4 Report the Ghanaian estimates. Two-tailed p-values
in parentheses.


                                                        Ghana                   Uganda
                                               Aid-Tax Oil-Tax               Aid-Tax Oil-Tax
                        Covariate                   p-value                       p-value
                               Age              0.638      0.396              0.468      0.489
                         Employed               0.379      0.543              0.839      0.454
                            Female              0.789      0.621              0.583      0.866
                             Rural              0.587      0.905              0.899      0.898
                        Education               0.098      0.753              0.378       0.63
                     Coethnic Pres              0.464      0.479              0.691      0.619
                        Trust Pres              0.777      0.889              0.513      0.795
                    Gov Supporter               0.559      0.515              0.802      0.903
                  Held Pol Position             0.467      0.807              0.207      0.469
                             Voted              0.236      0.804              0.082      0.042
                      Gov Corrupt               0.311      0.223              0.811      0.949

Table A.3: Balance Test. Estimates obtained using conventional diﬀerence in means estimator. The few
signiﬁcant results do not survive a multiple testing correction. Null results are consistent with successful
randomization.


                                                               5
B     Robustness Test: Regression with Block Fixed-Eﬀects
All regression speciﬁcations include block ﬁxed-eﬀects as well as the covariates reported in Table A.3.
Given the eﬃciency gains from adjustment, this is an especially conservative robustness check as
it increases the probability of obtaining signiﬁcant results. These results demonstrate that the
null ﬁndings presented in the paper are not an artifact of the estimation method. Also included are
regression estimates of heterogeneous treatment eﬀects for a variety of subgroups. The vast majority
of these eﬀects are not signiﬁcant at conventional levels, and those few that are do not survive a
multiple testing correction. Logistic regression is used for all binary variables (e.g. Anon Petition,
Named Petition, Sent SMS, Donated Any, Willing SMS, Create Agency) and conventional OLS is
used for all remaining measures. Reported estimates are the coeﬃcients from these regressions with
(classical) standard errors in parentheses. Like the randomization inference results, the dependent
variables of interest are in the rows, with the comparison arranged by country and group in the
columns.
    Table B.4 and Table B.5 replicate the main randomization inference results with regression
analysis. While the point estimates cannot be directly compared between the two approaches due
to the use of adjustment and, in the case of binary variables, the logistic link function, the general
pattern of statistical signiﬁcance remains unchanged regardless of the approach. Tables B.6-B.9
report a series of interaction results. Dependent variables are in the rows as in other tables, with
the reported coeﬃcients representing the additive eﬀect of the treatment when subjects belong to
the subgroup of interest (given in the column) relative to those subjects not in that group. Index
variables are created for each of the four major families of outcomes by taking the average of the
non-missing values for all items comprising the index. Index variables are reported ﬁrst, followed
by the variables used to create the index. The Sent SMS variable is not included in Tables B.6-B.9
because the small number of sent texts makes heterogeneous eﬀect estimation using block ﬁxed-eﬀects
infeasible.




                                                  6
                                                              Oil-Tax               Aid-Tax
                                                       Uganda       Ghana     Uganda      Ghana
               Behavioral Index                          0.023      −0.014      0.059     −0.059
                                                        (0.048)     (0.043)    (0.048)    (0.043)
               Sign Petition (Anon)                     −0.140       0.160      0.001      0.014
                                                        (0.119)     (0.191)    (0.119)    (0.187)
               Sign Petition (Named)                     0.032      −0.185     −0.081     −0.131
                                                        (0.116)     (0.113)    (0.115)    (0.112)
               Sent SMS                                 0.922∗      −0.142     −0.226      0.061
                                                        (0.521)     (0.289)    (0.397)    (0.302)
               Donate (Any)                             −0.023      −0.041      0.106     −0.146
                                                        (0.122)     (0.112)    (0.122)    (0.111)
               Donate (Amount)                          15.623       0.025     13.974     −0.064
                                                       (15.763)     (0.096)   (15.955)    (0.095)
               Willingness Index                        −0.012       0.063      0.030     −0.005
                                                        (0.047)     (0.044)    (0.047)    (0.044)
               Create Agency                            0.199∗       0.124     0.213∗     −0.086
                                                        (0.120)     (0.127)    (0.120)    (0.130)
               Agency WTP (Taxes)                       −0.054      −0.042      0.001    −0.087∗∗
                                                        (0.109)     (0.037)    (0.108)    (0.036)
               Willing SMS                              −0.130      −0.118     −0.027     −0.038
                                                        (0.123)     (0.121)    (0.123)    (0.120)
               Contact Elder                            −0.045       0.127      0.029      0.030
                                                        (0.085)     (0.078)    (0.085)    (0.078)
               Contact LC3/Assembly                      0.018       0.119     −0.067     −0.009
                                                        (0.087)     (0.077)    (0.087)    (0.076)
               Contact MP                               −0.141       0.106      0.013      0.043
                                                        (0.089)     (0.077)    (0.089)    (0.077)
                 ∗p   < .1;   ∗∗ p   < .05;   ∗∗∗ p   < .01

Table B.4: Behavioral and Willingness Eﬀects, Regression Results. Columns 1 and 3 report the Ugandan
results while Columns 2 and 4 Report the Ghanaian estimates. Standard errors in parenthesis. Reported
estimates obtained using block ﬁxed-eﬀects as well as standard battery of demographic covariates. All binary
outcome measures modeled using logistic regression, with eﬀects representing the log of the factor change in
the likelihood of taking the given action holding all other variables constant. None of the signiﬁcant results
survive a multiple-testing correction.




                                                                7
                                                               Oil-Tax            Aid-Tax
                                                        Uganda      Ghana     Uganda    Ghana
                Misappropriation Index                   0.070       0.070    −0.029     0.052
                                                        (0.047)     (0.043)   (0.047)   (0.043)
                Diﬃculty Observe                        −0.027      −0.030    −0.078    −0.062
                                                        (0.079)     (0.067)   (0.079)   (0.067)
                MP Will Know                            0.134∗∗      0.045     0.027     0.023
                                                        (0.059)     (0.048)   (0.059)   (0.048)
                Politicians Steal                       0.138∗       0.059     0.073    0.123∗∗
                                                        (0.081)     (0.057)   (0.081)   (0.056)
                Politicians Steal (List)                −0.024      −0.070     0.011    −0.087
                                                        (0.064)     (0.059)   (0.064)   (0.060)
                Beneﬁt Index                             0.033       0.030     0.028     0.042
                                                        (0.046)     (0.041)   (0.046)   (0.041)
                Beneﬁt Family                            0.037       0.074     0.061     0.001
                                                        (0.051)     (0.046)   (0.051)   (0.046)
                Beneﬁt Community                         0.027      0.076∗     0.052     0.039
                                                        (0.045)     (0.043)   (0.045)   (0.043)
                Beneﬁt Economy                          −0.063      −0.002     0.011     0.009
                                                        (0.041)     (0.038)   (0.041)   (0.038)
                  ∗p   < .1;   ∗∗ p   < .05;   ∗∗∗ p   < .01

Table B.5: Misappropriation Risk and Potential Beneﬁt Eﬀects, Regression Results. Columns 1 and 3 report
the Ugandan results while Columns 2 and 4 Report the Ghanaian estimates. Reported estimates obtained
using block ﬁxed-eﬀects as well as standard battery of demographic covariates. All binary outcome measures
modeled using logistic regression, with eﬀects representing the log of the factor change in the likelihood of
taking the given action holding all other variables constant. Standard errors in parenthesis. None of the
signiﬁcant results survive a multiple-testing correction.




                                                                8
                                             High Type   Gov Supporter   Oil Region       Female      High Trust       Coethnic Pres       High Approval
      Behavioral Index                         −0.160        0.073         −0.099          0.139          0.089             0.093              −0.171
                                               (0.125)      (0.120)        (0.150)        (0.103)        (0.127)           (0.175)             (0.112)
      Sign Petition (Anon)                      0.127       −0.067          0.251         −0.301         −0.100             0.055               0.112
                                               (0.255)      (0.246)        (0.308)        (0.211)        (0.259)           (0.359)             (0.228)
      Sign Petition (Named)                    −0.113       −0.182          0.172         −0.253          0.025             0.017              −0.018
                                               (0.257)      (0.248)        (0.316)        (0.213)        (0.261)           (0.367)             (0.230)
      Donate (Any)                            −0.424∗        0.284         −0.215          0.155          0.222             0.019             −0.439∗
                                               (0.256)      (0.245)        (0.311)        (0.211)        (0.259)           (0.366)             (0.228)
      Donate (Amount)                         −15.836      −18.102          8.659         40.339         −1.693            44.947             −12.667
                                              (40.484)     (39.170)       (46.919)       (33.298)       (41.001)          (53.584)            (36.895)
      Willingness Index                         0.135       −0.057          0.233          0.165         −0.051             0.255               0.061
                                               (0.122)      (0.118)        (0.147)        (0.101)        (0.124)           (0.171)             (0.109)
      Create Agency                            −0.090       −0.187          0.339         −0.159          0.003             0.587               0.261
                                               (0.264)      (0.253)        (0.316)        (0.218)        (0.267)           (0.387)             (0.238)
      Agency WTP (Taxes)                       −0.193       −0.285          0.208          0.181          0.054             0.143              −0.060
                                               (0.276)      (0.267)        (0.336)        (0.228)        (0.281)           (0.368)             (0.245)




9
      Willing SMS                              −0.009       −0.247         −0.166          0.088         −0.062             0.436              −0.332
                                               (0.260)      (0.251)        (0.322)        (0.215)        (0.264)           (0.377)             (0.233)
      Contact Elder                             0.237       −0.131          0.387          0.263         −0.126             0.176              0.396∗∗
                                               (0.223)      (0.215)        (0.268)        (0.184)        (0.226)           (0.310)             (0.199)
      Contact LC3/Assembly                      0.363        0.047          0.199         0.342∗         −0.041             0.245               0.125
                                               (0.223)      (0.214)        (0.267)        (0.184)        (0.226)           (0.309)             (0.199)
      Contact MP                                0.162        0.115          0.155         0.333∗         −0.318             0.324              −0.015
                                               (0.233)      (0.225)        (0.281)        (0.192)        (0.237)           (0.323)             (0.209)
       ∗p   < .1;   ∗∗ p   < .05;   ∗∗∗ p   < .01


    Table B.6: Heterogeneous Treatment Eﬀects, Ugandan Estimates, Tax-Oil Comparison. Estimates obtained using regression with block ﬁxed-eﬀects
    and a standard battery of demographic characteristics. Reported estimates are interaction eﬀects that test whether the eﬀect of the Tax treatment
    varies across potential moderators, including whether the respondent had experience paying taxes (High Type), was a government supporter (Gov
    Supporter), resides in an oil region (Oil Region), is female, reported high levels of trust in the government (Trust High), was a coethnic with the sitting
    president (Coethnic Pres), and approved of recent central government performance (High Approval). Standard errors in parentheses. Logistic regression
    used for binary variables, which are italicized. Because few respondents actually sent a text and many of our subgroups of interest are relatively small,
    the number of respondents who had both sent a text and belonged to the subgroup made estimation of this eﬀect infeasible. We thus drop the measure
    here.
                                              High Type   Gov Supporter   Oil Region       Female      High Trust       Coethnic Pres       High Approval
      Behavioral Index                          −0.099        0.090         −0.050         0.194∗         0.046              0.035              −0.001
                                                (0.126)      (0.121)        (0.149)        (0.103)       (0.124)            (0.175)             (0.111)
      Sign Petition (Anon)                       0.090        0.006          0.411         −0.210        −0.349             −0.198               0.254
                                                (0.258)      (0.248)        (0.308)        (0.212)       (0.254)            (0.365)             (0.227)
      Sign Petition (Named)                    −0.444∗        0.076         −0.058          0.080       −0.661∗∗            −0.285               0.183
                                                (0.264)      (0.252)        (0.312)        (0.216)       (0.259)            (0.386)             (0.231)
      Donate (Any)                              −0.289        0.045          0.089          0.032         0.014             −0.175              −0.037
                                                (0.258)      (0.246)        (0.306)        (0.212)       (0.253)            (0.374)             (0.226)
      Donate (Amount)                           −8.688       27.275        −17.905        80.097∗∗       21.530             36.199              15.609
                                               (41.554)     (40.028)       (47.453)       (33.483)      (40.933)           (52.792)            (37.295)
      Willingness Index                          0.039       −0.076          0.113          0.090        −0.096             −0.021               0.099
                                                (0.123)      (0.118)        (0.146)        (0.101)       (0.121)            (0.171)             (0.108)
      Create Agency                             −0.215       −0.126          0.411         −0.118        −0.068              0.167               0.149
                                                (0.268)      (0.254)        (0.312)        (0.219)       (0.261)            (0.398)             (0.238)
      Agency WTP (Taxes)                         0.108       −0.310         −0.296          0.348         0.104              0.430               0.001
                                                (0.277)      (0.265)        (0.333)        (0.228)       (0.273)            (0.359)             (0.241)




10
      Willing SMS                                0.144       −0.038         −0.163         −0.097        −0.222              0.572              −0.088
                                                (0.261)      (0.250)        (0.316)        (0.214)       (0.256)            (0.375)             (0.229)
      Contact Elder                              0.199       −0.165          0.070          0.172       −0.365∗             −0.111              0.442∗∗
                                                (0.224)      (0.214)        (0.264)        (0.184)       (0.220)            (0.311)             (0.197)
      Contact LC3/Assembly                       0.260        0.038          0.052         0.344∗        −0.141             −0.410               0.081
                                                (0.225)      (0.215)        (0.263)        (0.184)       (0.220)            (0.311)             (0.197)
      Contact MP                                −0.151        0.071          0.100         −0.050        −0.056             −0.293               0.038
                                                (0.234)      (0.225)        (0.278)        (0.192)       (0.232)            (0.327)             (0.207)
        ∗p   < .1;   ∗∗ p   < .05;   ∗∗∗ p   < .01


     Table B.7: Heterogeneous Treatment Eﬀects, Ugandan Estimates, Tax-Aid Comparison. Estimates obtained using regression with block ﬁxed-eﬀects
     and a standard battery of demographic characteristics. Reported estimates are interaction eﬀects that test whether the eﬀect of the Tax treatment
     varies across potential moderators, including whether the respondent had experience paying taxes (High Type), was a government supporter (Gov
     Supporter), resides in an oil region (Oil Region), is female, reported high levels of trust in the government (Trust High), was a coethnic with the sitting
     president (Coethnic Pres), and approved of recent central government performance (High Approval). Standard errors in parentheses. Logistic regression
     used for binary variables, which are italicized. Because few respondents actually sent a text and many of our subgroups of interest are relatively small,
     the number of respondents who had both sent a text and belonged to the subgroup made estimation of this eﬀect infeasible. We thus drop the measure
     here.
                                               High Type   Gov Supporter   Oil Region      Female      High Trust      Coethnic Pres       High Approval
       Behavioral Index                           0.027        0.005        −0.076         0.171∗        −0.170           −0.125                0.023
                                                 (0.132)      (0.121)       (0.185)        (0.104)       (0.116)          (0.288)              (0.128)
       Sign Petition (Anon)                      −0.808        0.067         0.614          0.110         0.196           12.818                0.191
                                                 (0.536)      (0.514)       (0.919)        (0.427)       (0.478)         (316.277)             (0.533)
       Sign Petition (Named)                      0.268       −0.119        −0.784∗        −0.074        −0.268          −1.826∗∗∗              0.027
                                                 (0.292)      (0.262)       (0.456)        (0.224)       (0.250)          (0.683)              (0.277)
       Donate (Any)                              −0.260       −0.088        −0.198          0.255        −0.302           −0.594                0.147
                                                 (0.287)      (0.266)       (0.479)        (0.228)       (0.254)          (0.645)              (0.281)
       Donate (Amount)                            0.305        0.200         0.015         0.420∗        −0.233           1.468∗∗              −0.064
                                                 (0.282)      (0.294)       (0.333)        (0.246)       (0.275)          (0.730)              (0.299)
       Willingness Index                         −0.048       −0.034         0.098         −0.097        −0.034           −0.446               −0.023
                                                 (0.133)      (0.123)       (0.188)        (0.105)       (0.117)          (0.293)              (0.130)
       Create Agency                             −0.415       −0.244         0.146         −0.365         0.133           −0.160               −0.110
                                                 (0.342)      (0.307)       (0.608)        (0.258)       (0.286)          (0.715)              (0.326)
       Agency WTP (Taxes)                         0.022        0.019         0.111          0.137         0.055            0.039                0.027
                                                 (0.106)      (0.102)       (0.143)        (0.087)       (0.097)          (0.236)              (0.106)




11
       Willing SMS                                0.107       −0.153        −0.345         −0.148        −0.319          −1.910∗∗               0.427
                                                 (0.292)      (0.289)       (0.406)        (0.253)       (0.278)          (0.791)              (0.303)
       Contact Elder                             −0.078       −0.040         0.056         −0.110        −0.107           −0.678               −0.020
                                                 (0.235)      (0.215)       (0.329)        (0.185)       (0.206)          (0.511)              (0.227)
       Contact LC3/Assembly                      −0.120       −0.114         0.256         −0.119        −0.167           −0.516                0.137
                                                 (0.231)      (0.213)       (0.325)        (0.183)       (0.203)          (0.505)              (0.225)
       Contact MP                                −0.149        0.029         0.273         −0.108         0.065           −0.556               −0.166
                                                 (0.233)      (0.215)       (0.330)        (0.184)       (0.205)          (0.511)              (0.227)
         ∗p   < .1;   ∗∗ p   < .05;   ∗∗∗ p   < .01


     Table B.8: Heterogeneous Treatment Eﬀects, Ghanaian Estimates, Tax-Oil Comparison. Estimates obtained using regression with block ﬁxed-eﬀects
     and a standard battery of demographic characteristics. Reported estimates are interaction eﬀects that test whether the eﬀect of the Tax treatment
     varies across potential moderators, including whether the respondent had experience paying taxes (High Type), was a government supporter (Gov
     Supporter), resides in an oil region (Oil Region), is female, reported high levels of trust in the government (Trust High), was a coethnic with the sitting
     president (Coethnic Pres), and approved of recent central government performance (High Approval). Standard errors in parentheses. Logistic regression
     used for binary variables, which are italicized. Because few respondents actually sent a text and many of our subgroups of interest are relatively small,
     the number of respondents who had both sent a text and belonged to the subgroup made estimation of this eﬀect infeasible. We thus drop the measure
     here.
                                               High Type   Gov Supporter   Oil Region      Female      High Trust      Coethnic Pres       High Approval
       Behavioral Index                          0.099        −0.030          0.058         0.113       −0.135              0.352              −0.012
                                                (0.134)       (0.119)        (0.186)       (0.104)      (0.116)            (0.307)             (0.131)
       Sign Petition (Anon)                     −0.949∗       −0.325          1.031        −0.059       1.028∗∗             0.022              −0.218
                                                (0.517)       (0.481)        (0.922)       (0.406)      (0.474)            (1.298)             (0.517)
       Sign Petition (Named)                     0.544∗       −0.061         −0.662         0.180       −0.468∗            −0.729               0.142
                                                (0.294)       (0.257)        (0.443)       (0.223)      (0.250)            (0.668)             (0.281)
       Donate (Any)                              0.188        −0.204          0.240         0.072       −0.224              0.587               0.024
                                                (0.289)       (0.259)        (0.459)       (0.224)      (0.252)            (0.744)             (0.283)
       Donate (Amount)                          −0.004         0.149          0.031         0.226       −0.159             1.757∗              −0.097
                                                (0.289)       (0.281)        (0.338)       (0.238)      (0.269)            (0.914)             (0.301)
       Willingness Index                         0.089        −0.098          0.015        −0.002        0.063             −0.060               0.056
                                                (0.135)       (0.121)        (0.189)       (0.105)      (0.118)            (0.311)             (0.133)
       Create Agency                            −0.170        −0.086         −0.318         0.044        0.279             −0.406               0.120
                                                (0.353)       (0.307)        (0.691)       (0.262)      (0.295)            (0.814)             (0.332)
       Agency WTP (Taxes)                       −0.121        −0.056          0.040         0.091       0.223∗∗             0.138              −0.026
                                                (0.108)       (0.100)        (0.141)       (0.086)      (0.096)            (0.251)             (0.109)




12
       Willing SMS                               0.122        −0.272         −0.063         0.190        0.076             −1.217               0.362
                                                (0.298)       (0.288)        (0.410)       (0.254)      (0.279)            (0.849)             (0.312)
       Contact Elder                             0.124        −0.171         −0.036        −0.093        0.111             −0.221               0.160
                                                (0.239)       (0.213)        (0.330)       (0.184)      (0.207)            (0.543)             (0.232)
       Contact LC3/Assembly                      0.177        −0.033          0.222        −0.093       −0.118              0.106               0.040
                                                (0.235)       (0.210)        (0.326)       (0.182)      (0.204)            (0.537)             (0.229)
       Contact MP                                0.161        −0.209         −0.048         0.054        0.037              0.259              −0.041
                                                (0.237)       (0.211)        (0.331)       (0.184)      (0.206)            (0.543)             (0.232)
         ∗p   < .1;   ∗∗ p   < .05;   ∗∗∗ p   < .01


     Table B.9: Heterogeneous Treatment Eﬀects, Ghanaian Estimates, Tax-Aid Comparison. Estimates obtained using regression with block ﬁxed-eﬀects
     and a standard battery of demographic characteristics. Reported estimates are interaction eﬀects that test whether the eﬀect of the Tax treatment
     varies across potential moderators, including whether the respondent had experience paying taxes (High Type), was a government supporter (Gov
     Supporter), resides in an oil region (Oil Region), is female, reported high levels of trust in the government (Trust High), was a coethnic with the sitting
     president (Coethnic Pres), and approved of recent central government performance (High Approval). Standard errors in parentheses. Logistic regression
     used for binary variables. Because few respondents actually sent a text and many of our subgroups of interest are relatively small, the number of
     respondents who had both sent a text and belonged to the subgroup made estimation of this eﬀect infeasible. We thus drop the measure here.
C     Mediation Analysis
Subjects may be more willing to monitor oil or aid-based revenues out of a concern that such
revenues will be misused at higher rates. To test for indirect eﬀects from this channel, we modeled
the items from the misappopriation index as mediators. Tables C.11 and C.10 report a selection
of estimates of the Average Causal Mediation Eﬀect (ACME) in both Ghana and Uganda for the
Tax-Oil comparison (e.g. tax-based revenue as the treatment condition and oil-based revenue as
the control condition). These estimates can be interpreted as the indirect eﬀect of the treatment
through the chosen mediator. Similar results hold for the Tax-Aid comparison. In neither case do
any of the mediation eﬀects approach signiﬁcance.
    The identifying assumption required for ACME estimates to be valid is that of sequential ignor-
ability. In the context of mediation analysis, sequential ignorability requires that, conditional on
covariates, the mediator is randomly assigned. We use a standard battery of demographic controls
to model the value of the mediator, but our results are robust to more extensive controls that include
partisan aﬃliation, and levels of political knowledge. All ACME estimates are produced using the
mediation package in R. Index variables are created for each of the four major families of outcomes
by taking the average of the non-missing values for all items comprising the index. Index variables
are reported ﬁrst, followed by the variables used to create the index.




                                                 13
                                Help Family          Help Community     Politicians Steal      Diﬃculty Observe
 Behavioral Index                      0.010              0.008              0.001                  0.001
                                      (0.298)            (0.382)            (0.878)                (0.832)
 Sign (Anon)                           0.010              0.009              0.001                  0.001
                                      (0.240)            (0.358)            (0.898)                (0.830)
 Sign (Named)                          0.010              0.008              0.001                  0.001
                                      (0.250)            (0.338)            (0.838)                (0.810)
 Sent SMS                              0.010              0.008              0.001                  0.001
                                      (0.260)            (0.386)            (0.880)                (0.820)
 Donate (Any)                          0.010              0.008              0.001                  0.001
                                      (0.278)            (0.358)            (0.882)                (0.852)
 Donate (Amount)                       0.011              0.008              0.002                  0.001
                                      (0.262)            (0.282)            (0.848)                (0.832)
  ∗p   < .1;   ∗∗ p   < .05;   ∗∗∗ p   < .01


Table C.10: Ugandan Estimates, Mediation Analysis, Tax-Oil Comparison. All estimates are the Average
Causal Mediation Eﬀect obtained with the mediation package in R. Each column represents one potential
mediator, with each mediator’s eﬀect reported for the outcome measures of interest in each row. Positive
eﬀects represent increases associated for those receiving the Tax condition relative to the oil condition. Two-
sided p-values in parentheses. The Behavioral Index variable is a simple weighted average of the non-missing
behavioral measures for each respondent.




                                       Help Family     Help Community      Politicians Steal      Diﬃculty Observe
Behavioral Index                         −0.005              0.002               0.004                 −0.005
                                         (0.564)            (0.712)             (0.722)                (0.476)
Sign Petition (Anon)                     −0.004              0.002               0.002                 −0.005
                                         (0.612)            (0.716)             (0.814)                (0.410)
Sign Petition (Named)                    −0.005              0.003               0.003                 −0.005
                                         (0.534)            (0.666)             (0.806)                (0.446)
Sent SMS                                 −0.004              0.002               0.003                 −0.005
                                         (0.598)            (0.716)             (0.752)                (0.384)
Donate (Any)                             −0.005              0.002               0.003                 −0.005
                                         (0.520)            (0.716)             (0.784)                (0.466)
Donate (Amount)                          −0.004              0.002               0.003                 −0.005
                                         (0.606)            (0.748)             (0.742)                (0.434)
 ∗p   < .1;   ∗∗ p   < .05;   ∗∗∗ p   < .01


Table C.11: Ghanaian Estimates, Mediation Analysis, Tax-Oil Comparison. All estimates are the Average
Causal Mediation Eﬀect obtained with the mediation package in R. Each column represents one potential
mediator, with each mediator’s eﬀect reported for the outcome measures of interest in each row. Positive
eﬀects represent increases associated for those receiving the Tax condition relative to the oil condition. Two-
sided p-values in parentheses. The Behavioral Index variable is a simple weighted average of the non-missing
behavioral measures for each respondent.



                                                              14
D     Heterogeneous Treatment Eﬀects
Figures D.7-D.10 visualize the results of analysis identical to that in the previous section for high-
and low-type respondents for the Tax-Oil and Tax-Aid comparisons. Figures D.7 and D.9 show the
treatments eﬀects for taxes relative to oil, and Figures D.8 and D.10 for taxes relative to aid. We
expect positive treatment eﬀects for high types who pay taxes and are well educated, and none or
negative ones for low types. And we expect positives ones for opposition members and negative ones
for governing party supporters in both countries. The results suggest no evidence that a positive
eﬀect exists for respondents with characteristics that would make them the most likely group to
monitor tax-based expenditures. The only treatment eﬀects that approach conventional signiﬁcance
are, in fact, in the opposite direction if the taxation-causes-accountability argument were to hold. Yet
controlling the false discovery rate at conventional levels using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure
eliminates even those few results that are marginally signiﬁcant.

                                                        Ghanaian Sample
                                                                      q
           Sign Petition (Named)                                           q
                                                                                              Subset

                                                                           q                   q Tax Exposure
             Sign Petition (Anon)                                     q
                                                                                               q No Exposure
                                                                          q
                       Sent SMS                                            q

                                                                           q
                    Donate (Any)                                  q

                                                                           q
                Donate (Amount)                                                    q


                                    −0.6         −0.3                 0.0              0.3              0.6
                                                         Average Treatment Effect

                                                         Ugandan Sample
                                                                          q
           Sign Petition (Named)                                          q
                                                                                              Subset

                                                                  q                            q Tax Exposure
             Sign Petition (Anon)                                          q
                                                                                               q No Exposure
                                                                           q
                       Sent SMS                                           q

                                                                           q
                    Donate (Any)                              q

                                                                               q
                Donate (Amount)                                           q


                                    −0.50        −0.25                0.00             0.25            0.50
                                                         Average Treatment Effect


Figure D.7: High-Type vs. Low-Type Respondents, Tax-Oil. Estimates obtained using randomiza-
tion inference with 10,000 draws to approximate the exact distribution. 95 percent Rosenbaum-style conﬁdence
intervals obtained via inversion of constant eﬀects hypothesis as implemented in ri package.




                                                    15
                                                        Ghanaian Sample
                                                                      q
           Sign Petition (Named)                                                  q
                                                                                                  Subset

                                                                              q                    q Tax Exposure
             Sign Petition (Anon)                                     q
                                                                                                   q No Exposure
                                                                          q
                       Sent SMS                                               q

                                                                      q
                    Donate (Any)                                          q

                                                                      q
                Donate (Amount)                                                        q


                                    −0.6         −0.3                     0.0              0.3              0.6
                                                         Average Treatment Effect

                                                         Ugandan Sample
                                                                          q
           Sign Petition (Named)                              q
                                                                                                  Subset

                                                                          q                        q Tax Exposure
             Sign Petition (Anon)                                             q
                                                                                                   q No Exposure
                                                                          q
                       Sent SMS                                            q

                                                                                  q
                    Donate (Any)                                  q

                                                                                      q
                Donate (Amount)                                                        q


                                    −0.50        −0.25                0.00                 0.25            0.50
                                                         Average Treatment Effect


Figure D.8: High-Type vs. Low-Type Respondents, Tax-Aid. Estimates obtained using randomiza-
tion inference with 10,000 draws to approximate the exact distribution. 95 percent Rosenbaum-style conﬁdence
intervals obtained via inversion of constant eﬀects hypothesis as implemented in ri package.




                                                    16
                                                      Ghanaian Sample
                                                                 q
           Sign Petition (Named)                                         q
                                                                                                 Subset

                                                                          q                       q Gov Opp
             Sign Petition (Anon)                                         q
                                                                                                  q Gov Supp
                                                                         q
                      Sent SMS                                           q

                                                                 q
                   Donate (Any)                                              q

                                                                                  q
               Donate (Amount)                                            q


                                    −0.6       −0.3                      0.0              0.3             0.6
                                                       Average Treatment Effect

                                                      Ugandan Sample
                                                                         q
           Sign Petition (Named)                                              q
                                                                                                 Subset

                                                                     q                            q Gov Opp
             Sign Petition (Anon)                                         q
                                                                                                  q Gov Supp
                                                                          q
                      Sent SMS                                            q

                                                                              q
                   Donate (Any)                              q

                                                                                      q
               Donate (Amount)                                                        q


                                    −0.50     −0.25                  0.00                 0.25            0.50
                                                       Average Treatment Effect


Figure D.9: Gov Supporters vs. Non-Supporters, Tax-Oil. Estimates obtained using randomization
inference with 10,000 draws to approximate the exact distribution. 95 percent Rosenbaum-style conﬁdence
intervals obtained via inversion of constant eﬀects hypothesis as implemented in ri package.




                                                  17
                                                      Ghanaian Sample
                                                                  q
           Sign Petition (Named)                                          q
                                                                                                 Subset

                                                                          q                       q Gov Opp
             Sign Petition (Anon)                                         q
                                                                                                  q Gov Supp
                                                                          q
                      Sent SMS                                            q

                                                              q
                   Donate (Any)                                           q

                                                                                  q
               Donate (Amount)                                    q


                                    −0.6       −0.3                   0.0                 0.3             0.6
                                                       Average Treatment Effect

                                                      Ugandan Sample
                                                                  q
           Sign Petition (Named)                                          q
                                                                                                 Subset

                                                                      q                           q Gov Opp
             Sign Petition (Anon)                                         q
                                                                                                  q Gov Supp
                                                                          q
                      Sent SMS                                            q

                                                                              q
                   Donate (Any)                                           q

                                                                                      q
               Donate (Amount)                               q


                                    −0.50     −0.25               0.00                    0.25            0.50
                                                       Average Treatment Effect


Figure D.10: Gov Supporters vs. Non-Supporters, Tax-Aid. Estimates obtained using randomization
inference with 10,000 draws to approximate the exact distribution. 95 percent Rosenbaum-style conﬁdence
intervals obtained via inversion of constant eﬀects hypothesis as implemented in ri package.



E     Survey Language And Design
E.1    Assignment to Treatment

Subjects were randomly assigned to treatment and control conditions in which they were provided
with information about government revenue. While simple randomization would not lead to biased
estimates in expectation, the presence of non-trivial diﬀerences in respondent experience with local
government at the constituency-level presented an opportunity to improve the eﬃciency of the dif-
ferences estimator through the use of a block randomization algorithm. This algorithm was designed
such that, within our primary sampling unit and thus at all higher-level geographic units—including,
importantly, the constituency—there was perfect (or, when the number of respondents was not di-
visible by four, near-perfect) balance between our experimental conditions. The donation measure
prompt was as follows:




                                                  18
E.2    Donation Prompt

      “There are several organizations in [Ghana/Uganda] that work to make it easier for ordi-
      nary [Ghanaians/Ugandans] to see how development funds are spent. At the beginning
      of the survey, we gave you [6 cedis/1,000 shillings] to compensate you for the time it has
      taken to answer our questions. Now, we would like to know if you would like to donate
      to one of those organizations. You may choose to donate to [Action Aid Ghana/Uganda,
      Transparency International Ghana/Uganda, or IMANI, a research organization that ana-
      lyzes government budgets, policies and initiatives/a third organization of your choosing].
      If you would like to donate, please give me the amount of money you would like to donate
      and which organization you would like to donate to. If you do donate, your money will be
      used to help reduce corruption and improve the lives of ordinary Ghanaians/Ugandans.”




                                                 19
