                                                     WPS8185


Policy Research Working Paper                       8185




                              A BIT Far?
       Geography, International Economic Agreements,
              and Foreign Direct Investment:
             Evidence from Emerging Markets

                               Laura Gomez-Mera
                                Gonzalo J. Varela




Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8185


  Abstract
 How do international economic agreements influence the                             increase the likelihood of foreign direct investment. Yet,
 investment patterns of firms from emerging economies?                              the effects of these agreements on foreign direct investment
 This paper studies the ways in which bilateral investment                          depend on the distance between the origin and potential
 treaties and preferential trade agreements interact with geo-                      destination countries. Moreover, trade and investment
 graphic and cultural distance to influence firms’ investment                       agreements appear to interact differently with distance. By
 patterns. How does geographic and cultural proximity affect                        providing guarantees to investors and signaling credible
 the impact of international economic agreements on foreign                         commitment from host governments, bilateral investment
 direct investment flows? This question is answered using data                      treaties mitigate the higher uncertainty and transaction
 from an original survey of 700 firms from four emerging                            costs associated with investing in faraway, unfamiliar
 (or newly-emerged) economies: Brazil, India, the Republic                          markets. By contrast, the investment attraction effective-
 of Korea, and South Africa. The findings suggest that bilat-                       ness of preferential trade agreements fades with distance.
 eral investment treaties and preferential trade agreements




  This paper is a product of the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at gvarela@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                    A BIT Far?
   Geography, International Economic Agreements, and Foreign Direct Investment:
                         Evidence from Emerging Markets


                                              Laura Gomez-Mera
                                             Associate Professor
                                             University of Miami
                                             lgmera@miami.edu

                                              Gonzalo J. Varela
                                              Senior Economist
                                               The World Bank
                                           gvarela@worldbank.org




Keywords: Foreign direct investment, bilateral investment treaties, preferential trade agreements, distance,
emerging market multinationals

JEL codes: F15, F13, F21, F23, F55
    1. Introduction

Foreign direct investment (FDI) flows are an important source of foreign capital for developing countries.
In the last decade, almost half of total FDI flows have been directed to developing and emerging economies.
Moreover, large developing countries have become increasingly salient sources of outward FDI. Indeed, in
2014, multinational enterprises (MNEs) from developing and emerging economies accounted for 35% of
global FDI flows, while developing Asia became the world’s top source of outward FDI (UNCTAD 2015).

The rising salience of emerging market multinational enterprises (EMNEs) has generated significant interest
among scholars of international business and economics. A growing literature has examined the factors
influencing the investment decisions of these firms, and their differences and similarities with multinational
enterprises from advanced industrialized countries (Cantwell and Barnard 2008; Sauvant 2005; 2008; 2010;
Dunning, Kim, and Park 2008; Gammeltoft 2008; etc.). Much of this work has focused on the economic
motivations for these firms to internationalize, emphasizing competitiveness pressures resulting from
increased economic interdependence. This literature has paid less attention to the role of non-economic
factors, such as domestic political institutions and participation in international institutions. While a vast
body of research has examined how domestic and international institutions influence patterns of FDI, this
work has primarily concentrated on firms from advanced industrial nations.

In this paper, we fill a gap in the literature by studying whether and in what ways international economic
agreements affect the investment decisions of firms from emerging and newly emerged countries. Research
on FDI from developed countries tends to find a positive association between the presence of bilateral
investment treaties (BITs) and preferential trade agreements (PTAs) and inflows of foreign investment.
What role do these international economic agreements (IEAs) play in the decision of EMNEs? In addition,
we are interested in the ways in which IEAs interact with distance to shape outward FDI from emerging
economies. More specifically, do IEAs work to mitigate the costs typically associated with geographic and
cultural distance? As empirical studies have shown, despite the reduction in transportation costs typically
associated to globalization, distance still matters for patterns of both trade and investment. Indeed, the
further away a potential market, the higher uncertainty about political, economic, and cultural factors, and
the more difficult it is to secure finding at home for those investments, which may affect the profitability of
investments. We thus hypothesize that, by providing guarantees to investors and signaling credible
commitment from host governments, BITs mitigate the higher uncertainty and reduce transaction costs
associated with investing in faraway, unfamiliar markets.1

By contrast, we expect the relationship between PTAs and distance to be more complex and to depend
partly on the motivations driving firms’ decisions to invest abroad. Previous research suggests that the
effect of PTAs on trade creation fades with distance (e.g. Carrere et al. 2012; Freeman and Pienknagura
2016). In a study of the impact of PTAs on FDI inflows, Medvedev (2011) finds that the FDI benefits of PTAs
increase with the proximity to the host country. In line with these results, and given the data from our
survey, which indicate that firms value PTAs primarily for their trade facilitating effects, we expect the
benefits of PTAs for FDI attraction to also decrease with distance. PTAs allow investors to import lower-cost
inputs from and to export finished goods back to their home countries. Yet, increasing transport costs will

1
 One example by which BITs reduce transaction costs is by giving access to more competitive financing. For example,
German multinationals that invest in countries with which Germany has a BIT will be able to apply for funding from KfW, a
German government-owned development bank.


                                                           2
offset these benefits, as the distance between two countries grows. Distance thus erodes part of the trade
cost savings associated with PTAs. Thus, in the context of vertical FDI, we would expect the relevance of
PTAs for investors to fade with distance between the firm’s country of origin and the potential destination.2

We test these hypotheses using data from an original survey of firm-level data from four emerging
economies: Brazil, India, South Africa, and the Republic of Korea. Consistent with our expectations, we find,
first, that controlling for distance and market size, the existence of a BIT between a firm’s country of origin
of and a potential market is associated with a greater number of investments in that country. But in
addition, the effect of the BIT increases with distance between members. In other words, investors pay
greater attention to the signals provided by BITs when considering whether to invest or not in more distant
countries. The positive interaction effect between BIT and distance also suggests that these agreements
work to offset part of the larger costs typically associated with distance, such as informational asymmetries
and higher transaction costs. In addition, our results show that while PTAs are also associated with more
investment, their effects appear to decrease the further away members are from each other. These results
also hold when controlling for different aspects of institutional quality and political risk.

The analysis in this paper has implications for several scholarly and policy debates on the role of
international economic agreements for cross-border investment decisions, at a time in which that role
appears to be under scrutiny among key players in the world economy. Indeed, increased scrutiny has come
both from the academic and policy fronts. In a blogpost published in 2008 and entitled “Some investors are
more equal than others,” Dani Rodrik suggests that BITs give an advantage to foreign relative to domestic
investors. In addition, it is argued that arbitration panels such as the International Center for the Settlement
of Investment Disputes (ICSID) tend to operate ‘secretively’ and quickly.3 Recent political developments
have also shown skepticism with respect to the benefits of these types of agreements among politicians
and their constituents. A top-down example is the withdrawal of the USA from the Trans-Pacific Partnership
(TPP) negotiations early in 2017. A bottom-up example is the Brexit vote in 2016 signaling – among many
other things - an appetite for keeping certain decisions at home rather than empowering supranational
agencies for those purposes.

Our contribution thus lies in exploring the ways in which distance—geographic and cultural – affects the
effectiveness of these international commitments in attracting foreign investment. At the same time, we
contribute to the economics literature on the determinants of FDI by showing how states can use specific
policies – such as joining trade and investment agreements—to offset the cost of investing in faraway
destinations. BITs reduce the transaction and information costs associated with investing abroad. Finally,
we contribute to the literature on emerging market multinationals, which has focused primarily on
economic considerations and has paid less attention to the ways in which host governments can use policy
choices to increase their attractiveness to potential foreign investors.

The paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we review the relevant literatures, on EMNEs,
distance, and international economic agreements and FDI. We then present our arguments and hypotheses.

2 PTAs allow investors to import lower-cost inputs from and to export finished goods back to their home countries. Yet, increasing
transport costs will offset these benefits, as the distance between two countries grows. If PTAs are primarily valued for their trade-
enhancing benefits, as the results of our survey suggest, their relevance to investors should fade with distance.
3 The argument is that these are ad hoc panels convened by practicing lawyers rather than a regularly sitting court with permanent

judges. In addition, there is no formal appeals process. This, according to many, defeats the whole object of providing swift and binding
decisions.


                                                                   3
In Part 3, we introduce our empirical strategy, discussing our sample, estimation technique, as well as the
ways in which we operationalize our main independent and control variables. We then discuss our results
and their implications. In the concluding section, we summarize their main findings and highlight how they
contribute to scholarly and policy-making debates on the determinants of FDI from emerging markets and
on the role of international institutions in attracting foreign investment.

    2. Literature Review

In examining the ways in which IEAs interact with distance to influence the investment decisions of EMNEs,
we draw upon and contribute to three bodies of literature: work on FDI from emerging markets, on the role
of distance in the context of increasing global economic integration, and on international economic
agreements and their effects on FDI.

    2.1. FDI from Emerging Market Multinationals
In the last two decades, developing and emerging economies have become increasingly salient players in
the global economy. Apart from capturing growing shares of global FDI flows, firms from the South have
emerged as important sources of outward investment. Already in 2005, according to UNCTAD’s World
Investment Report, outflows from developing economies were about three times world FDI flows 25 years
before, reaching about $130 billion. In 2011, these flows added up to $384 billion, accounting for more than
20% of total FDI flows. In terms of stocks, in 2011, firms from developing economies accounted for 1 of
every 5 dollars of equity held by multinationals worldwide, almost tripling the same ratio during the early
1990s.

A growing body of literature looks at the drivers and characteristics of outward FDI from emerging and
developing economies. Dunning, Kim, and Park (2008) compare contemporary TNCs from emerging markets
with traditional developed country corporations. They find evidence of a new wave of “asset-augmenting”
FDI in the 2000s, which contrasts with the primarily market-seeking and efficiency-seeking FDI from
developed economies in the 1960s-1980s. Whereas the traditional developed-country companies generally
invested abroad to exploit ownership-specific advantages, developing country MNCs tend to rely instead
on country-specific advantages, particularly in the services sector. Because of their limited assets and the
growing competitiveness pressures they face, firms from emerging markets have incentives to access
“created” assets such as brands, distribution networks, and managerial skills, in foreign countries through
M&As or other types of asset-augmenting FDI.4

Scholars have also highlighted the differences between the current wave of outward FDI from emerging
economies and two previous waves of outward investment from the developing world. The first wave
(1960s to mid-1980s) was driven primarily by the market- and efficiency-seeking strategies of Latin
American MNCs. The second wave, beginning in the mid-1980s, was dominated by Asian MNCs, seeking to
gain access to the rapidly expanding newly-industrializing economies in East Asia, as well as to increase
efficiency by drawing on cheaper labor in other less developed economies.

In the third wave, beginning in the 1990s, there has been a resurgence of OFDI from Latin America and Asia,
as well as growing flows from the Russian Federation and South Africa. While access to markets and inputs

4
 Examples include several M&As, including Lenovo’s purchase of IBM’s PC business and Tata’s acquisition of the steel giant
Corus.


                                                               4
remain the main motives, asset-augmenting strategies have increased in importance. During this period,
MNCs from emerging markets have relied on outward investments to access technology, R&D and
marketing capabilities, brands and managerial competencies (Gammeltoft 2008; Gammeltoft and Hobdari
2017; Fey et al. 2016). In terms of destinations, according to Gammeltoft (2008), third wave OFDI is
increasingly global and reaching both developed and developing countries, particularly in the
manufacturing sector.5 Finally, although up to 2001, FDI from emerging markets was mainly in the form of
greenfield investment, M&As have become more common (Dunning et al. 2008).

We add to this literature in two main ways. First, most of the available work on EMNEs has relied primarily
on case studies of specific firms, sectors, or countries. By contrast, we use data from a survey of over 700
firms from four emerging economies, which includes questions about the motivations, incentives, and
geographic location of these firms' decisions. Second, research on EMNEs has largely ignored the role of
non-economic factors in shaping these firms’ decisions. Are EMNEs concerned about political factors, such
as institutional and regulatory quality in host countries? Do they consider whether potential destination
markets participate in international economic agreements? It has been argued that MNCs from emerging
economies may possess “adversity advantages,” derived from their experience operating in a business
environment characterized by corrupt officials, regulatory instability and weak institutions (Contessi & El-
Ghazali 2010). Experience dealing with such challenging conditions may make these firms less worried
about political risk and instability, and by the same token, less responsive to the presence of BITs and PTAs.
We explore these issues empirically using data from the survey of potential investors.

    2.2. Distance and FDI
We also engage the discussion in the international trade and investment literatures on the so-called
“distance puzzle.” Conventional wisdom holds that globalization has irreversibly brought countries
together, facilitating international trade and investment. The fall in communication and transportation
costs in recent decades, a central element in the transaction costs that are captured by distance, has led to
the “death of distance” and made the world “flat” (Friedman 2005). Yet, empirical studies have failed to
show the purported declining distance elasticity of bilateral international trade (Disdier and Head 2008;
Carrere, de Melo, and Wilson 2011). Instead, studies have found that the burden of distance of trade may
be increasing.

A similar distance puzzle has been identified in FDI patterns. The empirical literature has shown that
distance has a negative effect on the investment decisions of multinational firms. Gravity-type of models
tend to find that distance, capturing informational gaps and asymmetries as well as cultural differences,
hinders FDI flows between two countries (e.g. Di Giovanni 2005; Portes and Rey 2005; Head and Mayer
2013; etc.). For example, Ferrantino (1992) finds that transaction costs associated, inter alia, with
geographic and cultural barriers, largely explained the fact that third world multinationals invested in other
developing countries, as opposed to a preference for low-income or labor-intensive markets.

These findings appear to go against the “FDI versus exports” approach, according to which firms are more
likely to expand production across borders, the higher the transportation costs and trade barriers.
Moreover, as information and communications technology facilitates the circulation of ideas and know-
how, firms should find investing and producing goods abroad more efficient than exporting them. Yet, as

5
 FDI in services, however, continues to exhibit a relatively higher regional bias. Asian MNCs appear to be more globalized than
Latin American MNCs, they are still more concentrated on neighboring countries.


                                                               5
Baldwin (2016) has argued, while the ICT revolution has enabled the unbundling of production and the
spread of global value chains, there are still important barriers to the movement of people. The still high
cost of moving people constrains the flow of professional services, the delivery of which requires face-to-
face contact and which cannot easily be offshored to foreign locations. Until this “third unbundling” of labor
services and workers materializes – according to Baldwin (2016) through the spread of “telepresence” -- we
can expect distance to constrain investment decisions, particularly in certain sectors.

Scholars have also examined the impact of cultural distance on foreign investment. Conventional wisdom
holds that similarities in cultural values facilitate doing business across countries and thus affects firms’
location decisions. Cultural and language differences are viewed as barriers to communication, thus leading
to higher transaction and information costs. Thus, multinational firms may prefer to invest in countries with
shared history, culture, and values. Relying on various conceptualizations of cultural distance, several
studies have found empirical support for its posited negative impact on FDI inflows (e.g.: Bhardwaj, Dietz,
and Beamish 2007; Siegel et al. 2011; Quer et al. 2017).

In line with this research, we expect firms’ investment decisions to be negatively influenced by geographic
and cultural distance, which increase the difficulty of making business across borders. When considering
attractive markets, firms will be more likely to prefer familiar, relatively closer destinations. Yet, can IEAs
contribute to offset the impediments of distance on FDI flows?

    2.3. International Economic Agreements and FDI
Conventional accounts of the determinants of FDI emphasized economic factors, particularly the size of the
market, business opportunities, and the availability of inputs in potential destinations. In addition,
economists recognized that governments could use specific policies, such as financial and tax incentives
and membership in international economic agreements to increase their attractiveness in the eyes of
foreign investors (Dreher et al, 2015).

Much of this work has focused on bilateral investment treaties (BITs), which govern the interactions
between foreign private investors and governments in host countries. BITs are viewed as commitment
devices that contribute to mitigating the so-called time-inconsistency problem inherent in foreign
investment.6 These treaties specify guarantees to foreign investors, most notably, the possibility of seeking
third-party arbitration in international tribunals and to obtain compensation in case of expropriation. In this
sense, they act as credible commitment mechanisms, thus boosting FDI between signatories. But in
addition, BITs have been also viewed as signaling a government’s commitment to liberal economic policies,
and hence reducing the likelihood of a broader range of interventions that may affect the profitability of
investments. Thus, BITs should also work to attract investment flows from third countries (Büthe and Milner
2009; Neumayer and Spess 2005).

An extensive body of literature has tested these theoretical claims empirically, obtaining mixed results.
Several scholars have found a statistically significant increase in FDI in the presence of a BIT, even when

6
  FDI involves the acquisition of fixed assets in a foreign country; investors will thus be concerned about the “obsolescing bargain”
(Vernon 1971) – the fact that once they have incurred the cost of the investment, governments, anticipating that it will be difficult
to pull out without considerable cost, see their bargaining power increase. Indeed, once the investment is made, a rational
government faces incentives to breach the terms of the agreement, expropriate assets, or introduce regulatory changes that make
the investment less profitable for the firm. Firms will anticipate this type of opportunistic behavior and will be discouraged from
investing in certain countries in the absence of specific guarantees.


                                                                 6
considering potential endogeneity effects (Neumayer and Spess, 2005; Büthe and Milner 2008; 2014; etc.).7
In other studies, however, the association is less clear (e.g Hallward-Driemeier, 2003; Tobin and Rose-
Ackerman, 2005; etc.). Finally, other works have found that the effectiveness of BITs on FDI depends on
characteristics of the host country, such as the quality of institutions and level of political risk. Neumayer
and Spess (2005) for example, show that the impact of BITs in attracting FDI increases with the quality of
institutions. By contrast, Yackee (2007) and Tobin and Rose-Ackerman (2011) find that investment treaties
are more effective in environments where political risk is higher.

Scholars have also explored the relationship between participation in preferential trade agreements (PTAs)
and FDI. Four different mechanisms through which preferential liberalization may affect FDI inflows have
been identified. First, economists emphasize the market-expansion effects of trade agreements. By creating
a larger host market, PTAs stimulate FDI inflows, which have been demonstrated to be particularly sensitive
to market size (e.g. Ethier 2001; Levy-Yeyati, Stein, and Daude 2003). Second, PTAs allow firms to benefit
from lower barriers of access, gaining access to cheaper inputs, and permitting them to export back to their
home country. Assuming a complementarity between trade and investment in the context of vertical FDI
and global value chains, one would expect PTAs to result in higher FDI inflows (Medvedev, 2011). Third,
PTAs may work to attract FDI inflows by contributing to increased economic growth of the host economy
(World Bank, 2001; Rodrik, 1999).

In addition to these purely economic effects of PTAs on FDI, there are political economy mechanisms
through which these agreements influence foreign investment decisions. Many of the more recent PTAs
contain investment and other non-trade provisions, concerning a broad range of domestic issues such as
the environment, competition policy, customs cooperation, labor standards, and intellectual property
rights. These “deep” trade agreements have been viewed as important drivers of FDI (Osnago et al., 2015).
Much like BITs, the non-trade provisions in PTAs signal to potential investors a government’s commitment
to maintaining liberal trade and investment policies. In line with this, Büthe and Milner (2008) find that
developing countries that participate in multilateral and regional trade organizations, such as the WTO or
EU, which provide mechanisms for information sharing, monitoring, and enforcement, tend to attract
higher levels of FDI.

Much of this work assumes North-South FDI flows- that is, firms from advanced industrialized nations
investing in developing countries. In this paper, instead, we investigate whether international economic
agreements also influence the decisions of firms from the South. Are these emerging foreign investors as
attentive/responsive to the commitment-enhancing effects of trade and investment treaties as their
counterparts from industrial economies? And does the effectiveness of IEAs in attracting FDI from emerging
economies depend on other factors, such as geographic and cultural distance and political risk in the host
country?


       3. Hypotheses

The literature on EMNEs has claimed that these firms tend to be more “global” in scope than their
predecessors in previous waves of outward FDI expansion from the developing world. Yet, in line with the
research reviewed in section 2, we expect these firms, like their competitors from the North, to be sensitive

7
    See UNCTAD (2014) for a comprehensive review of this literature.


                                                                7
to the higher transaction and informational costs associated with both physical and cultural distance. Thus,
we hypothesize that:

H1: All else equal, firms from emerging markets prefer to invest in closer and more familiar markets.

In addition, some have argued that firms from the South may be less worried about political risk and
instability and the security of their investments than those from the North. In contrast to these adversity
advantage hypothesis, we expect, rational investors from large developing countries to prefer investment
destinations in which they enjoy the protections granted by BITs. In addition, given the growing
participation of firms from these countries in global and regional value chains, commitment to liberal
policies – as signaled by BITs and PTAs—is likely to increase the attractiveness of a potential host market.
Our second hypothesis is thus that:

H2: IEAs increase the attractiveness of potential destinations to emerging market investors.

Yet, we expect these positive effects on firms’ investment decision to vary with geographic and cultural
distance between the firm’s country of origin and a potential destination. More specifically, we expect BITs,
which protect the security of investments, to reduce the uncertainty associated with remoteness and
cultural dissimilarities. We hypothesize that controlling for other country-specific factors, such as market
size and levels of political risk, BITs will be more important determinants of firms’ investment decisions, the
greater the distance between the investor’s home country and the potential destination. Moreover, we
expect distance to influence the effect of BITs on both the likelihood and the size of a firm’s investment in
a destination.

H3: The greater the (geographic and cultural) distance between a firm’s country of origin and a potential
destination, the stronger the (positive) effect of BITs on the firm’s investment decision.

The relationship between trade agreements and distance, on the other hand, is likely to be more
complicated. First, the effect of PTAs on firms’ investment decisions will depend on the motivations of the
firms for investing abroad. If the main motivation for the firm is to access new markets – “market-seeking”
FDI – then we would expect PTAs, which reduce the cost of trading across borders, to lead to lower levels
of FDI. This is because in that context, firms would prefer to directly trade with the country in question
instead to engage in the (more) costly strategy of acquiring fixed assets there. If, instead, the firm invests
abroad to take advantage of availability of low-cost inputs, such as cheap labor or skilled labor, or other
intangible assets that are not readily available in their home countries — “efficiency-seeking” FDI – then
PTAs are expected to foster higher levels of FDI. This is particularly the case for firms participating in
international production networks or global value chains.

A second consideration concerns the different mechanisms through which BITs and PTAs are expected to
attract FDI. While BITs contain provisions protecting investors from specific threats and damages, thereby
directly addressing firms’ perceptions of risk, the effect of PTAs is indirect. Unless they contain specific
investment clauses, they are believed to ease investors’ concerns by signaling commitment to market-
friendly policies. Moreover, the effectiveness of trade agreements in attracting FDI may be less related to
these commitment/signaling effects and more to the fact that they reduce the cost of trading for efficiency-
seeking investors. Once the firm starts producing within this country, it can also take advantage of
preferential access to other trade partners with which the destination country may have signed an


                                                      8
agreement. These advantages may be particularly salient as production becomes increasingly fragmented
in global value chains.8

H4: The effectiveness of PTAs in attracting FDI fades with geographic and cultural distance between two
countries, (assuming investors value PTAs for their trade-creating benefits).


4. Empirical Analysis

4.1. Data
The data for this study come from an original survey of investors and potential investors in four countries:
Brazil, Korea, South Africa, and India. The “Potential Investor Survey,” a joint project by UNIDO and the
World Bank, included interviews with 713 firms, randomly drawn from registries that contain all firms with
revenues of at least $25 million and operating in one of five sectors: finance and insurance, manufacturing,
wholesale trade, retail trade, and transportation and warehousing (See Table 1).9 To deal with selection
bias problems in other investors’ surveys, the sample contains not just firms that invest abroad but also
companies that considered investing but have decided not to do so, as well as firms that are focused on the
domestic market. The interviews were conducted in person and over the phone in 2009-2011.10

                                   Table 1. Survey respondents by country and sector
                                                                                               Korea,
                   Sector                              Brazil        India    South Africa      Rep.       Total
                   Manufacturing                        55            150         34            166         405
                                                      40.4%          82%         36.9%         59.5%       58.7%
                   Wholesale trade                      13            3            1             24          41
                                                       9.6%          1.64%       1.1%           8.6%        5.9%
                   Retail trade                         22            6            25            31          84
                                                      16.2%          3.28%       27.2%         11.1%       12.2%
                   Transportation & warehousing         22            0            1             32          55
                                                      16.3%           0%         1.1%          11.5%        7.9%
                   Finance & insurance                  24            24           31            26         105
                                                      17.6%          13.1%       33.7%          9.3%       15.2%
                   Total                                136          183           92            279        690
                   Source: Gomez-Mera et al (2014)


Firms were asked a variety of questions concerning their motivations for investing abroad, as well as the
different economic, political, and cultural factors influencing their choice to invest or not in a specific
destination. Data from the survey suggests that most firms are market-seeking: accessing new markets was

8
  Indeed, almost 30% percent of investors in our sample said the main ways in which they benefited from a PTA concerned the
increased size of the export market, while 23% and 16% mentioned reduction in the costs of trade and access to raw materials,
respectively. Yet, these trade costs reducing benefits of PTAs will fall the further away the potential investment destination, given
the higher transaction costs associated with trading with faraway markets. Thus, if investors value PTAs primarily because of their
trade-related effects, the relevance of these agreements may decrease with distance.
9
  The rationale for excluding natural resources and focusing largely on manufacturing and services was that while investment in
natural resources continues to account for a significant proportion of total FDI, its drivers and patterns of geographical expansion
tend to differ markedly from investment in manufacturing and services.
10
   See Gomez-Mera et al. (2014).


                                                                 9
claimed to be the main motivation for almost 70% of investors in the sample. The second main motivation
for investing abroad was lowering production costs, chosen by 20% of investors surveyed, followed by
acquiring natural resources and inputs (5%) (Gomez-Mera et al. 2014).

Investors were also asked to identify the three countries where they hold their largest investment. Of all
investors in the sample, only a subset identified the three main destinations. We aggregate this firm-level
data to generate a count of the number of investments from each country in each sector. The implicit
assumption made here, and purely driven by data availability, is that these data give a good representation
of the set of destinations in which firms from these four countries invest.

Although companies in our sample have investments in all regions of the world, there is a clear regional and
cultural bias, particularly in services. Brazilian firms tend to invest in Latin America, South African firms
invest in Africa, and Korean firms tend to invest in East Asia (Table 2). The exception is India, with a more
widespread reach. This is why in the remainder of this paper we look at revealed investment decisions and
test the trade-off between market size and informational costs associated with geographical and cultural
distance, as well as the role that BITs may have in reducing these informational costs.

                         Table 2. Investment destinations by country and region (%)
                                                     Brazil        India   South Africa   Korea, Rep.
                    Africa                           6.98           8.33      74.7           2.58
                    East Asia & Pacific               2.33         23.5        8.0            69
                    Europe & Central Asia             16.3         22.7       10.7           5.81
                    Latin America & Caribbean         48.8         1.52        4.0           10.3
                    Middle East & North Africa        2.33         20.4        0.0           0.65
                    South Asia                        0.0          6.82       1.33            7.1
                    US                                23.3         16.7       1.33           4.52
                    Total                             100          100         100           100
                   Source: Gomez-Mera et al (2014)


Consistent with the literature on the determinants of FDI, firms in this sample face a trade-off between
investing in a larger, more developed market and investing in more familiar, closer destinations where
they face lower transaction costs. Figure 1 shows this trade-off graphically. The scatter plots all possible
bilateral investments for firms in each of the countries of origin in our sample. The red dots show the
countries in which there is at least one investment (or one firm from that country that holds its largest
investment there). Except for firms from Korea, which appear to have a wider, more global reach, we
can see most of actual investments falling along or above a positively sloped line. The graph identifies
a locus of combinations of market attractiveness and distance that makes firms willing to invest: firms
accept greater transaction costs in exchange for a more attractive market. Thus, for example, although
Brazilian firms would probably like to invest in large attractive markets such as Indonesia, they end up
investing in smaller, but closer countries like Uruguay, Argentina, and Paraguay. It appears as if it took
very large markets such as China, Japan or India, to offset the costs of investing in distant locations.

                                            Figure 1. Market Size- Distance Trade-Off




                                                              10
4.2. Estimation strategy
Our unit of observation is the triplet country of origin ‘i’ – country of destination ‘j’ – sector ‘s’, and our
dependent variable is the number of investments from country i in country j in sector ‘s.’11 We use a hurdle
model – a special type of count model, which comprises two different steps for two separate processes.
The first step models the decision to invest, using a Logit model (to determine whether the count is zero or
positive). The second models the intensity – the count of investments, using a zero-truncated negative
binomial to determine the drivers of the positive count of investments.12 Both models are assumed to
follow the same specification.

Baseline model
The baseline specification for the hurdle model poses a relationship between the decision (and the count)
of investments between I and j, and the international economic agreements, along with controls, as follows:

                        = +                   +            +              +               +                   +
                         +             +             +                +

The dependent variable, FDI Countijs,, is the number of investment projects from home country i in host
country j corresponding to sector s. This gravity equation includes economic controls, such as the real per
capita gross domestic product (natural logs, in constant 2005 international dollars) of the host country
(GDPpcj), which is an indicator for level of economic development. In addition, to control for market size in


11
   Note that a count of zero investment from country i in country j in sector s masks two different scenarios: (i) no investment
from i is conducted in j in sector s, or (ii) firms from i that invest in j in sector s have not answered the question or have not been
sampled. The underlying process that determines whether a zero corresponds to (i) or to (ii) is unknown and hence not modeled
here.
12
   The idea is that if the outcome in the first step is positive, then “the hurdle is crossed” and the conditional distribution of the
positive values follows a zero-truncated count model. An alternative was to use a zero-truncated Poisson, but given that the data
showed overwhelming evidence of over-dispersion, the negative binomial is preferred.


                                                                 11
the destination country, the natural log of the population in j (Popj) is included. Exportsij, the average exports
of country i to country j over 2007-2009 seeks to both size-related market attractiveness and all the gravity
type of factors that impede or facilitate economic relations between a pair of countries, and control for the
complementarities that may exist between investment and trade. All else equal, it is expected that the
larger the size of the host country’s market and the higher the level of commercial exchange between the
home and host countries, the more attractive the latter would be as an investment destination.

In line with gravity models used widely in the trade literature, our model controls for the geographic and
cultural distances between home and host countries. Distij is the capital to capital distance in kilometers
(logs) from country of origin to country of destination, while Contigij, is a dummy variable equal to 1 if
countries i and j are contiguous and zero otherwise. The greater the physical distance between two
countries, the lower the expected investment levels between them, given higher transaction and
information costs associated with distance. To capture the effect of cultural differences, we include two
control variables: Comlangij is a binary variable equal to 1 if the countries i and j share the official language,
and zero otherwise, while Colonyij takes the value 1 if there was a shared colonial history between countries
i and j and zero otherwise. We expect that sharing a common language and a colonial history to facilitate
investment ties between two countries. Finally, eijs is the error term assumed to be orthogonal to the
regressors, and the set of “ ” and “b” are parameters.13

We also control for political stability and institutional quality, using data from the International Country Risk
Guide (ICRG), published by the Political Risk Services Group, and from the World Bank Governance
Indicators (WGI). We include two indicators in different models: the ICRG quality of government index and
the WGI political stability index. Gov quality is an average of three ICRG variables – Corruption, Law and
Order, and Bureaucratic Quality. While the first two are measured on a scale from 0 to 6, Bureaucratic
quality ranges from 0 to 4. The average of these scores is then scaled 0-1. Pol stability measures perceptions
of the likelihood of a government being overthrown by violent and/or unconstitutional means. In most
circumstances, we would expect a positive relationship between the coefficient for these indicators and FDI
count. However, if “adversity advantage” arguments are true, then the sign of the coefficient should be
negative.

Our variables of interest are BITij and PTAij. BITij is a dummy taking value 1 if countries i and j have a bilateral
investment treaty signed and ratified. Similarly, PTAij takes the value 1 if countries i and j have signed or
are part of a bilateral or plurilateral preferential trade agreement.

It is possible that the direction of causality between international economic agreements and investment
runs the other way. The case of the bilateral investment agreement between Uruguay and Finland helps
illustrate this reverse causality problem. The agreement signed between the two countries in 2002 was part
of the conditions required for a billion-dollar investment of a Finish cellulose pulp company in Uruguay.
While formally, the treaty preceded the investment, the signature of the former, was a consequence of the
interest in the latter. The standard approach to tackle this reverse causality problem that introduces a
potential source of inconsistency to standard estimators is to instrument the endogenous variable – in this
case the international economic agreement dummies. As a robustness check, we estimate instrumental
variable models. We follow Hallward-Driemeier (2003) and Busse et al. (2008) and as instrument the


13
     The specification also includes dummies for countries of origin (Brazil being the baseline) and sectors.


                                                                   12
number of BITs/PTAs a host country has concluded with third countries, subtracting the one with the home
country (BITall/ PTAall). 14

Interacted model: What role for distance?
The following step consists in testing the extent to which distance conditions the effects of international
agreements on FDI, and specifically if trade and investment agreements work to compensate at least
partially the costs associated with dissimilarities as captured by geographic distance. This is done through
an interacted model.


                       = +                  +           +            +                  +                +
                        +            +             +          ∗       +             ∗         +              +

In this case, the potential problem of endogeneity is attenuated by the fact that the endogenous variable is
interacted with an exogenous factor: distance. In fact, as argued by Nunn and Qian (2014) “interacting an
arguably exogenous term […] with one that is potentially endogenous […], can be interpreted as exogenous
since we directly control for the main effect of the endogenous variable."15


4.3 Results

    i.      Baseline
We first estimate a model of economic determinants of FDI, including market size and level of economic
development of the destination country, and average exports between the origin and destination markets,
controlling for distance and institutional factors. As expected, the results in Table 3 show that both market
size and level of economic development of the destination country matter for potential investors. The
combination of GDP per capita and population of the destination market are significant determinants of
the probability of investing in a destination, and of the number of investments there. Models 1 and 2 also
suggest that the greater the trade between the two countries, the higher the likelihood that firms from
country i origin will invest in market j.

At the same time, and in line with our first hypothesis, physical distance between markets reduces the
probability of investing in a market. This is likely related to the information costs associated with conducting
business in a faraway, possibly unfamiliar destination.16 Similarly, the statistically significant estimated
coefficient for Comlang shows that sharing an official language is a significant determinant of both the
probability of investing and of the number of investments in a market, further reinforcing our point

14
   These robustness checks with instrumental variables are run using a GMM estimator, with the dependent variable being
the count of investments from country i in country j.
15
   Other examples include Brukhart et al. (2012), and Drehel et al. (2015).
16
   Although not reported here, our results also show that the sensitivity to distance is higher for firms in the services sector,
as indicated by a negative interaction term between the services dummy and distance. In line with the literature, relative
to manufacturers, investors in the service sector show a preference for relatively similar host markets, revealing that in
services, in-depth knowledge of the host-market is more valuable than in manufacturing.




                                                               13
        that investors exhibit a preference for familiar markets, where they face lower transaction costs.
        Common colonial heritage, however, does not significantly predict the likelihood or size of investing by
        emerging market firms.

        Finally, Models 1 and 2 also include measures of political stability and institutional quality. The estimated
        coefficients for political stability is statistically significant and has the expected sign. Firms from emerging
        economies are more likely to invest (and tend to invest more) in destinations where perceptions of political
        instability and violence are low. The coefficient of quality of government, however, does not reach
        statistical significance.

        In Models 3 and 4, we include our main variables of interest, namely BIT and PTA. In Model 5, both variables
        are statistically significant in the first stage logistic regression, while the coefficient of BIT is also significant
        at the 90% level in the negative binomial stage. A PTA between two countries thus appears to influence the
        likelihood but not the level of investment between two countries. More specifically, all else equal, the odds
        of receiving an investment from an emerging market firm are 3.7 higher when there is a BIT between the
        origin and the destination countries, and 1.75 higher if the two countries have signed a PTA. Moreover, a
        BIT between two countries increases the difference in the logs of expected counts of investments by 1.6.


                                    Table 3. Baseline models. Hurdle negative binomial regressions
                                       (1)                               (2)                              (3)                              (4)

                            Logit                NB           Logit                NB          Logit               NB           Logit               NB

GDPpcj                    0.537***              0.309        0.229*               0.145       0.0150             0.0170         0.349              0.240
                           (0.192)             (0.285)       (0.137)             (0.220)      (0.153)            (0.222)       (0.213)            (0.284)
Populationj               0.561***            0.501***      0.689***            0.473***     0.578***           0.557***      0.432***           0.549***
                           (0.103)             (0.147)      (0.0912)             (0.138)      (0.101)            (0.140)       (0.112)            (0.161)
Distanceij               -0.00023***         -0.00013***   -0.00025***         -0.00014***   -0.0002***         -8.15e-05    -0.00017***         -7.12e-05
                         (6.24e-05)          (4.90e-05)    (6.38e-05)           (4.27e-05)   (6.73e-05)         (5.03e-05)   (6.54e-05)          (5.60e-05)
Tradeij                  4.71e-08**           -7.28e-09     2.59e-08            -9.75e-09    5.08e-08*          -1.18e-08    8.38e-08**          -7.47e-09
                         (2.40e-08)          (8.80e-09)    (1.75e-08)           (8.26e-09)   (2.89e-08)         (8.38e-09)   (3.59e-08)          (9.04e-09)
Contiguityij                0.163               0.701         0.604               0.392        0.649              0.421         0.178              0.712
                           (0.690)             (0.591)       (0.641)             (0.502)      (0.661)            (0.487)       (0.690)            (0.517)
Colonyij                    0.531              0.0844         0.300               0.176       -0.0696            -1.097        0.0180             -0.340
                           (0.876)             (0.801)       (0.928)             (0.696)      (0.778)            (0.930)       (0.801)            (0.843)
Comlangij                 1.320***            2.126***      1.253***            2.229***     1.748***           3.557***      1.890***           2.556***
                           (0.373)             (0.478)       (0.340)             (0.488)      (0.363)            (0.907)       (0.390)            (0.797)
Gov qualityj               -1.521               1.743                                                                          -1.933*             1.903
                           (1.091)             (1.455)                                                                         (1.151)            (1.508)
Poll stabilityj                                              0.349*              0.472**      0.323*            0.680***
                                                             (0.192)             (0.234)      (0.196)            (0.239)
BITij                                                                                        1.306***            1.612*       1.420***             0.567
                                                                                              (0.431)            (0.836)       (0.472)            (0.799)
PTA ij                                                                                        0.568*             0.467          0.450              0.684
                                                                                              (0.335)            (0.398)       (0.355)            (0.426)
Constant                  -16.68***           -15.44***     -16.67***           -11.36***    -13.64***          -11.78***     -13.30***          -15.98***




                                                                           14
                       (2.421)            (4.113)       (1.698)           (3.639)            (1.992)             (3.561)   (2.724)   (4.306)
Home FE                  Y                  Y             Y                 Y                  Y                     Y       Y         Y
Sector FE                Y                  Y             Y                 Y                  Y                     Y       Y         Y
Observations           1,852              1,852          2,508            2,508              2,508                2,508    1,852     1,852


     Until now, however, we have ignored an important potential problem when looking at the association
     between trade and investment agreements and FDI flows: the possibility of endogeneity. If we find a
     statistically significant positive effect of the BIT and PTA variables, before concluding that signing trade and
     investment agreements causes an increase in FDI inflows, we should be able to demonstrate that the
     causality does not in fact run the other way, i.e., that higher FDI flows may lead countries to join more of
     these agreements. For example, multinational corporations that invest in a country may press their
     governments to sign BITs to ensure greater protection for their investments. If they are part of global value
     chains of international production networks, they may also demand trade agreements to gain access to
     lower cost inputs and to facilitate re-exporting goods back to their home country.

     In Table 4, we report the results of the analysis employing an IV-GMM approach, with BITall and PTAall --
     the number of BITs/PTAs a host country has concluded with third countries, subtracting the one with the
     home country—as instruments. Model 11 includes both instrumental variables but the coefficient of PTAall
     is not statistically significant, most likely due to high correlation between the two instruments (0.68). Table
     4 also reports the first stage Shea R-square, which tells us the percentage change in the R-square associated
     with changes in each of the instruments. For the BITall the Shea R-square is 0.21, which seems reasonable,
     but for PTAall it is 0.07. In Models 12 and 13, therefore, we include BITall and PTAall in separate regressions.
     Model 12 shows that the instrument for BIT is positive and statistically significant at the 99% level. The Shea
     R-square increases to 0.31, suggesting it is a relevant instrument. We also examine the validity of the
     instruments using the Hansen J-test for overidentifying restrictions. For Model 6, the p-value of the J-test
     (0.73) shows that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the overidentification restrictions are valid (or
     put differently, that our instrument is correlated with the error term). Model 13 only includes the
     instrumented PTA variable. Although the coefficient is statistically significant, the low value of the Shea R-
     square and the p value for the J-Hansen test suggest our instrument is not very strong.


                                                Table 4. IEAs and FDI. GMM estimator
                                                              (5)                   (6)                    (7)
                        VARIABLES                        IVREG GMM           IVREG GMM                 IVREG GMM
                        GDPpcj                            -0.0280*              -0.0349**               -0.0342*
                                                          (0.0165)              (0.0148)                 (0.0190)
                        Populationj                       -0.00464              -0.00764                 -0.0179
                                                          (0.0115)              (0.00814)                (0.0116)
                        Tradeij                          6.07e-08***         6.32e-08***               5.65e-08***
                                                         (1.73e-08)             (1.64e-08)              (1.73e-08)
                        Distanceij                      -7.99e-06***        -7.59e-06***               -6.97e-06***
                                                         (2.57e-06)             (2.36e-06)              (2.57e-06)
                        Comlangij                         0.0791**              0.0717**                 0.0214
                                                          (0.0326)              (0.0314)                 (0.0323)
                        Poll stabilityj                    -0.0123               -0.0143                 -0.0320*




                                                                     15
                                                      (0.0196)            (0.0174)          (0.0186)
                   BITall ij                          0.161***           0.145***
                                                      (0.0518)            (0.0445)
                   PTAall ij                          -0.0628                               0.189*
                                                       (0.103)                              (0.102)
                   Constant                            0.304              0.400**           0.568*
                                                       (0.267)             (0.193)          (0.298)
                   Shea partial R2 (first stage)
                     BIT                                0.21                0.31
                     PTA                                0.07                                 0.11
                   Hansen J statistic (p-value)        0.7244              0.7353           0.0541
                   Country FE                             Y                   Y                Y
                   Sector FE                              Y                   Y                Y
                   Observations                        2,508               2,508             2,508
                   R-squared                           0.159               0.160             0.152
                    Robust standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



    ii.      Interacted models
Our results thus confirm that the presence of BITs and PTAs influences emerging market firms’ investment
decisions. In this section, we explore the extent to which the impact of these agreements on firms’ decisions
depends on cultural and geographic distance. We hypothesize that BITs, by providing institutional
guarantees, mitigate the costs and uncertainty associated with investing in faraway, unfamiliar locations.
We expect the relationship between distance and the effect of PTAs, however, to vary according to the
motivations of investors, and to matter less for market-seeking investors as distance increases and the costs
of trading grow beyond the expected benefits of these agreements.

To test these hypotheses, in Model 8, we add interaction terms between IEAs and distance. The estimated
coefficient for the interaction term BIT*Dist is positive and statistically significant in the logistic
specification, suggesting that the further away two countries are, the greater the effect of the BIT on the
likelihood that the country of origin will invest in the destination. In other words, the greater the distance
between two countries, the stronger the investment-attraction effect of the investment treaty. Using the
coefficients from the first-stage logistic regression, the odds of an investment increase by 1.0003 for every
kilometer of distance between two countries with a BIT.

At the same time, this result suggests that the presence of a BIT acts to offset at least partially the
transaction costs associated with geographic and cultural distance. BITs are thus (imperfect) substitutes for
proximity. More specifically, the estimated coefficients suggest that the existence of a BIT is equivalent to
an almost 80% reduction in the geographical distance between two markets. Thus, for example, if Brazil
and India had signed and ratified a BIT, its effect would be equivalent to bringing India closer to Brazil –
from 17,000 to less than 4,000 kilometers.

The estimated coefficient for the interaction term PTA*Dist, on the other hand, is significant and negative
only in the count model (negative binomial specification). This finding suggests that, in contrast to BITs,
which have a greater effect as magnets for FDI the further away a potential host market, the effectiveness
of PTAs in attracting FDI into a potential market fades with physical distance. Unlike BITs, PTAs thus fail to


                                                                 16
offset the cost of distance. In this sense, PTAs appear to matter for investors not for their political
consequences – of signaling credible commitment to investment friendly policies—but instead because of
their trade boosting effects, which are compounded by proximity. PTAs allow firms involved in international
production networks to more easily move intermediate and finished goods between countries. Yet, the
cost-reductions associated with the PTA will be eventually offset by the higher costs associated with greater
distance between origin and destination countries. This result is in line with the literature on the role of
distance in the effect of PTAs on trade (see, for example, Freeman and Piegnakura 2016).

In Model 9, we interact BIT and PTA with Contiguity. The negative sign of the coefficient of the interactive
term BIT*Contiguity suggests that these agreements have a weaker effect on FDI for pairs of countries that
share a border. This confirms our previous finding that BITs have greater relevance when investors consider
faraway, unfamiliar destinations, or put, differently, that BITs work to reduce the cost of distance. The
coefficient for the PTA*Contiguity interaction, however, does not reach acceptable levels of statistical
significance in the hurdle model.

               Table 5. Physical distance, IEAs, and FDI. Hurdle negative binomial regressions
                                              (8)                              (9)

            VARIABLES              Logit                NB          Logit               NB
            GDPpcj                 0.0617            -0.00504      -0.0346            -0.0341
                                  (0.153)             (0.165)      (0.165)            (0.155)
            Populationj           0.804***           0.603***     0.618***           0.773***
                                  (0.115)             (0.115)      (0.115)            (0.116)
            Distance ij          -0.0003***         -0.0003***    -0.0002***         -0.0002***
                                 (6.59e-05)         (6.77e-05)    (4.94e-05)         (4.34e-05)
            Trade ij              2.71e-09          7.09e-08**    5.09e-08*           9.59e-09
                                 (1.79e-08)         (3.14e-08)    (2.70e-08)         (1.74e-08)
            Comlang ij            2.189***           1.646***     1.727***           2.320***
                                  (0.383)             (0.381)      (0.379)            (0.395)
            Poll stabilityj       0.593***           0.434**       0.397*            0.561***
                                  (0.209)             (0.215)      (0.216)            (0.217)
            Contiguity ij                                          2.887**            2.565*
                                                                   (1.322)            (1.523)
            BIT ij                 -0.269             -0.0616     1.398***           1.390***
                                  (0.640)             (0.652)      (0.424)            (0.392)
            PTA ij                2.171***           1.753***       0.511              0.465
                                  (0.583)             (0.615)      (0.330)            (0.308)
            BIT*Distance ij      0.0002***          0.00023***
                                 (7.30e-05)         (8.00e-05)
            PTA*Distance ij     -0.00028***         -0.000215**
                                 0.0002***          0.00023***
            BIT*Contiguity ij                                      -3.239*            -3.316*
                                                                   (1.719)            (1.918)
            PTA*Contiguity ij                                       -2.002             -1.043
                                                                   (1.378)            (1.577)
            Constant             -17.38***           -13.46***    -14.06***          -16.85***
                                  (2.205)             (2.374)      (2.274)            (2.192)



                                                         17
             Home FE                       Y                       Y                    Y                      Y
             Sector FE                     Y                       Y                    Y                      Y
                                         2,508                 2,508                  2,508                  2,508
             Observations
             Robust standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *np<0.1



We then consider the interaction of IEAs with cultural distance (Table 6). In Model 10 we interact BIT and
PTA with Com language, which is a binary variable that takes the value of 1 if the two countries share a
common official language (spoken by at least 20% of the population of the country). Consistent with our
expectations, the coefficient of this interaction is negative, although it is only statistical significant in the
second stage negative binomial regression. Thus, as these results suggest, the BITs are more effective in
promoting investments between pairs of countries that don’t speak the same official language. In this sense,
BITs appear to also work to reduce the effects of cultural distance. The coefficients for PTA*Com language,
on the other hand, while having the expected sign, do not reach acceptable levels of statistical significance.
In Model 11, we use an alternative measure of cultural distance, Com language (ethno), which is set to 1 if
a language is spoken by at least 9% of the population in both countries. The interaction of BIT and common
language continues to be negative and significant in the count model only. In addition, when using this
alternative measure of common cultural background, PTA*Com language now becomes negative and
significant in the first stage logistic model, suggesting PTAs have a greater effect on the odds of investment
in pairs of countries that are culturally different than in those that share a language.

               Table 6. Cultural distance, IEAs, and FDI. Hurdle negative binomial regressions
                                                            (10)                                  (11)
                VARIABLES                         Logit                  NB            Logit                NB
                GDPpcj                           0.00684           -0.00877            0.139               0.149
                                                 (0.161)               (0.223)        (0.136)             (0.247)
                Populationj                    0.575***            0.563***          0.534***             0.343**
                                                 (0.113)               (0.160)       (0.0958)             (0.160)
                Distance ij                    -0.0002***          -6.81e-05     -0.0002***              -7.34e-05
                                               (4.98e-05)          (5.33e-05)        (4.78e-05)          (6.38e-05)
                Trade ij                       5.20e-08*           -1.10e-08         4.98e-08*           -1.91e-09
                                               (2.74e-08)          (1.03e-08)        (2.56e-08)          (1.28e-08)
                Contiguity ij                     0.599                0.401           0.400               0.208
                                                 (0.568)               (0.675)        (0.553)             (0.768)
                Colony ij                        -0.0199               -0.469          0.896              2.421**
                                                 (0.799)               (1.172)        (0.706)             (1.103)
                Comlang (off)ij                1.742***             13.78**
                                                 (0.472)               (5.570)
                Comlang (ethno)ij                                                    1.135***            16.42***
                                                                                      (0.436)             (3.311)
                BITij                          1.369***             11.98**           0.910**            14.50***
                                                 (0.458)               (5.567)        (0.428)             (3.323)
                PTAij                             0.523                0.340         0.870***              0.624
                                                 (0.331)               (0.421)        (0.329)             (0.476)
                BIT*Comlang ij                   -0.325                -11.10*
                                                 (0.877)               (5.726)



                                                                   18
               PTA*Comlang ij                0.402             0.645
                                             (0.776)          (0.852)
               BIT*Comlang (ethno) ij                                            -0.535     -16.66***
                                                                                 (0.619)     (3.325)
               PTA*Comlang (ethno)ij                                            -1.292**     -0.651
                                                                                 (0.647)     (0.886)
               Pol stabilityj                0.326            0.618**
                                             (0.213)          (0.269)
               Constant                    -13.52***         -11.67***          -14.02***   -9.988**
                                             (2.250)          (3.254)            (2.240)     (3.901)
               Home FE
               Sector FE
               Observations                  2,508             2,508             2,572       2,572
               Standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


Jointly considered, these results on cultural distance and those reported above on the geographical distance
shed light on one mechanism operating within the channel that links IEAs (specifically BITs) and cross-
border investment. BITs are more effective when firms invest in faraway, dissimilar environments,
suggesting, as mentioned above, that they are imperfect substitutes for proximity and familiarity. PTAs, on
the other hand, seem to, decrease in effectiveness as distance between partners grows.

These results hold in the face of several robustness tests, as shown in Table A2 in the Appendix. We begin
by using alternative estimation strategies for each of the stages in the hurdle regressions, including Logit
and Probit and Poisson and negative binomial. The coefficient for BIT*Distance is positive and statistically
significant in these models, except in the Poisson specification. In contrast, PTA*Distance is only significant
(and still negative) in the count models, suggesting that distance decreases the effect of PTAs on the
quantity but not the likelihood of investments. Similarly, the coefficient of BIT*Contiguity is negative and
significant across specifications, while PTA*Contiguity is only significant – and against our expectations also
negative—in the Poisson model. 17 Finally, our findings concerning the interaction of BITs and cultural
distance also continue to hold when using alternative estimation strategies. Both BITs and PTAs appear to
have a stronger effect on investments between pairs that do not speak the same language.

It may be useful to show graphically the interactive relationship between IEAs and distance that our analysis
has uncovered. Using the coefficients from the logistic and negative binomial regressions in Table A2
(Appendix), we plot the marginal effects of distance on FDI conditional of having or not BITs and PTAs
(holding all other variables at their means). As Figure 2a shows, as distance between two countries’ capital
cities grows, the likelihood of investment flows between them declines. However, it falls less rapidly for
pairs of countries that have signed and ratified a BIT. Another way to interpret this conditional relationship
is that for countries that are close to each other, the effect of having a BIT is insignificant. As distance
between countries grows, however, the marginal effect of having a BIT also increases. In contrast, as Figure
2b shows, the marginal effect of having a PTA is substantially higher when distance between two countries
is low. As distance grows, the effectiveness of a PTA in increasing the likelihood of investment, fades.

17
  These results are only marginally altered when dropping the logarithmic transformation of GDPpc and Pop,
and when using LnDistance instead of Distance as in previous specifications.



                                                             19
In Figure 3, in turn, we examine the conditional effect of IEAs and distance on the expected count of
investments. Again, we can observe the difference between pairs of countries with and without BITs. While
less statistically significant, having a BIT partially offsets the negative effects of distance on the count of
investments. By contrast, while at lower levels of distance PTAs appear to have a substantive effect on the
predicted count of investments, as distance grows, the marginal effect of a PTA falls until disappearing
(relative to no PTA).

     Figure 2a. Likelihood of Investing and BITs                    Figure 2b. Likelihood of Investment and PTAs




 Figure 3a. Predicted count of Investments and BITs             Figure 3b. Predicted count of investments and PTAs




4.4. Extensions
Does the direction of FDI flows affect the impact of IEAs on FDI? More specifically, do firms pay more
attention to BITs and/or PTAs when they invest in developing countries, which tend to be associated with
higher levels of uncertainty and regulatory instability? Indeed, we would expect investors to demand higher
institutional commitments to enter generally riskier destinations than in advanced nations. However, some


                                                      20
scholars have argued that firms from emerging markets, given their experience doing business in
challenging and uncertain environments, are less sensitive to poor governance and low institutional quality
problems in other developing countries. An observable implication of this “adversity advantage” of
emerging market firms would be no significant attention to BITs or any other institutional mechanisms
signaling credibility and reliability by the host country government.

To assess this empirically, we interact BIT and PTA with dummy variables indicating the direction of FDI
flows. South-South (SS) is equal to 1 if the host country is a Southern country and 0 otherwise, while South-
North (SN) takes the value of 1 if the destination country is in the North.18 Table 7 reports these results. All
else equal, both BITs and PTAs appear to have a stronger effect on South-South FDI flows. While the main
effects are insignificant, the interaction BIT*SS is positive and statistically significant in the second stage
regression model, suggesting that BITs have a stronger effect on the intensity of investments when
emerging market firms invest in other developing countries than when they invest in the North. The
coefficient of PTA*SS, on the other hand, is positive and significant only in the first-stage logistic regression.
PTAs are more effective in shaping the likelihood of SS (than SN) investment. Moreover, these results hold
when controlling for political stability and institutional quality. Indeed, in Model 13, the coefficient of Pol
stability continues to be statistically significant and positive, although Gov. quality (Model 12) is not.

To shed further light on the importance of political risk and institutional quality for emerging market
investors, we then examine whether the effects of BITs and PTAs are conditional on the quality of
institutions in the host market. Indeed, Neumayer and Spess (2005) found that BITs tend to have greater
effectiveness in attracting FDI when quality of institutions is low. In other words, BITs tend to substitute
also for good domestic institutions. Our results, reported in Table 8, confirm these findings. In Model 14,
the interaction term BIT*Pol stability is negative and statistically significant at the 95% in the second stage
regression. We obtain a similar result when we interact BIT with Gov quality (Model 15) and with rule of
law (Model 16). By contrast, the coefficient for the interaction terms PTA*Pol stability and PTA*Gov quality
in the first two models are not statistically significant. This suggests that the effect of PTAs, unlike those of
BITs, do not depend on the quality of domestic political institutions. This may be viewed as an indication
that investors value PTAs mainly for their commercial – not their political—effects.

                         Table 7. IEAs and direction of FDI flows. Hurdle negative binomial regressions
                                                    (12)                              (13)
                 VARIABLES               Logit                NB           Logit                NB
                 GDPpcj                  0.293              -0.0654      0.539**               0.375
                                        (0.226)             (0.262)       (0.266)             (0.237)
                 Populationj           0.636***             0.415**      0.419***            0.704***
                                        (0.113)             (0.175)       (0.114)             (0.210)
                 Distanceij           -0.0003***           -6.07e-05    -0.0003***           -0.000159
                                       (8.59e-05)          (0.000196)   (8.95e-05)           (0.000141)
                 Tradeij               6.35e-08*           -1.10e-08    9.96e-08***          -2.48e-08
                                       (3.63e-08)          (1.20e-08)   (3.84e-08)           (1.55e-08)
                 SS ij                   0.585              -1.732*        0.775              -1.828*
                                        (0.770)             (0.894)       (0.788)             (1.068)


18   In this paper, the Republic of Korea is treated as “South”.


                                                                   21
                Comlang ij                   1.791***               3.696***                 1.838***             3.106***
                                              (0.378)                (1.019)                     (0.405)           (0.882)
                Pol stabilityj                0.617**                0.529**
                                              (0.248)                (0.212)
                Gov qualityj                                                                      -0.106            0.619
                                                                                                 (1.248)           (1.757)
                BIT ij                        -0.744                  -0.424                      -0.531            -2.102
                                              (1.034)                (1.466)                     (1.069)           (1.521)
                PTA ij                        -0.443                  0.932                       -0.705            2.461
                                              (1.081)                (1.184)                     (1.061)           (1.870)
                BIT*Dist ij                 0.00026***              3.17e-05                0.000245**            0.000243
                                             (9.74e-05)             (0.00023)               (0.000104)            (0.000165)
                PTA*Dist ij                  -2.02e-05              -0.000198                    3.51e-05        -0.000465**
                                            (0.000109)              (0.000153)              (0.000106)            (0.000223)
                BIT*SS ij                      0.296                3.517***                      0.202            2.560**
                                              (0.797)                (1.216)                     (0.804)           (1.178)
                PTA*SS ij                     1.698**                 0.336                       1.248             0.951
                                              (0.832)                (0.967)                     (0.802)           (1.169)
                Constant                     -16.90***               -7.360*                 -15.60***            -17.84***
                                              (3.558)                (4.418)                     (3.906)           (6.079)
                Home FE                          Y                      Y                           Y                    Y
                Sector FE                        Y                      Y                           Y                    Y
                Observations             2,508             2,508                 1,852                              1,852
                Robust standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                Table 8. IEAs, domestic institutions, and FDI. Hurdle negative binomial regressions
                                               (14)                                       (15)                                (16)
VARIABLES                           Logit                  NB                  Logit                    NB       Logit                   NB
GDPpcj                            -0.00668              -0.0682                0.280                0.350        0.221                0.478***
                                   (0.165)               (0.222)              (0.245)               (0.232)     (0.190)                (0.147)
Populationj                       0.612***              0.580***             0.424***              0.755***    0.490***               0.449***
                                   (0.104)               (0.136)              (0.118)               (0.201)     (0.0979)               (0.139)
Distance ij                      -0.00027***            -6.15e-06           -0.00026***            -8.76e-05   -0.0003***             -0.00019
                                 (8.38e-05)            (0.000103)           (8.62e-05)            (0.000111)   (8.48e-05)            (0.000119)
Trade ij                          6.95e-08*           -2.02e-08**           1.07e-07***           -2.83e-08*   8.52e-08**            -2.25e-08**
                                 (3.72e-08)            (8.44e-09)           (3.89e-08)            (1.57e-08)   (3.80e-08)            (9.98e-09)
Comlang ij                        1.630***              2.820***             1.695***              2.647***    1.469***               3.519***
                                   (0.387)               (0.574)              (0.397)               (0.568)     (0.396)                (0.702)
Pol stability                      0.629*               1.411**
                                   (0.323)               (0.623)
Inst quality                                                                   -0.806              4.167**
                                                                              (1.685)               (1.644)
Rule of law                                                                                                     0.0779                0.293***
                                                                                                                (0.0564)              (0.0955)
BIT ij                             -0.324                 1.410                -0.492               2.333       0.0163                4.088***



                                                                              22
                                  (0.805)          (0.945)         (1.231)       (1.601)      (0.822)       (1.316)
     PTA ij                       1.733*          2.081**          2.438**      3.656***      2.759***     2.466***
                                  (1.001)          (0.818)         (1.104)       (1.055)      (0.762)       (0.925)
     BIT*Distance ij            0.00025**        -4.95e-06        0.00025**     0.00017      0.00028***    0.0003**
                                (0.000105)       (0.000101)       (0.000105)   (0.000118)    (9.70e-05)   (0.000123)
     PTA*Distance ij             -0.00021       -0.00033***       -3.80e-05    -0.000536**    5.01e-05    -0.000268**
                                (0.000175)       (0.000121)       (0.000125)   (0.000227)    (0.000117)   (0.000114)
     BIT ij*Pol stabilityj        -0.481          -1.188**
                                  (0.331)          (0.556)
     PTA ij*Pol stabilityj         0.126           0.272
                                  (0.417)          (0.359)
     BIT ij*Inst qualityj                                           0.365       -4.197**
                                                                   (1.796)       (1.828)
     PTA ij*Inst qualityj                                           -3.094       -0.174
                                                                   (2.054)       (2.434)
     BIT ij*Rolj                                                                              -0.0587      -0.500***
                                                                                              (0.0691)      (0.116)
     PTA ij*Rolj                                                                             -0.292***      -0.0349
                                                                                              (0.101)      (0.0827)
     Constant                    -13.41***       -11.74***        -12.68***     -22.08***    -14.10***     -17.00***
                                  (2.343)          (3.533)         (3.056)       (4.811)      (2.420)       (3.374)
     Home FE                         Y               Y                Y            Y             Y            Y
     Sector FE                       Y               Y                Y            Y             Y            Y
      Observations                 2,508           2,508             1,852        1,852        2,508         2,508
     Robust standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


We then explore whether our main results, namely that the effects of IEAs on FDI depend on the distance
between countries, holds in the context of South-South and South-North investment flows. We begin by
including two three-way interactions (BIT*Dist*SS and PTA*Dist*SS). The results, in Table 9, show that while
the former is statistically significant, the latter is not. Thus, emerging market firms pay more attention to
BITs when investing in other developing countries than when investing in advanced nations, as shown by
the results in Table 7. In addition, they tend to demand greater institutional commitments -- in the form of
BITs, for example—the further are these developing country destinations. This is confirmed when we divide
the sample into developing and developed destination countries, or South-North and South-South
investments. As the results from models 19 and 20 show, the interaction of BIT*Distance continues to be
positive and significant when restricting the sample to S-S investments. By contrast, none of the interaction
or main effects are significant for the N-S sample.19




19
   The hurdle-negative binomial regressions for N-S did not converge. When we run two separate logit and negative
binomial regressions, none of the interaction or main effects are significant for N-S.


                                                                   23
                 Table 9. IEAs, Distance, and the Direction of FDI flows. Hurdle negative binomial regressions
                                       (17)                                (18)                              (19)                             (20)
VARIABLES                    logit               NB              logit                 NB         Logit                NB          Logit                NB
                          All sample          All sample      All sample          All sample       SS                  SS           SS                  SS
GDPpcj                      0.276               -0.117         0.504**              0.334        0.483*               0.195        0.191               -0.138
                            (0.210)            (0.296)         (0.253)             (0.269)       (0.256)             (0.334)      (0.221)             (0.243)
Populationj                0.623***           0.669***        0.416***            0.799***      0.396***             0.409*      0.680***             0.305**
                            (0.103)            (0.141)         (0.109)             (0.172)       (0.138)             (0.235)      (0.145)             (0.135)
Distanceij                -0.0003***          -0.0002**      -0.0003***           -0.0002**    -0.0003***           -0.00065     -0.0003***          -0.0006*
                          (6.60e-05)          (8.85e-05)      (6.67e-05)          (9.92e-05)   (7.59e-05)           (0.00045)    (7.63e-05)          (0.000330)
Tradeij                   4.86e-08*           -1.54e-08*     8.44e-08**           -1.93e-08*   1.87e-07***          -1.18e-08     5.82e-08           -6.65e-09
                          (2.89e-08)          (8.51e-09)      (3.63e-08)          (1.10e-08)   (6.90e-08)           (1.47e-08)   (6.11e-08)          (9.93e-09)
Comlang ij                 1.844***           3.108***        1.931***            2.877***      1.666***              6.771      1.383***              7.346
                            (0.371)            (0.656)         (0.401)             (0.629)       (0.549)             (12.80)      (0.486)             (10.02)
Pol Stabilityj             0.518**            0.660***                                                                            0.666**             0.462*
                            (0.229)            (0.249)                                                                            (0.268)             (0.248)
SSij                         0.349              -0.697          0.415              -0.0758
                            (0.648)            (0.691)         (0.636)             (0.813)
PTAij                       0.460              1.006*           0.124              1.429**        0.141              2.194*       1.078*               0.798
                            (0.424)            (0.544)         (0.440)             (0.722)       (0.734)             (1.321)      (0.653)             (0.825)
BITij                       0.355               0.424           0.674              -0.0943        0.104               2.728        -0.399              4.780
                            (0.482)            (0.567)         (0.543)             (0.669)       (0.851)             (13.78)      (0.745)             (10.75)
BIT*Dist*SS ij             0.00018*           0.00019**       0.00014*            0.00021**
                          (8.22e-05)          (8.23e-05)      (8.32e-05)          (8.77e-05)
PTA*Dist*SS ij             9.21e-05           -0.000118       0.000109            -0.000184
                          (7.65e-05)          (8.53e-05)      (7.67e-05)          (0.000116)

BIT*Dist ij                                                                                     0.00017*             0.00065     0.0002**             0.00049

                                                                                               (8.72e-05)           (0.000464)   (8.19e-05)          (0.000335)

PTA*Dist ij                                                                                     0.000118            -0.000359     1.98e-05           -0.000184

                                                                                               (9.31e-05)           (0.000233)   (9.04e-05)          (0.000165)

Gov qualityj                                                    -0.275              2.141        -2.927               0.305
                                                               (1.294)             (1.960)       (1.866)             (2.032)
Constant                  -16.20***           -11.58***       -15.01***           -20.59***     -13.41***             -21.10     -16.38***             -4.155
                            (3.162)            (4.412)         (3.529)             (5.190)       (3.463)             (14.54)      (3.192)             (3.334)
Home FE                        Y                  Y               Y                    Y           Y                    Y            Y                   Y
Sector FE                      Y                  Y               Y                    Y           Y                    Y            Y                   Y
Observations                  2,508           2,508              1,852              1,852         1,291               1,291        1,919               1,919
Robust standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                  24
Conclusions
This paper examines the ways in which international economic agreements interact with distance to
influence the investment decisions of multinational firms. Our findings suggest that both BITs and PTAs
significantly and substantively increase the likelihood that an emerging market firm will invest abroad.
Moreover, the effects of trade and investment agreements on FDI depend on distance, albeit in different
ways. BITs by providing clear rules and arbitration procedures, appear to reduce uncertainty and
information asymmetries associated with geographic and cultural distance. Put differently, BITs offset the
costs of geographical and cultural barriers to investment, thus acting as (imperfect) substitutes for
proximity.

Trade agreements, on the other hand, appear to have a more complex interaction with distance. Our
findings show that the positive effect of PTAs on FDI fades with distance. These results suggest that
emerging market firms value these trade agreements more for their commercial and trade cost reducing
effects than for their role as commitment or signaling mechanisms. In other words, firms appear to prefer
investing in countries that are members to trade and investment agreements because these treaties allow
them to benefit from lower barriers of access to other countries’ markets and to export back to the home
country. Yet these benefits are likely offset by the higher transportation and transaction costs associated
with distance. Thus, unlike BITs, the benefits of PTAs decrease as the distance between two countries grows.

Our findings have several policy implications for developing country governments that seek to attract FDI
from emerging economies, as well as for those considering joining preferential trade agreements. They
suggest that signing BITs is a good idea, particularly with countries that are further away. In fact, given the
costs of negotiating, signing and complying with investment agreements, it makes sense for developing
countries to prioritize those with more distant partners. By contrast, our findings suggest countries are
better off signing trade agreements with proximate countries. These results complement those obtained
by Freeman and Pienknagura (2016), who find that trade agreements have a stronger positive effect on
bilateral flows when they are signed among proximate countries.




                                                      25
References

Abed, G., and Davoodi, H. (2000) “Corruption, Structural Reforms and Economic Performance in the
   Transition Economies.” IMF Working Paper No. 132. Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Baek, K. and X. Qian (2011). “An Analysis of Political Risks and the Flow of Foreign Direct Investment in
   Developing and Industrialized Economies.” Economics, Management, and Financial Markets, 6: 4
   (December).

Baldwin, R. (2016). The Great Convergence: Information Technology and the New Globalization. Belknap,

Bardhan, P. (1997) “Corruption and Development: A Review of Issues.” Journal of Economic Literature,
   25: 1320–46.

Barthel, F., M. Busse and E. Neumayer (2010). “The Impact of Double Taxation Treaties on Foreign
   Direct Investment: Evidence from Large Dyadic Panel Data.” Contemporary Economic Policy, 28:3,
   p. 366-377.

Bhardwaj, A., J. Dietz, and P. Beamish (2007). “Host Country Cultural Influences on Foreign Direct
   Investment.” Management International Review, 47(1): 29-50.

Brülhart, M., M. Jametti, and K. Schmidheiny (2012). “Do Agglomeration Economies Reduce the
   Sensitivity of Firm Location to Tax Differentials?” The Economic Journal, 122: 1069-1093.

Busse, M., J. Koniger, and P. Nunnemkamp (2008). “FDI Promotion through Bilateral Investment
   Treaties: More Than a Bit.” Proceedings of the German Development Economics Conference, Zü rich
   2008, No. 4.

Büthe, T. and H. Milner (2008). “The Politics of Foreign Direct Investment into Developing Countries:
   Increasing FDI through International Trade Agreements?” American Journal of Political Science, 52:
   4, p. 741-762.

Büthe, T. and H. Milner (2009). “Bilateral investment treaties and foreign direct investment: a political
   analysis.” In K. Sauvant and L. Sachs (eds.) The Effects of Treaties on Foreign Direct Investment:
   Bilateral Investment Treaties, Double Taxation Treaties, and Investment Flows. Oxford University
   Press.

Büthe, T. and H. Milner (2014). “Foreign direct investment and institutional diversity in trade
   agreements: Credibility, commitment, and economic flows in the developing world, 1971–2007.”
   World Politics, 66:1, p. 88-102.

Cantwell, J. and H. Barnard (2008). “Do Firms from Emerging Markets Have to Invest Abroad? Outward
   FDI and the Competitiveness of Firms.” In K. Sauvant (ed.), The Rise of Transnational Corporations
   from Emerging Markets: Threat or Opportunity? Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.


                                                   26
Carrère, C., J. de Melo and J. Wilson (2009). “The Distance Effect and the Regionalization of the Trade
   of Developing Countries.” CEPR Discussion Paper 7458.

Contessi, S. and H. El-Ghazali (2010). “Multinationals from Emerging Economies Growing but Little
   Understood.” The Regional Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (July).

Di Giovanni, J. (2005). “What drives capital flows? The case of cross-border M&A activity and financial
    deepening.” Journal of International Economics, 65: 127-149.

Disdier A.C. and K. Head (2008), “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect on Bilateral Trade”,
    The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (1): 37-41.

Dreher, A., A. Minasyan, and P. Nunnenkamp (2015). “Government ideology in donor and recipient
   countries: Does ideological proximity matter for the effectiveness of aid?” European Economic
   Review, 79 (1): 80-92.

Dunning, J., C. Kim, and D. Park (2008). “Old Wine in New Bottles: A Comparison of Emerging-Market
   TNCs Today and Developed-Country TNCs Thirty Years Ago.” In K. Sauvant (ed.), The Rise of
   Transnational Corporations from Emerging Markets: Threat or Opportunity? Northampton, MA:
   Edward Elgar.

Ethier, W. (2001). “The New Regionalism in the Americas: A Theoretical Framework.” North American
    Journal of Economics and Finance, 12 (2): 159-72.

Freeman, R. and S. Pienknagura (2016). “Are All Trade Agreements Equal? The Role of Distance in Shaping
    the Effect of Economic Integration Agreements on Trade Flows.” World Bank Policy Research Working
    Paper No. 7809.

Friedman, T. (2005). The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century. Farrar, Straus and
    Girou.

Gammeltoft, P. (2008). “Emerging Multinationals: Outward FDI from the BRICS Countries.”
  International Journal of Technology and Globalization, 4 (1): 5-22.

Gomez-Mera, L., T. Kenyon, Y. Margalit, J. Reis, and G. Varela (2014). New Voices in Investment: A
  Survey of Investors from Emerging Economies. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.

Hallward-Driemeier, M. (2003). "Do bilateral investment treaties attract foreign direct investment?
    Only a bit - and they could bite." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3121.

Head, K. and T. Mayer (2013). “What separates us? Sources of Resistance to Globalization.” Canadian
   Journal of Economics, 46 (4): 1196-1231.



                                                  27
Hobdari, B. and P. Gammeltoft (2017). “The Home Country of the MNE: The Case of Emerging Economy
   Firms.” Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 34 (1): 1-17.

Jensen, N. (2003). “Democratic Governance and Multinational Corporations: Political Regimes and
   Inflows of FDI.” International Organization 57(3): 587-616.

Jensen, N. (2006). Nation States and the Multinational Corporation: A Political Economy of Foreign
   Direct Investment. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.

Levy Yeyati, E., E. Stein, and C. Daude (2003). “Regional Integration and the Location of FDI.” Inter-
   American Development Bank Working Paper No. 492.

Li, Q. and A. Resnick (2003). “Reversal of Fortunes: Democratic Institutions and FDI Inflows to
    Developing Countries.” International Organization, 57(1): 175-211.

Medvedev, D. (2011). “Beyond Trade: The Impact of Preferential Trade Agreements on FDI Inflows.”
   World Development, 40(1): 49-61.
Neumayer, E. and L. Spess (2005). “Do bilateral investment treaties increase foreign direct investment
   to developing countries?” World Development, 33 (10): 1567-1585.

Nunn, N. and N. Qian (2014). “US Food Aid and Civil Conflict.” American Economic Review, 104 (6):
   1630–1666.

Osnago, A., N. Rocha and M. Ruta (2015) “Do Deep Trade Agreements Boost Vertical FDI?” World Bank
   Economic Review, 30(1): 119-125.

Portes, R., and H. Rey (2005). “The determinants of cross-border equity flows.” Journal of International
   Economics, 65: 269–296.

Quer, D., E. Claver, and L. Rienda (2017). “Cultural distance, political risk and location decisions of
   emerging-market multinationals: a comparison between Chinese and Indian firms.” Journal of the
   Asia Pacific Economy, forthcoming.

Rodrik, D. (1999). “The new global economy and developing countries: Making openness work.” Policy
   Essay 24, Overseas Development Council, Washington, DC.

Rodrik, D. (2008). “Some Investors Are More Equal than Others.” Blogpost. Available at:
   http://rodrik.typepad.com/dani_rodriks_weblog/2008/03/some-investors.html

Sauvant, K. (2005). “New Sources of FDI: The BRICS. Outward FDI from Brazil, Russia, India and China.”
   Journal of World Investment & Trade, 6: 5, p. 639-709 (October).




                                                  28
Sauvant, K. (2008). “The Rise of TNCs from Emerging Markets: The Issues.” In Karl P. Sauvant (ed.), The
   Rise of Transnational Corporations from Emerging Markets: Threat or Opportunity? Northampton,
   MA: Edward Elgar.

Sauvant, K., W. Maschek and G. McAllister (eds.) (2010). Foreign Direct Investment from Emerging
   Markets: The Challenges Ahead. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Siegel, J., A. Licht, and S. Schwartz (2012). “Egalitarianism, Cultural Distance, and Foreign Direct
    Investment: A New Approach.” Organization Science, 24(4): 1174 – 1194.

Tobin, J. and S. Rose-Ackerman (2005). “Foreign Direct Investment and the Business Environment in
   Developing Countries: The Impact of Bilateral Investment Treaties.” Yale Law School Center for Law,
   Economics and Public Policy Research Paper No. 293.

UNCTAD (2006). World Investment Report. FDI from Developing and Transition Economies: Implications
  for Development (New York and Geneva: United Nations Publications).

Vernon, R., (1971). Sovereignty at Bay: The Multinational Spread of Multinational U.S. Enterprises. New
   York: Basic Books.

Yackee, J. (208). “Do Bits Really Work? Revisiting the Empirical Link between Investment Treaties and
   Foreign Direct Investment.” Univ. of Wisconsin Legal Studies Research Paper No. 1054.

Wei, S. (2000). “How Taxing Is Corruption on International Investors.” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 82: 1–11.




                                                  29
      APPENDIX

                                                Figure A1. Evidence of overdispersion




                               Source: Authors’ elaboration based on data from the Potential Investors’ Survey.




                             Table A1. IEAs, geographic distance, and FDI: Robustness checks
                     (1)              (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)               (7)          (8)

     VARIABLES     Probit            Logit             NB          Poisson         Logit          Probit             NB         Poisson
GDPpcj              0.175           -0.0116          0.0549         0.186         -0.0319        -0.0282           -0.0303      0.0522
                   (0.108)          (0.0779)         (0.144)       (0.167)        (0.166)        (0.0811)          (0.156)      (0.102)
Populationj       0.248***         0.328***         0.802***      0.706***       0.619***       0.326***          0.776***     0.678***
                  (0.0557)          (0.0519)         (0.0848)      (0.124)        (0.115)        (0.0587)          (0.117)      (0.0656)
Distance ij      -0.00014***      -0.0001***        -0.0003***     -0.00012     -0.0002***    -8.86e-05***        -0.0002***   -0.0002***
                 (4.18e-05)        (3.81e-05)       (7.15e-05)    (7.61e-05)     (4.97e-05)     (2.29e-05)        (4.34e-05)   (3.22e-05)
Trade ij         5.09e-08***       3.39e-08*         2.54e-09    -1.72e-08**     5.18e-08*     2.70e-08**          9.58e-09    -1.22e-09
                 (1.82e-08)        (1.75e-08)       (1.82e-08)    (8.50e-09)     (2.77e-08)     (1.34e-08)        (1.75e-08)   (4.42e-09)
Contiguity ij      -0.198           0.0151          -0.000838       -0.466        2.888**        1.436*            2.576*       2.353**
                   (0.418)          (0.369)          (0.627)       (0.648)        (1.322)        (0.744)           (1.524)      (1.066)
Colony ij           0.112           0.0534            0.255        -0.0826        -0.139         -0.0693            -0.178       -0.412
                   (0.408)          (0.400)          (0.554)       (0.560)        (0.749)        (0.401)           (0.727)      (0.371)
Comlang ij        0.850***         0.808***         2.128***      2.109***       1.751***       0.894***          2.362***     2.199***
                   (0.195)          (0.183)          (0.371)       (0.396)        (0.400)        (0.201)           (0.431)      (0.261)
Pol stabilityj                      0.228**         0.590***      0.702***        0.400*         0.223**          0.565***     0.577***



                                                                   30
                                                (0.106)      (0.187)       (0.220)            (0.217)        (0.109)     (0.218)     (0.136)
Gov qualityj              -0.938*
                          (0.569)
BIT ij                    -0.227                -0.128        -0.320        0.519            1.419***        0.687***   1.425***    1.130***
                          (0.427)               (0.363)      (0.646)       (0.683)            (0.439)        (0.208)     (0.419)     (0.273)
PTA ij                     0.527                0.842**      2.200**      2.856***            0.504           0.241      0.458      0.478**
                          (0.425)               (0.413)      (0.857)       (0.696)            (0.333)        (0.167)     (0.308)     (0.203)
BIT*Distance ij         0.00012**              0.00011**    0.00022***    9.25e-05
                         (5.45e-05)            (4.81e-05)   (7.98e-05)   (8.87e-05)
PTA*Distance ij          -4.94e-05             -9.29e-05    -0.00029*    -0.00042***
                         (6.27e-05)            (6.60e-05)   (0.000157)   (0.000111)
BIT*Contiguity ij                                                                             -3.257*        -1.628*     -3.341*    -2.731**
                                                                                              (1.721)        (0.968)     (1.921)     (1.220)
PTA*Contiguity ij                                                                             -1.996          -0.838     -1.043      -1.859*
                                                                                              (1.378)        (0.770)     (1.577)     (1.098)
Constant                 -7.006***             -7.229***    -17.32***     -17.37***          -14.09***      -7.399***   -16.92***   -15.53***
                          (1.389)               (1.068)      (2.008)       (3.196)            (2.284)        (1.145)     (2.215)     (1.332)
Home FE                      Y                     Y            Y            Y                  Y                  Y       Y           Y
Sector FE                    Y                     Y            Y            Y                  Y                  Y       Y           Y
Observations               1,852                 2,508        2,508         2,508              1,852          2,508       2,508       2,508
Robust standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                      Table A2. IEAs, cultural distance, and FDI: Robustness checks
                                                                                     (9)                    (10)
                                      VARIABLES                                   Logit                   Poisson
                                      GDPpc j                                   -0.00275                   0.133
                                                                                 (0.159)                  (0.0999)
                                      Populationj                               0.587***                 0.646***
                                                                                 (0.112)                  (0.0619)
                                      Distance ij                            -0.0002***                  -0.0002***
                                                                                (4.98e-05)               (3.13e-05)
                                      Trade ij                                  5.08e-08*                -3.51e-09
                                                                                (2.79e-08)               (4.54e-09)
                                      Contiguity ij                               0.507
                                                                                 (0.551)
                                      Colony ij                                   0.671                   0.604*
                                                                                 (0.728)                  (0.361)
                                      Com language ij                            1.103**                 1.992***
                                                                                 (0.450)                  (0.326)
                                      BIT ij                                     0.904**                 0.889***
                                                                                 (0.446)                  (0.317)
                                      PTA ij                                    0.861***                 1.155***
                                                                                 (0.333)                  (0.201)




                                                                           31
BIT*Comlang ij                                 -0.144                   -1.048**
                                               (0.655)                   (0.412)
PTA*Comlang ij                                -1.383**                  -1.928***
                                               (0.662)                   (0.387)
Pol stabilityj                                 0.292                    0.303**
                                               (0.208)                   (0.128)
Constant                                      -13.54***                 -15.69***
                                               (2.259)                   (1.350)
Home FE                                           Y                         Y
Sector FE                                         Y                         Y
Observations                                   2,508                     2,508
Robust standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                         32
