                                                    WPS8169


Policy Research Working Paper                      8169




    The Impact of Strengthening Agricultural
              Extension Services
                        Evidence from Ethiopia

                                 Niklas Buehren
                                Markus Goldstein
                                Ezequiel Molina
                                  Julia Vaillant




Africa Region
Office of the Chief Economist
 &
Gender Cross Cutting Solution Area
August 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8169


  Abstract
 This paper evaluates the effect of the Rural Capacity                              in project and control kebeles. The results show that the
 Building Project, which aimed at promoting growth by                               strengthening of extension services had a positive impact
 strengthening the agricultural service systems in Ethio-                           on economic participation in the household, land area
 pia and by making them more responsive to smallholders’                            cultivated, and adoption of marketable crops, suggesting
 needs. The project intended to increase the outreach of agri-                      that access to extension helped farmers switch to more
 cultural extension services to help farmers become aware                           commercial, market-oriented agriculture. In addition,
 of and adopt economically viable and environmentally sus-                          and contrary to previous evidence from other countries,
 tainable technologies and practices. The paper examines                            female-headed households seem to have benefited equally
 the impact of the Rural Capacity Building Project using                            from the project. However, the project was not able to
 panel data on 1,485 geographically dispersed households                            reduce the preexisting gender gap in agricultural outcomes.




  This paper is a product of the Office of the Chief Economist, Africa Region the Gender Cross Cutting Solution Area. It is
  part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development
  policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.
  org. The authors may be contacted at jvaillant@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
     The Impact of Strengthening Agricultural Extension Services:
                       Evidence from Ethiopia


               Niklas Buehren, Markus Goldstein, Ezequiel Molina, and Julia Vaillant*




Keywords: Agricultural extension, farmers, production decision, technology adoption.
JEL Classification: O13, Q16.




*
   All authors work for the World Bank. Correspondence regarding this paper can be sent to Julia Vaillant:
jvaillant@worldbank.org. We thank all members of the Rural Capacity Building Project on which this paper is based.
We are especially grateful to Beth Rosen, Tigist Assefa Ketema, and Amare Teklu Yirbecho for their excellent
research assistance and seminar participants in Paris and Addis Ababa for useful comments. This initiative is supported
by the World Bank Group's Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality. The Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality (UFGE)
is a multi-donor facility designed to strengthen awareness, knowledge, and capacity for gender-informed policy
making. Funding is made possible through generous contributions from the governments of Australia, Canada,
Denmark, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United
States. All views expressed in this paper should be considered those of the authors alone, and do not necessarily
represent those of the World Bank.
1. Introduction

Agricultural extension services are designed to “extend” research-based knowledge to the rural
sector to improve the lives of farmers, by increasing their yields and production (Davis, 2008).
The services are based on the assumption that there are beneficial technologies that can improve
farmers’ welfare, but that farmers need to know about them and about their benefits to adopt them.
Extension services are meant to overcome this information barrier that constrains technology
adoption, which may be rooted in low expected profits and perceived high risks (Jack, 2013). As
information is a public good, its provision is associated with market failures, which justify
government intervention in the provision of the services (Maffioli et al, 2011; Anderson and Feder,
2007). Indeed, most countries of Sub-Saharan Africa have been providing various forms of
extension services for the last four decades through public investment. However, there is a lack of
rigorous evidence on the impact of these investments on their ultimate beneficiaries, farming
households.

Weaknesses in public extension systems have been noted but the evidence remains insufficient to
reach a conclusion on the viability of extension services, based on cost-benefit considerations
(Rivera et al, 2001, Anderson and Feder; 2007). Rigorous evidence on the impact of extension
service investments could potentially have important effects on policy maker’s commitment to
adequately support such endeavors. Evidence would help promote policies geared towards the
types of services that are most efficient in reaching beneficiaries and increasing productivity and
income. In this paper, we evaluate the impact of the Rural Capacity Building Project (RCBP), a
public investment to strengthen the extension system in Ethiopia.

Agriculture accounts for 85 percent of employment and 46 percent of GDP in Ethiopia (World
Bank & IFPRI, 2010) and is dominated by smallholder farming, which accounts for approximately
96 percent of the country’s cultivated area (Taffesse et al, 2012). Although there has been growth
in production since 2000, most of the growth has come from increases in the area cultivated rather
than an intensification of production. Yields have thus remained low by international standards
(Taffesse et al, 2012). In 2006, as part of an array of policies that focused on promoting agricultural
growth, the government implemented the RCBP, with the objective of strengthening agricultural
services and systems and making them more responsive to the needs of smallholder farmers.

One of the components of the RCBP focused on improving the effectiveness of agricultural
extension services in the country and explicitly sought to increase female participation by
mainstreaming gender in all aspects of the extension system. Participation of women in agriculture
in Ethiopia is substantial, with estimates lying between 29 percent and 45.5 percent of agricultural
labor, according to the source (FAO, 2011; Palacios-Lopez et al, 2017). The gender gap in access
to extension services appears relatively low in a study using data collected in 2009 in four regions
of Ethiopia (World Bank/IFPRI, 2010). Twenty percent of women report having been visited by
an extension agent, against 27 percent of men. However, they may simply be reporting the fact
that an agent visited the home, even if they did not directly address the female respondent. The
gender gap becomes significant in access to technical advice through community meetings
organized by extension officers. Only 11 percent of women used this service against 28 percent of
men (World Bank/IFPRI, 2010). In the sample used in the present study, 68 percent of female-
headed households reported having had any contact with an extension officer in the past 12 months.

                                                  2
This is 18 percentage points less than male-headed households. Given women’s high participation
in agriculture and low access to extension, improving their access to knowledge and information
on agricultural technologies may lift one of the barriers to women’s economic empowerment in
Ethiopia.

Studies evaluating the impact of extension have usually involved estimating the rate of returns to
extension in an agricultural production function. Returns are generally positive but vary widely
across studies and contexts (Anderson & Feder, 2007; Birkhaeuser et al., 1991; Evenson, 2001).
Challenges in identifying a causal relationship between extension and productivity or income
include endogeneity in program placement and participation, lack of baseline data, and the severity
of measurement errors in key outcomes (Aker 2011; Davis, 2008). Longitudinal data with valid
counterfactuals are rare and experimental evidence on the impact of intensified extension services
is very scarce, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa.

Traditional models of agricultural extension were usually government-driven and involved
extension agents visiting farmers to deliver knowledge and information. Owens et al (2003) use
panel data from a sample of resettled households in Zimbabwe to measure the impact of farmer
contact with agricultural extension services. Controlling for farmer’s ability, they find that
receiving one or two visits per year has a significant positive impact on crop production but the
effect is highly variable across years. A similar approach is used to measure the impact of access
to extension services in Côte d’Ivoire, showing positive impacts on yields for food crops, but not
for cash crops (Romani, 2003).

One of the most widely used models is the Training and Visit system (T&V), which involves
regular visits by extension agents to contact farmers who are expected to disseminate the
information learned to other farmers in their community (Anderson et al, 2005). An early study of
the impact of the Kenya T&V extension system found high returns to extension (Bidlinsh and
Evenson, 1993). However, these results were controversial, as a later study that revisited some of
the data issues could not establish a significant impact on farmer efficiency or farm productivity
(Gautam and Anderson, 1999). Gautam (2000) argues that the system was not efficacious because
its approach did not focus on farmer empowerment, and was too supply-driven. In another study
in Ghana, farmers were randomly selected into early and late treatment groups, to benefit from a
business and technical training and input provision program (Agyei-Holmes et al, 2011). The
program did not show significant impacts on crop yields and incomes. However, the sample size
may have been too small to detect an effect and the phased-in design did not allow for medium
term measurement of impact.

To overcome weaknesses of traditional extension systems, both the content and the mode of
diffusion of the information can be altered. Adopting more demand-driven and participatory
approaches can help increase the relevance of the extension services to the needs of farmers, and
thus promote adoption of technology. In Uganda, a public-private extension service delivery
approach, in which farmer groups contracted service providers to deliver advisory services, was
evaluated using post-program cross-sectional data (Benin et al, 2007). The study finds that the
program promoted adoption and use of agricultural production technologies but no significant
impact on yield growth. Pamuk et al (2014) investigate the impact of a decentralized approach to
the promotion of agricultural innovation, based on local participatory innovation platforms, where


                                                3
representatives of local stakeholders, such as farmers’ associations, traders, researchers, extension
workers, NGOs, and government policy makers, meet regularly to share views, identify problems
and prioritize solutions. The program was rolled out in eight countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and
within each country, program locations were randomly selected at the village or higher
administrative level. The study finds evidence of adoption of crop management innovations but
also considerable heterogeneity in the impact across research sites. Other higher-level outcomes
such as yields or household welfare were not included in the study.

Another approach that attempts to overcome some weaknesses of traditional extension systems is
Farmer Field Schools (FFS), where farmers attend weekly field school sessions throughout the
season. Through observation and learning-by-doing, farmers are meant to internalize the
advantages of improved technology and adopt new practices on their own fields (Waddington et.
al, 2014). Davis et al. (2012) evaluate the impact of the scaling up of FFS in Kenya, Tanzania, and
Uganda. Using matching estimators and a difference in differences approach, they find that
productivity and income increase significantly in Kenya and Tanzania, but not in Uganda. One of
the main limitations of that study is the lack of detailed baseline data on the outcomes of interest,
relying on recall data instead, and non-random placement of FFS. Kondylis et al (2017) evaluate
the impact of two different modalities of the T&V extension delivery system, using a randomized
control trial methodology in Mozambique. They compare the traditional decentralized system in
which extension agents train contact farmers (who are then supposed to train other farmers in their
communities) to an alternative in which contact farmers receive an additional centralized 3-day
training. They find that directly trained contact farmers are more likely to adopt techniques.
However, these higher levels of adoption by contact farmers did not encourage higher diffusion to
other farmers in the community.

Extension services are one of several possible sources of information about new technologies that
farmers can use. Other strands of research have investigated how information can be passed on to
farmers through alternative modes. For example, there is a growing body of literature that focuses
on social learning, which describes how information spreads within one’s network (see e.g.: Jack,
2013; Munshi, 2004; Conley and Udry, 2001; Bandiera and Rasul, 2006). Information can also be
made cheaper to supply and acquire, for example through the use of new information and
communication technologies, such as mobile-phone based service or internet kiosks (Aker, 2010;
Cole & Fernando, 2012).

Among the literature on extension, two papers have analyzed the impact of extension services in
Ethiopia. Dercon et al. (2010) use longitudinal household survey data from 1994 to 2004 to study
the impact of public investments in road quality and extension services on the welfare of farmers.
Using household fixed effects and an instrumental variable strategy, they find that receiving at
least one extension visit during the last cropping season increased consumption growth by 7.1
percent. Krishnan and Patnam (2014) make use of later waves of the same survey to compare the
role of extension services and peer learning on improved seeds and fertilizer adoption between
1999 and 2009. To identify the impacts of neighbors on adoption, they use farmers’ spatial
distribution within villages. They also control for unobserved heterogeneity in the placement of
extension services and household characteristics by including household and village fixed effects.
They find that extension services had a significant initial impact on adoption but that by 2009,
adoption mainly takes place through social learning and extension services become irrelevant.


                                                 4
Reviews of the impact of extension services consistently conclude that female farmers are
underserved: access to extension agents is significantly lower for women as compared to men.
Ragasa (2014) reviews evidence from India and several countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and
summarizes factors causing the gender gap in access to extension: extension agents primarily work
with the main household decision maker, who is usually male; the perception that women’s
contribution to farming in the household is minimal; household responsibilities and mobility
constraints that hinder women’s participation in training activities; cultural factors that make
interaction of female farmers with male extension agents difficult; and the like. As a result, women
farmers receive mostly second-hand information from their husbands, and this information may
not be attuned to their needs if their agricultural practices and crop choices are different from that
of male farmers. In addition, women often lack the financial and material resources to translate
theoretical knowledge into practice (O’Sullivan et al, 2014; Ragasa, 2014; Quisumbing &
Pandolfelli, 2010). Decomposition analyses from agricultural surveys in Ethiopia and Uganda
show that when women farmers do receive extension services, they benefit from them less than
their male counterparts (O’Sullivan et al, 2014). More rigorous evidence is needed on specific
interventions targeted at improving both access to and impact of extension for women farmers. A
randomized control trial in Mozambique suggests that female farmers were more likely to learn
about agricultural techniques in communities in which there was a second, female contact farmer,
in addition to a male contact farmer (Kondylis et al. Mueller, 2014). Female messengers may not
only improve communication to women, but also better meet their informational needs.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a more detailed description
of the RCBP. Section 3 outlines our identification strategy and provides a description of the data
used to implement the estimation. The results are presented in Section 4 and Section 5 concludes.


2. Rural Capacity Building Project

The Ethiopian extension system relies on a network of professionally trained extension workers,
called Development Agents (DA), who are deployed in Farmer Training Centers (FTC). The
objective of the Ethiopian government is to have one FTC in each kebele1 in the country with three
DAs per FTC, each specialized in a different topic: livestock, crops, or natural resources
management. At the time of project preparation, at the end of 2006, only a small share of kebeles
had a fully equipped and functional FTC and half of the DA target number had been reached.

The RCBP aimed at strengthening the agricultural extension service systems in Ethiopia to make
them more responsive to the needs of farmers and enhance their capacity to become aware of, and
adopt, economically viable and environmentally sustainable technologies and practices. Through
these activities, the project hoped to raise households’ income, productivity and adoption of new
agricultural practices by smallholder farmers. The RCBP was implemented in 10 regions, 127
woredas, 635 kebeles and 2,500 FTCs in the country, beginning in 2007. The project sought to
improve the effectiveness of the agricultural extension program as it scaled up, particularly with
regard to its DAs’ technical capacity and its ability to respond to the expressed needs of farmers

1
 Ethiopia is divided in woreda, or districts, which are composed of kebeles. A kebele is the smallest administrative
division in Ethiopia, and is similar to a neighborhood, or a ward. There are about 8,000 kebeles in Ehiopia.

                                                         5
(especially market-oriented farmers), to enhance women’s participation and gender equality
mainstreaming in all aspects of the extension system, and to support the emergence of non-public
sector agricultural services as an additional feature of extension services in Ethiopia. The RCBP
supported capacity building at the woreda, regional, and federal levels of the agricultural extension
system. DAs received training, exposure visits, and technical and managerial support. The project
provided already built FTCs with basic materials and equipment, including furniture, means of
transport, and demonstration sites. It also supported FTCs in the setup of management committees.
Other activities covered by the RCBP included support for institutional innovation and M&E in
Agricultural Advisory Services, and research-extension-farmer linkages.

The RCBP was based on the assumption that by providing assistance and training to farmers they
would be able to enhance their farming methods, which would in turn increase their productivity
and improve their welfare. Below we analyze the impact of the project to see if the evidence
supports this theory of change.

The selection of kebeles receiving RCBP was a two-stage process: selection of the woredas was
done by regional authorities and the selection of five kebeles per woreda was done at the woreda
level. The Ministry of Agriculture selected the participating treatment woredas based on specific
criteria that included: completed FTC building and assignment of three qualified DAs; access to
basic infrastructure, such as water and access roads; agro-ecology representation; commitment to
focusing programmatic activities toward the needs of women farmers; and farming systems
representation (e.g. rainfed subsistence farming in food insecure and high potential areas,
commercial oriented farming, irrigation based farming, pastoralism, etc.). Thus, in order to create
a comparison group for our analysis within agro-climatic zones, control woredas were purposively
selected for inclusion in our survey based on proximity to the treatment woreda, to ensure the most
similar agro ecology/farming system.


3. Data and empirical strategy

       3.1. Data

To estimate the impact of RCBP, we use a panel data set collected among farming households in
both project and non-project kebeles. The sample includes 1,485 households spread across four
major regions, Amhara, Oromia, Southern Nations, Nationalities and People’s Region (SNNPR),
and Benishangul-Gumuz (BSG). Table 1 depicts the breakdown of households by region. Overall,
our sample covers 82 kebeles in 23 woredas.

The first round of data collection (Round 1) was conducted between December 2009 and January
2010 among 1,609 households. About two years later, from March to April 2012, an effort was
made to re-interview (Round 2) all households in order to create a panel data set. For 1,485
households, this strategy proved successful.2

As indicated above, round 1 of data collection occurred in 2009-2010 which was 2 years after the
RCBP officially started, in 2007. Project implementation proceeded slowly, however, and at the

2
    This implies an attrition rate of 8%, based on a sample of 1,609 surveyed initially.

                                                             6
time of the initial survey in 2009, many regions and kebeles had only recently received the RCBP
treatment. At the time of this survey most of the equipment for the FTCs as well as other necessary
inputs for the program had been procured, though much of it had not yet been delivered to the end
users. However, there is evidence suggesting that the treatment group had already received
substantially higher exposure to extension services than the control areas. We therefore conduct
the analysis without baseline data.

The questionnaire administered covered a wide range of topics including household demographics,
asset ownership, agricultural production and practices as well as markers for the interaction
between the household and agricultural extension agents. The main survey respondent was the
household head. The access to agricultural extensions services module, however, was administered
to two respondents separately: the household head and his or her spouse. If the household head
had no spouse or if the spouse was unavailable for the interview, the main farming household
member other than the head or spouse was interviewed.3

Table 2 presents summary statistics by treatment status during the first round of data collection.
The sample is balanced at Round 1 on sociodemographic characteristics that, by nature, are
relatively stable over time. The average size of households is a little over six members, and around
one-quarter of households are headed by a woman.
       3.2. Identification strategy

We estimate the impact of RCBP at two points in time, first in 2009-2010, at the beginning of roll-
out (Round 1), then in 2012, when follow-up data was collected (Round 2).

We estimate the following equation:

                            =          2+              1+               2+            +       +

Where      	denotes the outcome of interest of household i, residing in kebele j, at time t. Let be
an indicator variable that captures the treatment status which equals one if kebele j in which
household i resides received the RCBP and zero otherwise. Let               be an indicator variable
of the round of data collection, equal to 1 at Round 1, for t=1, and equal to 1 at Round 2, for t=2.
  controls for time effects and for regional effects, with            a set of indicator variables of
the region in which the household is located. Finally we control for household contemporaneous
sociodemographic characteristics by including the following vector of variables              : sex of
household head, presence of a female spouse of the head, household size, number of men in the
household, number of elderly in the household (> 50 years old), number of adults (25-49), number
of adolescents (16-24), number of children (6-15), dependency ratio (number of children under
7/household size), number of literate household members, number of students in household,
number of rooms in the dwelling, roof material is iron sheets.

In this paper, we capture the intention-to-treat (ITT) estimator of the RCBP project. As treatment
compliance is unobservable in this context, the ITT estimates the impact of RCBP based on
assignment to treatment, that is, living in treated kebeles. The and       coefficients are the ITT

3
    A detailed definition of all the outcomes presented is included in the annex (Table 7).

                                                             7
estimators of the impact of RCBP on treated households, at Round 1 and Round 2 respectively.

Assessing the impact of any intervention requires making an inference about the outcomes that
would have been observed for program participants (treatment) had they not participated, i.e. the
counterfactual. We hypothesize that before program roll-out, treatment and control households
were identical in time-invariant observable and unobservable characteristics. Results from
descriptive statistics confirm that socio-demographic characteristics, which are generally stable
over time, were balanced at Round 1 between treatment and control. In other words, to identify
the impact of RCBP, we assume that in the absence of RCBP, the outcomes of treated households
would have been the same as that of control households. If the project areas were selected for their
agricultural growth potential over time in ways that are not captured by observable characteristics,
then this selection – rather than the activities of the project – could be driving the results.


4. Results

   4.1. Main impacts

Table 3 presents the ITT estimates of the impact of the RCBP on economic and agricultural
outcomes of interest. Each row shows results of a regression for a different dependent variable.
Column (1) shows the Round 1 mean of the control households and Column (2) shows the number
of observations. Column (3) shows the coefficient of the time indicator and controls for the general
trend between Round 1 and Round 2. Column (4) shows the ITT impact of RCBP at Round 1, and
Column (5) shows the ITT coefficient at Round 2. All standard errors are clustered at the kebele
level and all regressions control for regions and contemporaneous household sociodemographic
characteristics.

Looking at Panel A of Table 3, our estimates suggest that in the earlier stages of the program (at
Round 1) the number of household members working on the household farm decreased in RCBP
households, and that agricultural sales increased. At Round 2, the RCBP had a positive and
significant impact on the number of people contributing to income in the household and the total
plot area owned or used by the household. Taken together, the ITT estimates suggest that the RCBP
program had a significant impact on the economic participation of household members. The
increase in the number of people contributing to household income was higher by 0.36 members
in RCBP households at Round 2, and that difference is statistically significant. In terms of farm
labor, there was an overall decline in household farm labor for all (treatment and control)
households during the evaluation period. However, in RCBP areas, household farm labor was
significantly lower at Round 1, but the overall decrease was mitigated in Round 2.

Panel B shows results on agricultural outcomes and high-value farming. Overall productivity,
defined as the value of output per hectare, did not increase as a result of RCBP, regardless of the
round. However, the farming and selling of marketable crops increased significantly. Farmers are
adopting more marketable crops and are less likely to use intercropping. The evidence is consistent
with RCBP helping farmers switch to more commercial, market-oriented agriculture. The labor
patterns we observe in Panel A could also be consistent with this. Given that more market-oriented
agriculture requires more work off farm (in terms of marketing, but also potentially in areas such


                                                 8
as processing), the significant increase we see in the number of people contributing to income but
not necessarily working on the farm could be laying the groundwork for the crop switching.

Land area, irrigation and tree farming increased significantly at Round 2 in RCBP areas. In fact,
the general negative trend observed in the control group for these outcomes was potentially
mitigated by the program. It appears the training provided by extension agents could have
encouraged farmers to devote more resources to agriculture, by investing in land, better technology
and marketable crops with a longer maturation period.

In Panel C of Table 3 we assess the impact of RCBP on access and satisfaction with extension
services. Results show that at Round 1, treatment households had significantly more regular
contact with extension services. Regular contact with extension services is defined as at least
monthly visits to give advice. These visits can be to the field, dwelling, or in another location. This
confirms the hypothesis that at the time of the first round of data collection, increased services had
already started being provided in RCBP areas. While satisfaction with extension services,
measured as the respondent reporting that the advice given by the DA was very useful, was
significantly higher at Round 1, it was significantly lower at Round 2 in RCBP areas. The negative
coefficients in Round 2 offset the general increase in satisfaction and exposure to extension
services that is indicated by the positive coefficients of the time variable.

These results suggest that that there was a “surge” in extension services in RCBP areas at Round
1. The effect of being exposed to extension are already visible at that time, as shown by the
adoption of marketable crops and new agricultural technologies (see Figure 1). At Round 2
however, households in RCBP are more likely to report an increase in having received advice from
NGOs than from an extension agent. It is possible that after initially getting a set of useful
information from extension agents, households graduated to other sources of information as
extension agents could not keep pace.
   4.2. Impact of RCBP by gender of the household head

One of the original goals behind collecting the data for this impact evaluation was to look at the
gender-differentiated impacts of expanding extension. Hence, the overall sample surveyed was
larger than it would have been if we were simply looking for average impact. In addition, as
indicated above, we asked more than one individual in the household about farming outcomes. To
start our examination of how the effects might be different by gender, we turn to the effects on
male versus female headed households since, in Ethiopia, the farm manager is often equated with
being the head of the household. To do this, we estimate the following equation:

     =         2+            1+               1+            2+              2+           +     +

Where is a female headship indicator, equal to 1 if the head of household i is a woman, and the
other variables are as defined above.

Table 5 shows the coefficients of the impact of RCBP at each round and of the impact at each
round interacted with the female headship indicator. We see that while the positive impact of the
program on the number of individuals who contribute to income is lower in female-headed
households, this difference is not statistically significant. Additionally, there is no significant

                                                   9
statistical difference in the impact of the number of people who work on the farm. The coefficient
for the interaction term of treatment and female-headed household is also not statistically
significant (and small) for farming and sales of marketable crops. This suggests that the main
impacts of the program, adoption of marketable crop farming and increased labor force
participation, benefitted male and female-headed households equally. Likewise, we find no
difference in access to extension for female heads of households.

It is possible that, as extension is often geared towards or available to household heads only, the
equal impact of RCBP on extension access for both female and male-headed households is actually
driven by household headship and not gender. To verify that, we make use of the information on
access and satisfaction with extension services which was collected for two individuals in each
household: the household head and his or her spouse. If the household head had no spouse or if
the spouse was unavailable for the interview, the main farming household member other than the
head or spouse was interviewed. Including the data on the secondary respondent, we check whether
the gender disaggregated results hold when looking at the sample in three different ways. First, we
run the regression including all respondents, with gender interactions. This estimation compares
the impact of RCBP on access to extension services on all men in the sample compared to all
women, regardless of the headship status. Second, we run the regression on the women-only
sample, adding interactions for headship. This model compared female household heads to other
sample women who are secondary respondents, that is, wives of household heads in the majority
of cases. Third, we run the regression on the sample of secondary respondents only, with gender
interactions. In all three cases, there are no significant differences in the effect of RCBP on access
to extension services between men and women, and household heads and non-heads (results not
shown but are available on request).

There are a few remaining differences in impacts between female and male-headed households.
As indicated by Panel B of Table 5, the number of crops grown by female-headed households
increased significantly more than in male-headed households at Round 2. Female-headed
households cultivate on average of 3.7 crops initially, against 4.7 for male-headed households
(Table 4). As women are shifting to more commercial agriculture are the same rate as men, this
significant coefficient may simply reflect the addition of one crop to their portfolio, starting from
a lower baseline situation. Indeed, the fact that they do not experience the decline in intercropping
(significant at 10 percent) at Round 1 that male headed households do is also indicative of this
diversification.

The negative coefficient of irrigation for female-headed households at Round 2 means that the
total effect of RCBP on female-headed household’s irrigation was not significantly different from
zero, and irrigation increased only in male-headed households. This may reflect a wealth effect, as
irrigation represents a large investment and female-headed households have lower initial levels of
wealth overall. If RCBP helped households make larger investments on their land, such as
irrigation, as suggested above, this positive effect did not reach female-headed households. We
will return to potential wealth effects in the next section.

We examine whether differences in fertility or tenure of plots could be driving the investment
effect of RCBP. Looking at the simple differences in reported fertility of plots between control
female and male-headed households at Round 1, we see no significant differences, ruling out the


                                                 10
explanation of soil fertility driving investments on the land such as irrigation (Table 4). In addition,
the share of plots owned (including owned but rented out, shared out or gifted out) by female-
headed households is higher than that of male-headed households, which would exclude land
tenure differences driving differences in irrigation investments (Table 4).

It is important to note that although many of the impacts of RCBP are not statistically different
between male- and female-headed households, RCBP did not help close the gender gap. As shown
in Table 4, female-headed households are initially worse off in all dimensions: wealth and
consumption, labor and capital endowment, access to extension services and farming advice in
general, and farming practices. The project thus succeeded to some extent at benefitting women
farmers as much as their male counterparts, but in both treatment and control areas, female-headed
households were still worse off in these dimensions after RCBP.
   4.3. Heterogeneity analysis by initial level of wealth

As mentioned in the gender-disaggregated analysis, some of the differences in effects of RCBP
across sex may in fact by reflecting a wealth effect. We hypothesize that initially wealthier
households may be more able to fully reap the benefits of the knowledge acquired from the
extension agents. Below we analyze whether there is heterogeneity in treatment effect along the
initial level of wealth. The higher wealth interaction term is equal to one if initially the total value
of assets owned by the household was above the sample median. Assets include an extensive list
of durable goods and equipment owned by the household and excludes land, house, and livestock.

Table 6 shows that there is no difference in impact on marketable crop adoption and access to
extension services for initially wealthier households. At Round 1, the impact of RCBP on labor
force participation in wealthier households is significantly negative as compared to less wealthy
farmers, but this effect disappears at Round 2. RCBP has a strong positive impact on the likelihood
of using irrigation for wealthier households in both rounds. At Round 1, RCBP significantly
increases the number of crops with improved seeds for these households. For initially poorer
households, the coefficient on the value of livestock is now positive and significant, while it is
negative, but non-significant for wealthier households. This suggests the project encouraged
investments, with wealthier households being able to invest in the land, by expanding irrigation
use and higher quality crop farming, while poorer households invested in cheaper or more liquid
assets, such as livestock. This pattern seems in turn to have an effect on higher-level outcomes
measuring household welfare. Panel A of Table 6 suggests that initially wealthier households
benefitted from RCBP significantly more than poorer households, in terms of non-food
consumption and level of assets (the latter significant at 10 percent).

In terms of access to extension services, Panel C of Table 6 suggests that at Round 2, wealthier
households in RCBP areas were significantly more likely to receive advice from peers than
wealthier control households. We interpret this finding as a sign that wealthier households have
larger or better quality networks that they can turn to for advice and useful information on
agricultural technology, once they have exhausted the knowledge that the public extension system
could provide.




                                                  11
5. Conclusion

We use a panel data set collected among farming households in Ethiopia between 2009 and 2012
to evaluate the impact of the Rural Capacity Building Project, which aimed at increasing farmer
productivity and technology adoption by strengthening the agricultural extension system. Round
1 of data collection occurred from December 2009 to January 2010, that is, 2 years after the RCBP
officially started, in 2007. Project implementation proceeded slowly, however, and at the time of
the initial survey in 2009, many regions and kebeles had only recently received the RCBP. At the
time of this survey most of the equipment for the FTCs as well as other necessary inputs for the
program had been procured, though it is unclear as to how much training exactly the treatment
group had had access to already. About two years later, from March to April 2012, an effort was
made to re-interview (Round 2) all Round 1 households in order to create a panel data set. In
accordance with the program roll-out, it seems that at Round 1, households in RCBP areas had
already been exposed to extension services. Given this evidence, we conducted the analysis with
no baseline data.

The results support the hypothesis of a “surge” in extension services happening around the first
round of data collection. Treatment households have more regular contact with extension officers
and higher satisfaction with extension services. At Round 2, treatment households report lower
satisfaction with extension services and seem to be favoring information sources outside of the
government system. The effects of the increase in access to extension services at Round 1 are
visible at both Round 1 and Round 2. Firstly, the evidence points to a positive impact of RCBP on
economic participation in the household, land area cultivated and adoption of marketable crops,
suggesting that access to extension helped farmers switch to more commercial, market-oriented
agriculture. Secondly, female-headed households seem to have benefited equally from RCBP.
However, as their initial levels of wealth, agricultural outcomes and access to extension were
lower, the project did not contribute to reducing the gender gap.


References

Agyei-Holmes, A., Ayerakwa, H. M., Osei, R. D., & Osei-Akoto, I. (2011). Training and Farmer
Productivity: An Evaluation using RCT for the MCA-Ghana Programme. Retrieved from
http://addis2011.ifpri.info/files/2011/10/Paper_1C_Robert-D.-Osei.pdf

Aker, J. C. (2011). Dial “A” for agriculture: a review of information and communication technologies for
agricultural extension in developing countries. Agricultural Economics, 42(6), 631-647.

Anderson, J., Feder, G., & Ganguly, S. (2006). The Rise and Fall of Training and Visit Extension: An Asian
Mini-drama with an African Epilogue. Retrieved from
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/8447/wps3928.pdf?sequence=1

Anderson, J. R., & Feder, G. (2007). Chapter 44 Agricultural Extension. In R. Evenson and P. Pingali (Ed.),
Handbook of Agricultural Economics (Vol. Volume 3, pp. 2343–2378). Elsevier.

Bandiera, O., & Rasul, I. (2006). Social Networks and Technology Adoption in Northern Mozambique.
The Economic Journal, 116(514), 869–902.



                                                    12
Benin, S., Nkonya, E., Okecho, G., Pender, J., Nahdy, S., Mugarura, S., Kato, E., Kayobyo, G. (2007).
Assessing the Impact of the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) in the Uganda Rural
Livelihoods. IFPRI Discussion Paper 00724.

Birkhaeuser, D., Evenson, R. E., & Feder, G. (1991). The Economic Impact of Agricultural Extension: A
Review. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 39(3), 607–650.

Bindlish, V., & Evenson, R. (1993). Evaluation of the Performance of T&V Extension in Kenya (Vol. 23).
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Cole, S., & Fernando, A. N. (2012). The value of advice: evidence from mobile phone-based agricultural
extension (No. 13-047). Harvard Business School Working Paper.

Conley, T. G., & Udry, C. R. (2010). Learning about a New Technology: Pineapple in Ghana. The American
Economic Review, 100(1), 35–69.

Davis, K. (2008). Extension in sub-Saharan Africa: Overview and assessment of past and current models
and future prospects. Journal of International Agricultural and Extension Education, 15(3), 15–28.

Davis, K., Nkonya, E., Kato, E., Mekonnen, D. A., Odendo, M., Miiro, R., & Nkuba, J. (2012). Impact of
Farmer Field Schools on Agricultural Productivity and Poverty in East Africa. World Development, 40(2),
402–413.

Dercon, S, Daniel O. Gilligan, John Hoddinott, and Tassew Woldehanna. (2009) The Impact of Agricultural
Extension and Roads on Poverty and Consumption Growth in Fifteen Ethiopian Villages. American Journal
of Agricultural Economics, 91(4) , 1007–21.

Evenson, R. E. (2001). Chapter 11 Economic impacts of agricultural research and extension. In Bruce L.
Gardner and Gordon C. Rausser (Ed.), Handbook of Agricultural Economics (Vol. Volume 1, Part A, pp.
573–628). Elsevier. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574007201100149

FAO (Ed.). (2011). Women in agriculture: closing the gender gap for development. Rome: FAO.
Gautam, M. (2000). Agricultural extension: the Kenya experience : an impact evaluation. Washington,
D.C.: World Bank.

Gautam, M., & Anderson, J. R. (1999). Reconsidering the evidence on returns to T&V extension in Kenya
(Vol. 2098). World Bank Publications

Jack, B. K. (2013). Constraints on the adoption of agricultural technologies in developing countries
(Literature Review). Agricultural Technology Adoption Initiative, J-PAL (MIT) and CEGA (UC Berkeley).

Kondylis, F., Mueller, V., & Zhu, J. (2017). Seeing is believing? Evidence from an extension network
experiment. Journal of Development Economics, 125, 1–20.

Kondylis, F., Mueller, V., Sheriff, G., & Zhu, S. (2014). Policy experiment in Mozambique highlights
importance of gender in dissemination of sustainable land management techniques (MozSSP Working
Paper 7). IFPRI.

Krishnan, P., & Patnam, M. (2014). Neighbors and Extension Agents in Ethiopia: Who Matters More for
Technology Adoption? American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 96(1), 308–327.


                                                  13
Maffioli, A., Ubfal, D., Baré, G. V., & Cerdán-Infantes, P. (2011). Extension services, product quality and
yields: the case of grapes in Argentina. Agricultural Economics, 42(6), 727–734.

Munshi, K. (2004). Social learning in a heterogeneous population: technology diffusion in the Indian Green
Revolution. Journal of Development Economics, 73(1), 185–213.

Owens, T., Hoddinott, J., & Kinsey, B. (2003). The Impact of Agricultural Extension on Farm Production
in Resettlement Areas of Zimbabwe. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 51(2), 337–357.

Palacios-Lopez, A., Christiaensen, L., & Kilic, T. (2017). How much of the labor in African agriculture is
provided by women? Food Policy, 67, 52–63..

Pamuk, H., Bulte, E., & Adekunle, A. A. (2014). Do decentralized innovation systems promote agricultural
technology adoption? Experimental evidence from Africa. Food Policy, 44, 227–236.

Quisumbing, A. R., & Pandolfelli, L. (2010). Promising Approaches to Address the Needs of Poor Female
Farmers: Resources, Constraints, and Interventions. World Development, 38(4), 581–592.

Ragasa, C. (2014). Improving Gender Responsiveness of Agricultural Extension. In A. R. Quisumbing, R.
Meinzen-Dick, T. L. Raney, A. Croppenstedt, J. A. Behrman, & A. Peterman (Eds.), Gender in Agriculture
(pp. 411–430). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.

Rivera, W. M., Qamar, M. K., & Van Crowder, L. (2001). Agricultural and Rural Extension Worldwide:
Options for Institutional Reform in Developing Countries. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization.

Romani, M. (2003). The impact of extension services in times of crisis: Côte d’Ivoire (1997-2000).
Retrieved from http://aida.econ.yale.edu/conference/neudc03/papers/4a-romani.pdf

Owens, T., Hoddinott, J., & Kinsey, B. (2003). The Impact of Agricultural Extension on Farm Production
in Resettlement Areas of Zimbabwe. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 51(2), 337–357.

O’Sullivan, M., Rao, A., Banerjee, R., Gulati, K., & Vinez, M. (2014). Levelling the field : improving
opportunities for women farmers in Africa (No. 86039) (pp. 1–86). The World Bank.

Taffesse, A., Dorosh, P., & Asrat, S. (2011). Crop Production in Ethiopia: Regional Patterns and Trends.
Retrieved from http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.190.9513&rep=rep1&type=pdf

Waddington, H., Snilstveit, B., Hombrados, J. G., Vojtkova, M., Anderson, J., & White, H. (2014). Farmer
field schools for improving farming practices and farmer outcomes in low-and middle-income countries: a
systematic       review.     Campbell        Systematic     Reviews,     10(6).     Retrieved       from
http://campbellcollaboration.org/lib/project/203/

World Bank, and IFPRI. (2010) Gender and Governance in Rural Services: Insights from India, Ghana,
and Ethiopia . The World Bank and International Food Policy Research Institute.




                                                    14
Table 1: Sample by location and treatment status

 Region       Woreda                Observations
 Amhara
 Control     Debay Tilatgin                        150
             Chilga                                126
             Tech Gayint                           112
 Treatment   Fagita Lekomma                         59
             Dejen                                  42
             Dembia                                 60
             Minjar                                 21
             Meket                                  59
             Dewa Chifa                             55
             Mekdela                                90
 Benshangul Gumuz
 Control     Homosha                               83
 Treatment   Menge                                 64
             Bello Jiganfoy                        88
 Oromia
 Control     Boset                                 117
 Treatment   Kuni                                   26
             Adama                                  82
             Booke                                  18
 SNNP
 Control     Dalocha                               84
 Treatment   Geze Gofa                             21
             Yem Special                           21
             Darra                                 21
             Offa                                  65
             Soro                                  21




                                               15
Table 2: Household Level Descriptive Statistics by Treatment Status, Round 1

                                                                                               Control Mean              Treatment - Control               N
 Male household head (=1)                                                                          .741                         .017                     1,485
                                                                                                  [.438]                       (.021)
 Presence of a female spouse of the household head (=1)                                            .723                          .007                    1,485
                                                                                                  [.448]                       (.021)
 Household size                                                                                    6.19                          .020                    1,485
                                                                                                  [2.45]                       (.178)
 Number of men in the household                                                                    3.11                          .041                    1,485
                                                                                                  [1.69]                       (.108)
 Number of elderly (> 50 years old)                                                                .501                         -.012                    1,485
                                                                                                  [.678]                       (.051)
 Number of adults (aged 25-49)                                                                     1.46                         -.004                    1,485
                                                                                                  [.901]                       (.050)
 Number of adolescents (aged 16-24)                                                                1.23                        -.064                     1,485
                                                                                                  [1.14]                       (.080)
 Number of children (aged 6-15)                                                                    2.07                          .059                    1,485
 Dependency ratio (number of children under 7/household size)                                      .175                         .009                     1,485
                                                                                                  [.169]                       (.016)
 Number of literate household members                                                              2.85                         .043                     1,485
                                                                                                  [2.04]                       (.169)
 Number of students in the household                                                               2.37                          .098                    1,485
                                                                                                  [1.81]                       (.145)
 Number of rooms in the dwelling                                                                   2.07                          .045                    1,473
                                                                                                  [1.04]                       (.133)
 Roof material is iron sheets (=1)                                                                 .560                         -.028                    1,478
                                                                                                  [.497]                       (.065)
Notes: Standard deviations in brackets. Standard errors of the difference between Treatment and Control in parentheses. * indicates significance at 10% level, **
at 5% level, *** at 1% level.




                                                                               16
Table 3: Impact of RCBP

                                               Panel A: Household Income, Assets, and Consumption
                                                                         Round 1                         Impact estimates
                                                                       Control mean Obs.      Round 2 Round 1 x RCBP Round 2 x RCBP
 Food consumption from market purchases (birr)                             71.6      2,847 64.4***           4.78           -14.6
                                                                          [90.7]               (8.51)       (8.47)         (11.0)
 Total value of assets (birr)                                               966      2,847    979***          140            338
                                                                         [1,321]                (153)       (136)           (250)
 Non-food consumption (birr)                                              3,209      2,750 2,210***           161             242
                                                                         [2,921]                (307)       (281)           (459)
 Nb of household members who contribute to income                          2.22      2,847     .307*         -.015        .360**
                                                                          [1.49]               (.155)       (.127)         (.166)
 Nb of household members who work on household farm                        4.10      2,847 -.558***       -.386***           .105
                                                                          [2.28]               (.121)       (.111)         (.094)
 Total plot area (ha)                                                      2.20      2,847     -.663*        -.133        .382**
                                                                          [4.35]               (.334)       (.340)         (.167)
 Livestock ownership (=1)                                                  .958      2,834    -.032**        -.015          -.021
                                                                          [.200]               (.014)       (.015)         (.019)
 Total value of livestock owned (birr)                                    7,718      2,834 24,430***          721          4,213
                                                                         [9,012]              (3,401)      (1,304)        (5,258)
 Total agricultural sales (birr)                                          3,961      2,847       -173         880             944
                                                                         [6,031]                (423)       (581)           (587)
                                              Panel B: Agricultural outcomes and high-value farming
                                                                         Round 1                         Impact estimates
                                                                       Control mean Obs.      Round 2 Round 1 x RCBP Round 2 x RCBP
 Productivity (harvest value/ha, birr)                                    5,466      2,811 2,778***          -345           -11.6
                                                                         [4,920]                (401)       (453)           (783)
 Tried new agricultural activities in the past year (=1, head)             .473      2,513       .033        .058           -.008
                                                                          [.500]               (.041)       (.041)         (.038)
 Intercropping (=1)                                                        .237      2,801      -.057      -.086**         -.059*
                                                                          [.425]               (.041)       (.035)         (.032)
 Irrigation (=1)                                                           .146      2,803 -.087***          .031          .046*
                                                                          [.354]               (.023)       (.039)         (.026)
 Crops with improved seeds (number of crops)                               .823      2,806       .007        .078           -.070
                                                                          [1.26]               (.084)       (.105)         (.100)

                                                                17
 Crops with purchased seeds (number of crops)                              1.50      2,806               -.383***          -.269**                -.221*
                                                                          [1.55]                           (.090)            (.121)               (.112)
 Fertilizer or pesticides (=1)                                             .865      2,783                  -.037             -.002                 .007
                                                                          [.342]                           (.024)            (.017)               (.032)
 Number of crops grown by the household                                    4.45      2,806               -.951***             -.053                -.013
                                                                          [1.95]                           (.133)            (.237)               (.183)
 Marketable crop farming (=1)                                              .225       2,806              -.143***           .097**               .186***
                                                                          [.418]                           (.027)            (.039)               (.038)
 Marketable crop selling (=1)                                              .131       2,795               -.057**          .106***               .203***
                                                                          [.338]                           (.028)            (.036)               (.039)
 Tree farming (=1)                                                         .171       2,801              -.113***              .015                .044*
                                                                          [.377]                           (.026)            (.037)               (.024)
                                                      Panel C: Access to extension services
                                                                        Round 1                                          Impact estimates
                                                                     Control mean Obs.                   Round 2      Round 1 x RCBP Round 2 x RCBP
 Contact with extension officer for advice or information (=1, head)       .821      2,435               .184***              .014          .002
                                                                          [.384]                          (.027)            (.032)        (.014)
 Contact with extension officer was regular (=1, head)                     .458      2,237               .504***            .076*          -.014
                                                                          [.499]                          (.030)            (.042)        (.017)
 Rated DA advice very useful (=1, head)                                    .568       1,819                .085*          .153***         -.084*
                                                                          [.496]                          (.045)            (.047)        (.044)
 Received advice from peer (=1, head)                                      .656      2,522               -.134**             -.003          .058
                                                                          [.475]                          (.056)            (.039)        (.045)
 Received advice from contact farmers (=1, head)                           .339      2,422                 .081*           .111**           .021
                                                                          [.474]                          (.045)            (.047)        (.047)
 Received advice from extension officers (=1, head)                        .837      2,586               .123***             .003          -.016
                                                                          [.370]                          (.025)            (.031)        (.023)
 Received advice from an NGO (=1, head)                                    .068      2,519               -.032**             -.025         .038*
                                                                          [.252]                          (.013)            (.016)        (.019)
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the kebele level. * indicates significance at 10% level, ** at 5% level, *** at 1% level. Each row shows the
coefficients of the regression of the outcomes in the left-hand side column on a time indicator (Round 2), and the interaction of the time indicators and the
treatment variable (Round 1 x RCBP, Round 2 x RCBP). All regressions control for region and the following contemporaneous household variables: sex of
household head, presence of a female spouse of the head, household size, number of men in the household, number of elderly in the household, number of adults,
number of adolescents, number of children, dependency ratio, number of literate household members, number of students in household, number of rooms in the
dwelling, roof material is iron sheets. Outcomes shown in Panel C and "Tried new agricultural activities in the past year" are individual respondent level
variables, with only household heads included in the sample.


                                                                              18
Table 4: Round 1 outcomes by gender of household head, control group

                                                                                                   Male headed Female headed
                                                                                                   households    households                Difference         N
 Food consumption from market purchases (birr)                                                         77.5         54.8                    22.6***          672
 Total value of assets (birr)                                                                         1,107          562                     545***          672
 Non-food consumption (birr)                                                                          3,557        2,214                   1,342***          672
 Nb of household members who contribute to income                                                      2.37         1.77                     .603***         672
 Nb of household members who work on household farm                                                    4.37         3.32                     1.05***         672
 Total plot area (ha)                                                                                  2.32         1.86                     .460***         672
 Livestock ownership (=1)                                                                              .980         .895                      .085**         669
 Total value of livestock owned (birr)                                                                8,965        4,117                   4,848***          669
 Total agricultural sales (birr)                                                                      4,536        2,312                    2,224***         672
 Productivity (harvest value/ha, birr)                                                                5,955        4,069                   1,886***          668
 Tried new agricultural activities in the past year (=1)                                               .540         .280                    .259***          653
 Intercropping (=1)                                                                                    .256         .181                      .075**         667
 Irrigation (=1)                                                                                       .163         .099                      .064**         670
 Crops with improved seeds (number of crops)                                                           .888         .636                      .252**         671
 Crops with purchased seeds (number of crops)                                                          1.58         1.26                     .320***         671
 Fertilizer or pesticides (=1)                                                                         .873         .841                        .032         667
 Number of crops grown by the household                                                                4.70         3.72                     .984***         671
 Marketable crop farming (=1)                                                                          .249         .156                      .093**         671
 Marketable crop selling (=1)                                                                          .149         .077                      .072**         664
 Tree farming (=1)                                                                                     .185         .133                        .052         671
 Share of plots owned                                                                                  .411         .418                       -.007         670
 Share of plots fertile                                                                                .848         .971                    -.123***         672
 Contact with extension officer for advice or information (=1)                                         .869         .684                    .185***          653
 Contact with extension officer was regular (=1)                                                       .502         .333                     .169***         642
 Rated DA advice very useful (=1)                                                                      .596         .437                      .160**         403
 Received advice from peer (=1)                                                                        .684         .578                      .106**         654
 Received advice from contact farmers (=1)                                                             .380         .225                     .155***         652
 Received advice from extension officers (=1)                                                          .890         .688                     .202***         655
 Received advice from an NGO (=1)                                                                      .071         .058                        .014         649
Notes: * indicates significance at 10% level, ** at 5% level, *** at 1% level. Table shows means at Round 1 of data collection for the control group only.




                                                                               19
Table 5: Gender differentiated impact of RCBP

                                               Panel A: Household Income, Assets, and Consumption
                                                                        Round 1 x    Round 1 x RCBP x   Round 2 x   Round 2 x RCBP x
                                                                           RCBP         Female head       RCBP        Female head
 Food consumption from market purchases (birr)                              .059            19.5*         -20.1*           23.3
                                                                           (9.29)          (10.5)         (11.2)         (15.5)
 Total value of assets (birr)                                                243          -403**            341           -27.4
                                                                           (162)            (199)          (275)          (234)
 Non-food consumption (birr)                                                 150             62.0           97.1           628
                                                                           (292)            (306)          (531)          (593)
 Nb of household members who contribute to income                           .006            -.085          .381*          -.088
                                                                           (.152)          (.167)         (.192)         (.191)
 Nb of household members who work on household farm                      -.393***            .026           .123          -.076
                                                                           (.133)          (.172)         (.103)         (.142)
 Total plot area (ha)                                                       -.102           -.124        .360**            .095
                                                                           (.359)          (.227)         (.173)         (.255)
 Livestock ownership (=1)                                                   -.010           -.020          -.023           .008
                                                                           (.012)          (.045)         (.021)         (.048)
 Total value of livestock owned (birr)                                     1,410          -1,929          5,482          -5,860
                                                                          (1,332)         (1,485)        (6,205)        (6,483)
 Total agricultural sales (birr)                                           1,011             -522            954          -52.9
                                                                           (692)            (773)          (684)          (791)
                                              Panel B: Agricultural outcomes and high-value farming
                                                                        Round 1 x    Round 1 x RCBP x   Round 2 x   Round 2 x RCBP x
                                                                           RCBP         Female head       RCBP        Female head
 Productivity (harvest value/ha)                                             253             -249         1,710          -1,850
                                                                           (820)            (903)        (1,570)        (1,684)
 Tried new agricultural activities in the past year (=1, head)              .069            -.046         -.021           .053
                                                                           (.044)          (.064)         (.042)         (.066)
 Intercropping (=1)                                                      -.110***           .094*          -.044          -.067
                                                                           (.038)          (.049)         (.035)         (.044)
 Irrigation (=1)                                                            .038            -.032        .060**          -.066*
                                                                           (.043)          (.038)         (.027)         (.035)
 Crops with improved seeds (number of crops)                                .146           -.276*         -.091           .091
                                                                           (.123)          (.164)         (.104)         (.156)

                                                                    20
 Crops with purchased seeds (number of crops)                            -.237*             -.133                         -.279**                 .261
                                                                          (.136)            (.144)                         (.111)                (.159)
 Fertilizer or pesticides (=1)                                            -.007              .023                           .019                 -.052
                                                                          (.018)            (.036)                         (.031)                (.046)
 Number of crops grown by the household                                    -.075              .077                          -.152               .622**
                                                                          (.251)            (.269)                         (.182)                (.259)
 Marketable crop farming (=1)                                            .102**              -.022                        .178***                 .036
                                                                          (.042)            (.054)                         (.040)                (.049)
 Marketable crop selling (=1)                                           .111***              -.022                        .201***                 .007
                                                                          (.037)            (.040)                         (.040)                (.045)
 Tree farming (=1)                                                          .021             -.028                           .034                 .043
                                                                          (.041)            (.058)                         (.024)                (.039)
                                                      Panel C: Access to extension services
                                                                       Round 1 x     Round 1 x RCBP x                    Round 2 x       Round 2 x RCBP x
                                                                         RCBP           Female head                       RCBP             Female head
 Contact with extension officer for advice or information (=1, head)       -.005              .074                          .005               -.009
                                                                          (.030)            (.057)                         (.016)             (.012)
 Contact with extension officer was regular (=1, head)                      .057              .072                         -.014                .005
                                                                          (.045)            (.066)                         (.018)             (.030)
 Rated DA advice very useful (=1, head)                                 .131***               .121                          -.063              -.094
                                                                          (.048)            (.093)                         (.047)             (.076)
 Received advice from peer (=1, head)                                      -.026              .094                          .057                .004
                                                                          (.042)            (.060)                         (.050)             (.072)
 Received advice from contact farmers (=1, head)                         .116**              -.020                          .010                .041
                                                                          (.050)            (.058)                         (.051)             (.071)
 Received advice from extension officers (=1, head)                        -.017              .078                         -.005               -.039
                                                                          (.027)            (.055)                         (.019)             (.049)
 Received advice from an NGO (=1, head)                                    -.018             -.029                        .042**               -.018
                                                                          (.018)            (.026)                         (.020)             (.032)
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the kebele level. * indicates significance at 10% level, ** at 5% level, *** at 1% level. Each row shows the
coefficients of the regression of the outcomes in the left-hand side column on interactions of treatment and time (Round 1 x RCBP, Round 2 x RCBP), and the
interaction of the time indicator, treatment variable and sex of the household head (Round 1 x RCBP x Female head, Round 2 x RCBP x Female head). All
regressions control for region, time period, and the following contemporaneous household variables: presence of a female spouse of the head, household size,
number of men in the household, number of elderly in the household, number of adults, number of adolescents, number of children, dependency ratio, number of
literate household members, number of students in household, number of rooms in the dwelling, roof material is iron sheets. Outcomes shown in Panel C and
"Tried new agricultural activities in the past year" are individual respondent level variables, with only household heads included in the sample.



                                                                               21
Table 6: Heterogeneity analysis by level of initial assets

                                               Panel A: Household Income, Assets, and Consumption
                                                                        Round 1 x   Round 1 x RCBP x       Round 2 x   Round 2 x RCBP x
                                                                          RCBP       High initial assets     RCBP      High initial assets
 Food consumption from market purchases (birr)                            -1.61              12.5             -18.5           8.58
                                                                          (9.70)            (10.8)            (13.0)        (15.9)
 Total value of assets (birr)                                              -56.9             382*              13.1          692*
                                                                          (108)             (202)             (188)          (350)
 Non-food consumption (birr)                                                3.74              307              -328        1,233**
                                                                          (255)             (373)             (364)          (596)
 Nb of household members who contribute to income                           .121           -.268*              .238           .243
                                                                          (.151)            (.153)            (.183)        (.226)
 Nb of household members who work on household farm                        -.171          -.431**              .099           .015
                                                                          (.113)            (.193)            (.105)        (.141)
 Total plot area (ha)                                                       .164             -.604           .366**           .056
                                                                          (.138)            (.524)            (.147)        (.223)
 Livestock ownership (=1)                                                  -.019              .007             -.027          .013
                                                                          (.027)            (.029)            (.029)        (.036)
 Total value of livestock owned (birr)                                      553               449           6,277**         -4,106
                                                                         (1,417)          (1,354)           (2,565)        (8,327)
 Total agricultural sales (birr)                                             295            1,129               670            637
                                                                          (425)             (896)             (629)          (807)
                                              Panel B: Agricultural outcomes and high-value farming
                                                                        Round 1 x   Round 1 x RCBP x       Round 2 x   Round 2 x RCBP x
                                                                          RCBP       High initial assets    RCBP       High initial assets
 Productivity (harvest value/ha)                                           -253              -204             378             -740
                                                                          (459)             (611)            (777)          (1,133)
 Tried new agricultural activities in the past year (=1, head)              .084             -.051           -.006           -.002
                                                                          (.056)            (.068)          (.055)           (.065)
 Intercropping (=1)                                                     -.129***              .085          -.074*            .030
                                                                          (.045)            (.052)          (.041)           (.052)
 Irrigation (=1)                                                          -.017           .095**             -.010         .112***
                                                                          (.037)            (.047)          (.022)           (.041)
 Crops with improved seeds (number of crops)                               -.106           .361**            -.026           -.070
                                                                          (.092)            (.174)          (.101)           (.153)

                                                                      22
 Crops with purchased seeds (number of crops)                          -.390***              .233                        -.255**                  .088
                                                                          (.132)            (.185)                        (.126)                (.153)
 Fertilizer or pesticides (=1)                                            -.019              .035                          .013                  -.008
                                                                          (.021)            (.024)                        (.041)                (.043)
 Number of crops grown by the household                                    .117              -.353                         .211                -.419**
                                                                          (.230)            (.239)                        (.204)                (.209)
 Marketable crop farming (=1)                                            .122**              -.050                       .195***                 -.016
                                                                          (.048)            (.046)                        (.051)                (.054)
 Marketable crop selling (=1)                                           .112***              -.013                       .191***                  .025
                                                                          (.042)            (.042)                        (.053)                (.050)
 Tree farming (=1)                                                         .044              -.060                        .053*                  -.016
                                                                          (.043)            (.046)                        (.032)                (.037)
                                                      Panel C: Access to extension services
                                                                      Round 1 x      Round 1 x RCBP x                   Round 2 x       Round 2 x RCBP x
                                                                         RCBP        High initial assets                 RCBP           High initial assets
 Contact with extension officer for advice or information (=1, head)       .025              -.021                       -.0003                .003
                                                                          (.046)            (.048)                       (.015)              (.015)
 Contact with extension officer was regular (=1, head)                   .103**              -.055                         .001               -.031
                                                                          (.049)            (.059)                       (.023)              (.030)
 Rated DA advice very useful (=1, head)                                 .184***              -.062                        -.030               -.102
                                                                          (.064)            (.072)                       (.055)              (.065)
 Received advice from peer (=1, head)                                      .053            -.111*                         -.004               .123*
                                                                          (.051)            (.061)                       (.050)              (.069)
 Received advice from contact farmers (=1, head)                         .130**              -.037                         .015                .009
                                                                          (.055)            (.056)                       (.057)              (.069)
 Received advice from extension officers (=1, head)                     -.00004              .006                         -.030                .028
                                                                          (.044)            (.047)                       (.034)              (.035)
 Received advice from an NGO (=1, head)                                   -.029              .008                         .039*               -.002
                                                                          (.019)            (.029)                       (.020)              (.030)
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the kebele level. * indicates significance at 10% level, ** at 5% level, *** at 1% level. Each row shows the
coefficients of the regression of the outcomes in the left-hand side column on interactions of treatment and time (Round 1 x RCBP, Round 2 x RCBP), and the
interaction of the time indicator, treatment variable and high initial level of assets (Round 1 x RCBP x High initial assets, Round 2 x RCBP x High
initial assets). All regressions control for region, time period, and the following contemporaneous household variables: presence of a female spouse of the
head, household size, number of men in the household, number of elderly in the household, number of adults, number of adolescents, number of children,
dependency ratio, number of literate household members, number of students in household, number of rooms in the dwelling, roof material is iron sheets.
Outcomes shown in Panel C and "Tried new agricultural activities in the past year" are individual respondent level variables, with only household heads included
in the sample.

                                                                              23
Figure 1: Round 1 and 2 means in the RCBP and non-RCBP kebeles


         Tried new agricultural activities in the                 Received advice from peer (=1)
                    past year (=1)
                                                                            RCBP        Non RCBP
                   RCBP         Non RCBP
                                                           0.7
  0.54                                                     0.6
  0.52                                                     0.5
                                                           0.4
   0.5
                                                           0.3
  0.48
                                                           0.2
  0.46                                                     0.1
  0.44                                                       0
               Round 1              Round 2                            Round 1              Round 2

         Contact with extension officer was                       Received advice from an NGO (=1)
                    regular (=1)
                                                                            RCBP        Non RCBP
                   RCBP         Non RCBP
                                                            0.1
  1.2
                                                           0.08
    1
  0.8                                                      0.06
  0.6                                                      0.04
  0.4
                                                           0.02
  0.2
    0                                                         0
              Round 1               Round 2                             Round 1              Round 2


Note: Means are calculated over the entire sample of respondents to the extension module, which was administered to the household head and another household
member of the opposite sex (the spouse in male-headed households, another male in farmer in female-headed households).



                                                                             24
                                                             Annex

Table 7: Definition of outcomes of interest

 Variable name                                             Definition
 Food consumption from market purchases (birr)             Total value of food consumed from market purchases during the previous last
                                                           week in birr. Winsorized at 1%.
 Total value of assets (birr)                              Total value of all household assets excluding land, house and livestock in birr.
                                                           Winsorized at 1%.
 Non-food consumption (birr)                               Total value of non-food items purchased in the past 12 months in birr, items
                                                           with monthly recall are annualized. Winsorized at 1%.
 Nb of household members who contribute to income          Number of people who contribute to income in the household
 Nb of household members who work on household farm        Number of people who work on household farm activities
 Total plot area (ha)                                      Total size of all plots owned or used by household in hectares (including
                                                           rented/shared/gifted out and forest/pasture/homestead)
 Livestock ownership (=1)                                  = 1 if household owns livestock
 Total value of livestock owned (birr)                     Total value of livestock owned in the past 12 months. Poultry purchase recall
                                                           period is 3 months and annualized. Winsorized by 1 %.
 Total agricultural sales (birr)                           Total value of agricultural sales: crops sold last during the last cropping
                                                           season, and livestock and animal by-product sold in the last 12
                                                           months.Winsorized at 1%.
 Productivity (harvest value/ha, birr)                     Total value of all crops harvested, using regional median price in birr, divided
                                                           by total area cultivated in hectare. Winsorized at 1%.
 Tried new agricultural activities in the past year (=1)   = 1 if respondent tried any new agricultural activities in the past year.
 Intercropping (=1)                                        = 1 if household intercrops on at least one plot.
 Irrigation (=1)                                           = 1 if household used irrigation on at least one plot.
 Crops with improved seeds (number of crops)               Number of crops for which improved seeds were used.
 Crops with purchased seeds (number of crops)              Number of crops for which seeds/seedlings were purchased.
 Fertilizer or pesticides (=1)                             = 1 if household used natural fertilizer, chemical fertilizer, pesticides,
                                                           herbicides, or fungicides.
 Number of crops grown by the household                    Total number of crops grown by the household.
 Marketable crop farming (=1)                              = 1 if household grows at least one marketable crop, defined as high value
                                                           crops that are primarily cultivated to sell on the market: coffee, mango,
                                                           avocado, banana, guava, casmir, sesame, peanuts, clove, ginger, tobacco, khat,
                                                           dinbilal, watermelon, eucalyptus, pineapple, orange, papaya, garlic, lemon,
                                                           sunflower, cumin, cauliflower, rapeseed, cucumber, apple, and spices.


                                                                25
Marketable crop selling (=1)                                    = 1 if household sold at least one marketable crop.
Tree farming (=1)                                               = 1 if household grows at least one marketable tree: mango, avocado, banana,
                                                                guava, eucalyptus, orange, papaya, lemon, apple, gishta
Share of plots owned                                            Share of all plots cultivated that are owned, rented out, or shared out by the
                                                                household.
Share of plots fertile                                          Share of all plots cultivated on which soil is reported as fertile.
Contact with extension officer for advice or information (=1)   = 1 if the respondent had contact with a DA or a WOARD officer for advice
                                                                or information since the last harvest, whether in the field, at the dwelling, or
                                                                another location, = 0 if no contact
Contact with extension officer was regular (=1)                 = 1 if contact with the DA or a WOARD officer was monthly or more
                                                                frequent, = 0 if less frequent or no contact.
Rated DA advice very useful (=1)                                = 1 if, conditional on having had contact with the DA, the respondent rated
                                                                DA's advice very useful, = 0 if rated advice useful or not useful.
Received advice from peer (=1)                                  = 1 if received advice from a household member, friend or neighbor, on
                                                                vegetable garden, crops, livestock, natural resource management in the last 12
                                                                months.
Received advice from contact farmers (=1)                       = 1 if received advice from a model farmer, follower farmer, or farmer group
                                                                in the last 12 months (same topics as above).
Received advice from extension officers (=1)                    = 1 if received advice from a DA, a Farmer Training Center officer, or a
                                                                WOARD officer in the last 12 months (same topics as above).




                                                                     26
