                                                            WPS8143


Policy Research Working Paper                              8143




  Pension Funds and the Impact of Switching
     Regulation on Long-term Investment
                          Alvaro Enrique Pedraza Morales
                                   Olga Fuentes
                                  Pamela Searle
                                  Fiona Stewart




Finance and Markets Global Practice Group
July 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8143


  Abstract
 This paper looks at the impact of members’ ability to switch                       for regulators. First, use administrative controls to prevent
 pension fund provider and /or portfolio on the allocation                          fraudulent switching between pension providers. Second,
 of pension funds to long-term investments. The level of                            provide clear performance and cost comparisons to inform
 annual turnover in pension fund portfolios was compared                            members’ choice of provider/fund and encourage informed
 with the amount of short-term investments (using gov-                              decision making, which is beneficial for members and
 ernment treasury bills and bank deposits as proxy). The                            the system. Third, supervise and control advertising and
 investment regulations around switching and other market                           marketing (including reporting of performance periods)
 conduct were then considered. The paper finds that greater                         carefully, to avoid switches based on misleading advice.
 movements between pension fund providers and between                               Fourth, control financial incentives for sales agents, so
 portfolios is linked to increased holdings of short-term                           that switching advice is given in members’ interest and
 and more liquid assets. Switching appears to be driven                             not for commercial gain. Fifth, concentrate issuance in
 by competition, market structure, and investment advice,                           government securities, to create more liquid instruments.
 and, unfortunately, frequently results in poor investment                          And sixth, conduct further research on the concept of a
 returns for members. The paper makes six recommends                                central liquidity pool to manage unexpected outflows.



  This paper is a product of the Finance and Markets Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank
  to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
  Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at
  apedrazamorales@worldbank.org; fstewart1@worldbank.org; ofuentes@spensiones.cl; psearle@spensiones.cl.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    Pension Funds and the Impact of Switching Regulation
                              on Long-term Investment
                                   Alvaro Enrique Pedraza Morales
                                            Olga Fuentes
                                            Pamela Searle
                                            Fiona Stewart




JEL Code:
G110: Financial Economics / General Financial Markets / Portfolio Choice; Investment Decisions
G230: Financial Economics / Financial Institution and Services / Pension Funds; Non-bank Financial
Institutions; Financial Instruments; Institutional Investors
G280: Financial Economics / Financial Institutions and Services / Government Policy and Regulation
F380: International Economics / International Finance / International Financial Policy/ Financial
Transactions Tax; Capital Controls
Keywords: Capital Markets, Financial Instruments, Pension Funds, Regulation, Portfolio, Asset
Allocation, Capital Gain, Capital Control
Pension Funds and the Impact of Switching Regulation on Long-term
Investment1

Background
Pension funds are rightly viewed as an important source of long-term capital in many countries. Following
the global financial crisis of 2008, the theme of long-term investment and the role of institutional investors
as providers of domestic capital for economic development has been high on policy makers’ agendas.
Pension funds are seen as an important source of long-term, domestic capital as the balance sheets of
governments and banks have become increasingly stretched.

Despite generally positive findings linking pension system development and economic growth,2 there
have also been plenty of disappointments. In too many countries, pension fund investments remain highly
concentrated in bank deposits and traditional government bonds3, contributing little long-term funding
for development – as well as delivering disappointing investment returns and therefore pensions. OECD
Global Pension Statistics show that around half the assets of pension funds around the world are held in
bills and bonds – with the proportion significantly higher in non-OECD countries (at 58.6% of total assets
under management (AUM)).4




1
  This paper has been prepared by Alvaro Enrique Pedraza Morales and Fiona Stewart from the World Bank and
Olga Fuentes and Pamela Searle from the Superintendencia in Chile. This paper was produced in collaboration
with the International Organisation of Pension Supervisors (IOPS) and will also appear in their Working Paper
Series on Effective Pension Supervision.
2
  For theoretical and empirical evidence linking pension funds and economic growth see (Stewart, Despalins and
Remizova forthcoming).
3
  It should be noted that long-term investment can be also achieved via government instruments if these are of
long duration and kept until maturity and/or if they are financing particular goals such as for example
infrastructure or green bonds. However, in many countries, pension funds’ holdings of government securities are
generally of shorter-term duration. It should also be noted that when pension systems are launched in some
countries, government bond rates can be high (and remain so for persistent periods). While this is the case, it can
make sense for allocations to these assets to remain stable. However, it would be expected that these would
decline as macroeconomic conditions and the pension sector develop. While this has been observed in some
countries (such as Mexico), others lag in their portfolio diversification trends.
4
  See Pension Funds in Figures, May 2017 + accompanying statistical tables http://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/private-
pensions/pensionmarketsinfocus.htm. A more in-depth discussion of pension fund portfolio diversification and
links to investment performance can also be found in (Stewart, Despalins and Remizova forthcoming ‘Pension
Funds, Capital Market and the Power of Diversification’).


                                                                                                                 2
          Figure 1: Pension Fund Asset Allocation in Selected Asset Classes, (2016 preliminary)

                               % AUM OECD / Selected Non-OECD Countries




Source: OECD

There are many causes behind the lack of diversification in pension fund investments. These include
unsupportive macro conditions (high government bond rates crowding out other investments), a shortage
of investment instruments and attractive investment opportunities, poor governance and limited
investment knowledge and capacity within the funds.5

Regulation can also affect pension funds allocation via restrictive asset class limits and excessive reliance
on short-term monitoring of performance. For instance, in defined contribution (DC) pension plans, a
disproportionate focus on asset preservation rather than the long-term goal of providing an adequate
retirement income can negatively impact portfolio allocation. Investment regulation in some countries
may serve to reinforce this focus on the short-term delivery of investment returns rather than the long-




5
 Among numerous other papers, these issues are discussed in Opazo et al (2015), Raddatz et al (2014), and de la
Torre et at (2011).

                                                                                                                  3
term generation of a pension income through overly restrictive use of asset classes.6 Over and above
straight asset class limitations, it has been argued that distortions are also increased when these are
combined with relative performance benchmarks, which encourage herding by fund managers and are
usually based on short-term measures.7

Other regulatory and agency issues also combine to reinforce the short-term focus of pension fund
providers. Pension funds can be prevented from fully diversifying their portfolios into long-term assets by
issues such as principle-agent problems, whereby fund managers derive profits from short-term
performance rather than from long-term gains (particularly where conservative allocations are rewarded
almost the same a risky allocations). In addition, fees are often charged based on short-term performance
rather than long–term measures, and accounting and solvency regulations may actually incentivize
investment in short-term and liquid assets.

Improving investment regulation can help overcome these hurdles. Using lifecycle funds rather than
straight investment limits, removing relative return guarantees, benchmarking outcomes, and measuring
performance and fees over a long-term period can have an impact of pension fund portfolio construction,
allowing for greater long-term investment.

Switching and Pension Fund Portfolios
An additional regulatory challenge for DC pension fund managers occurs when individuals have the ability
to switch between pension fund managers and /or portfolio. This means that pension fund managers have
to manage redemption risks. In the case of pension funds, because saving for retirement is mandatory in
many countries, outflows are expected to be very stable, especially those resulting from benefit payouts.
However, managers of DC open pension systems, where members are allowed to switch between
providers and portfolios– often at will – can be exposed to significant outflows.

Switching can distort pension funds’ asset allocation and skew portfolios towards short-term instruments.
For example, in order to accommodate unexpected outflows, fund managers might hold more liquid
portfolios with a higher proportion of short-term assets.8 In this case, pension fund managers might be
unable to fully take advantage of liquidity and term premiums by forgoing profitable investment
opportunities, affecting the value of the funds and future pension outcomes. For example, Muslim and
Pasquini (2012), examining the pension system in 27 countries from 1990-2007, find that: “occupational
schemes tend to generate higher returns than do personal pension schemes and closed schemes tend to
generate higher returns than do open schemes.” Furthermore, if domestic pension funds manager indeed



6
  Again, a fuller discussion of the impact of pension regulation on portfolio construction can be found in (Stewart,
Despalains and Remizova forthcoming). Stewart (2014) and Stanko (2015) discuss how regulations could be adapted
to incentivize long-term investment horizons by introducing outcome-based benchmarks.
7
  For a discussion of this issue see Randle and Rudolph (2014), and the Viceira and Rudolph presentation ‘The Use of
Guarantees on Contributions in Pension Funds’, World Bank Contractual Savings Conference, January 2012. Acharya
and Pedraza (2015) study Colombian pension fund managers in response to changes in the performance benchmark.
Further information on herding by Polish pension fund managers can be found in (Stanko 2003) and (Voronkova and
Bohl 2005). It has also been argued that the focus on short-term volatility is enhanced by the dislocation between
the accumulation and decumulation phase of DC pensions - see (Blake et al 2008).
8
  While this behavior has been widely documented for open-end mutual funds, less is known in the context of DC
pension schemes.

                                                                                                                  4
skew their portfolios to liquid and other short-term instruments, the full benefits from pension savings on
domestic capital market development could be limited.

This paper documents differences in regulation on switching in a number of countries operating DC
pension systems. The paper also studies the extent to which switching between pension providers and
across different portfolios affect asset allocation. More precisely, the paper analyses whether pension
funds’ holdings in short-term assets is related to outflows resulting from transfers within and across
pension fund providers. Data on pension funds’ portfolios were provided by the regulatory authorities in
Chile; Colombia; Costa Rica; Estonia; Hong Kong SAR, China; Mexico; Peru; Poland; and Romania. 9

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents the aggregate trends in pension
funds’ holdings at different maturities. Section 2 documents outflows from benefit payments and
switching. Section 3 studies the relation between switching and portfolio allocations. In addition to
analyzing the relation between fund transfers and short-term holdings for the group of countries, the
section also presents two empirical exercises for Colombia and Chile where recent events in switching
provide two quasi-natural experiments to study the causal effects on portfolio strategies and liquidity
management. Section 4 concludes and presents several policy recommendations.

1.      Holdings of short-term assets
Holdings of short-term and medium-term assets have declined in all Latin American countries over the
past decade, with similar trends witnessed in the Central and Eastern Europe region. For the purpose of
this paper, short-term assets have been defined as local government treasuries securities < 1-year
maturity, local bank term deposits, foreign treasury securities < 1-year maturity and foreign term deposits.
Medium term assets are defined as those with between 1-5 years maturity. For example, in Chile, while
short-term investments accounted for 19% of AUM in 2005, they were only 6% of the portfolio in 2015.
Medium term assets have also declined or at least stabilized during the sample period.




9
 IOPS members from Nigeria and Slovak Republic also kindly provided information for this paper, but as no data
were available on switching, it was not possible to include these countries in the paper.

                                                                                                                 5
                        Figure 2+3: Short-term and Medium-term Assets in LAC Countries


              Short-term assets % AUM                                                Medium-term assets % AUM
45%                                                                          45%
40%                                                                          40%
35%                                                                          35%
30%                                                                          30%
25%                                                                          25%
20%                                                                          20%
15%                                                                          15%
10%                                                                          10%
 5%                                                                           5%
 0%                                                                           0%




                                                                                   2005

                                                                                          2015

                                                                                                 2005

                                                                                                        2015

                                                                                                               2005

                                                                                                                      2015

                                                                                                                             2005

                                                                                                                                    2015

                                                                                                                                           2005

                                                                                                                                                  2015
       2005

              2015

                     2005

                            2015

                                   2005

                                          2015

                                                 2005

                                                        2015

                                                               2005

                                                                      2015
         CHL           COL           CRC           MEX           PER                 CHL           COL           CRC          MEX            PER


Source: National pension supervisory authorities

                        Figure 4+5: Short-term and Medium-term Assets in EEC Countries




Note: Romania reported short- and medium-term holdings starting in 2010.

This move towards longer-term assets in the allocation of the pension funds’ portfolios have occurred as
the systems have become more mature. As assets in the systems grow, and fund managers gain
experience, the portfolios of the funds tend to diversify. Chile, the oldest system, has the smallest amount
of short- and medium-term asset combined (13% of AUM). Even Romania, with the youngest DC pension
system in the sample, has experienced a decline in the share of short-term investments. In Poland, the




                                                                                                                                                         6
abrupt decline in short-term assets is related to structural reforms and new regulation which effectively
forced funds to invest into equity securities only.10

The one exception to the common decline in short-term assets is Hong Kong SAR, China, where holdings
of deposits and cash11 have remained consistently high at around two-thirds of the Mandatory Provident
Fund (MPF) portfolios. This extreme focus on short-term investments is widely believed to result directly
from members’ choice as opposed to portfolio decisions by managers. For instance, individuals have the
right to invest their contributions in any of the constituent funds of a MPF scheme. By design, at least one
of these funds has to be a “MPF Conservative Fund”, with holdings in short-term bank deposits or other
short-term debt securities, and an average investment period that must not exceed 90 days. In addition,
some MPF schemes offer other money market funds which invest in short-term instruments such as
treasury bills, certificates of deposit, and commercial paper. Overall, the Conservative Fund and money
market funds remain popular choices among participants. A new default fund model has been introduced
with fee caps.

The decline in short- and medium-term assets have been accompanied by gradual changes in portfolio
allocation restrictions, i.e. introduction of new asset classes and more flexible investments limits. For
example, in recent years, Mexican pension funds have also experience greater diversification. In 2005,
equity investments and foreign debt instruments were allowed. Ten years later, 27% of pension fund
portfolios were invested in these assets. In addition to international diversification, new regulation
allowed pension fund to invest in alternative asset classes. As a result, the total exposure to domestic
government securities declined from 80% in 2005 to 51% in 2015. The regulatory authorities in Colombia
and Peru have also gradually increased their limits on several asset classes, including those in private
equity and other alternative securities.




10
  Following declines in contributions made to the private pension funds (OFEs) in Poland in 2011, in 2014, the option
of choosing whether to transfer any part of the pension contribution to OFE was introduced, with all future
contributions accumulated in the public system (ZUS) being made the default option. Further, the 2014 law
introduced the ‘slider’, whereby those members with 10 or fewer years left to maturity would have their second
pillar assets incrementally transferred to the first pillar. In 2014, more than half of assets held by OFEs were
transferred to ZUS and government bonds were ‘renationalized’, (shrinking OFE portfolios by around 50%). Pension
funds were banned from buying bonds (governmental or private, including those issued by foreign entities),
drastically exposing the industry to more equities. The law also lifted the minimum return requirement and
overhauled investment regulations (equity limit was raised from a maximum 40% of net assets to a minimum 75%
and the maximum foreign investment limit was increased from 5% to 10% in 2014, rising to 30% in 2016). In 2016 it
was announced that the government would transfer a quarter of the 140 billion zlotys ($35.2 billion) of assets held
by OFEs, into a single investment vehicle, the demographic reserve fund (FRD) from 2018. This is still to be decided
– another proposal is to move everything to the FRD fund. The OFEs will be shut down. The funds will then be
invested by a government-appointed manager. Incentives will be provided to opt for long-term investment (with
details yet to be finalized).

11
 These are taken as a proxy for short-term assets, since the local authorities did not provide information based on
maturities.

                                                                                                                   7
                     Figure 6: Diversification Pension Funds’ Portfolios (2000-2013)




Source: CONSAR

In some cases, the diversification has been achieved via a diversification by moving into overseas
investments. For instance, in Chile and Peru, diversification seems to have been away from short-term
domestic instruments and into overseas assets as the limits on these investments were increased.

          Figure 7: Development of Investment Abroad and Investment Limits Chilean Pension Funds




Source: Superintendencia Chile




                                                                                                   8
Figure 8: Development of Investment Abroad and Investment Limits Peruvian Pension Funds




Source: Superintendencia Peru



2.      Fund Outflows: Benefit Payments and Switching

Pension fund outflows can be classified into (i) benefit payouts resulting from life events and (ii) fund
transfers when investors switch between pension fund providers and between portfolios. Benefits
payments typically include phased withdrawals after retirement (whether in the from old-age or from
survivor and disability), annuity purchases, and early withdrawals. Switching among providers and
between portfolios depends on each country’s pension design and the menu of funds available to clients.

2.1       Benefit Payouts
Retirement payouts represent only a small fraction of pension fund outflows. For most countries in the
sample, pension funds’ outflows are largely driven by transfers across fund providers (solid line) and those
between portfolios within the same management company (dash line). Retirement payouts (dash-dotted
line), only represent a small fraction of total assets. For example, in Chile, the country with the most
mature system in the region, benefit payouts only account for 2.5% of AUM. Estonia and Romania are
also still young systems with limited payouts as yet having been required. Poland is the exception due to
the systemic changes which allowed members to decide whether they still wanted to allocate new
contributions to the funded pillar or whether these will be sent to the unfunded pillar and registered in
individual notional accounts (default).

Early withdrawals are not a major driver of outflows. Unlike in some other countries and regions globally
(for example in relation to the social security funds in some African countries), early withdrawals do not
have a major impact on the pension funds in these countries, as these are tightly controlled (details
provided in Annex).




                                                                                                          9
Hong Kong SAR, China has a different pattern, with switching, benefit payouts and withdrawal levels closer
than in other countries. Switching represents around 6% of the total portfolio, with benefit payments 4%
(the MPF system having been established over 20 years ago) and early withdrawals (allowed 5 years
before the retirement age) around 2%.




                                                                                                       10
Figure 9: Pension funds yearly flows (% of AUM)




                                                  11
2.2      Switching between providers
The regulations on switching between providers in the different countries varies in the level of restrictiveness.
Peru, Costa Rica and Chile new participants who do not choose an AFP are locked into their initial or default
provider for a certain period (1 month, 1 year, 2 years respectively) and then allowed to switch at the member’s
discretion. In Mexico, after trying various iterations, members are now locked into the default fund (based on
5-year net of fee returns) for 1 year, but may switch pension fund managers (AFORE for its Spanish acronym)
at higher frequencies if their new AFORE has displayed higher net returns.12 Switching between providers in
Colombia is allowed every 6 months. However, members are also given a regular choice to switch from the
privately managed DC system back into the DB public pension system once every 5 years, until 10 years before
retirement. In the Central and Eastern European countries, transfers are permitted fairly freely. In Poland, they
were previously executed 4 times a year, and in Estonia the transfers take place 3 times a year (details provided
in Annex). Switching provider has been allowed at least once a year in Hong Kong SAR, China since 2012.13

 The most effective regulation to limit switching between providers while maintaining flexibility for individuals
appears to be related to administrative checks and marketing rules. For example, in Costa Rica, after November
2012, any member changing provider had to sign a contract with both the new manager (as was previously the
case) and the old manager. As a result, from the addition of this seemingly minor administrative burden,
switching between providers dropped dramatically from 14% of total AUM in 2012 to less than 2% in 2013 (see
Ashcroft, Inglis and Price, 2016).

Greater administrative checks were also introduced in Mexico and Chile which helped reduce fraudulent
switches. In Chile, after tighter controls requiring clearance from both old and new pension providers were
introduced in 1997, switching dramatically declined. In Mexico, the number of switches dropped from 3.8
million members in 2006 to 2.4 million after a similar measure. There, the central administrator (Procesor) also
checks with the member’s current fund manager that the individual really has requested to transfer (the
provider then checks with the individual).




12
   In the Mexican system, at the point of enrollment, if a member does not choose a provider they get allocated to a
provider by CONSAR. Initially this was purely an administrative arrangement to various funds. Then there was a return
component but it was initially only 1 year returns – and then over time it become net of fee returns over 5 years).
Around 60% of members get allocated in this way so it is a material consideration for pension funds trying to build
members.
13
    Switching provider (in the sense of transferring funds) was allowed for MPF members in Hong Kong SAR, China when
changing employer, as the MPF provider is chosen by the employer rather than the employee. Since 2012, members
were also allowed to switch their contributions to a provider of their own choice once a year. From the launch of the
Employee Choice Arrangement in November 2012 to October 2016, there has been 362,000 transfer requests, which
accounts for 10% of the average number of employee contribution accounts over the period. Despite greater flexibility,
the total amount of transfers between providers has not changed dramatically vs. the years prior to 2012 (figure 9).

                                                                                                                    12
                                                          Figure 10




Turnover: Number of yearly switches / Total affiliates.
Source: National regulatory authorities

Also in Mexico, the regulator has gone one step further by improving the information available to those
members who want to switch. Research found that poor financial literacy leads to confusion over the choice
of AFORE, and members are often easy target to manipulation, in many cases resulting in poor individual
choices.14 Marketing controls were consequently introduced. When switching provider, individuals are shown
the returns of the old and the new provider. If switching to a fund with lower returns, a prominent (downwards)
red line is drawn between providers to make the point – though members are warned that past performance
is not necessarily a guide to future returns.

                          Figure 11: Switching Forms Mexican Pension Fund Administrators




Source: CONSAR


14
     See (Calderon, Dominquez and Schwartz 2008).

                                                                                                            13
The Eastern Europeans have taken the approach of removing marketing completely from their systems.
Switching is allowed between providers, but on the individual members’ own decision in Romania, while in
Poland advertisement and sales activities by agents was banned from 2012. Marketing has been effectively
removed from these systems, which has kept switching between providers to low single digit levels. Other
jurisdictions beyond those covered in this paper, have tackled the sales/ switching issue by removing or
controlling financial incentives paid to intermediaries.15 16

2.3      Switching between portfolios
In addition to choosing their pension fund provider, pension fund members in many Latin American countries
are also offered a choice of investment portfolio. These systems frequently operate on a ‘multi-funds’ or life
cycle model, with a default portfolio which becomes less risky when individuals approach the retirement age.
Alternatively, members can opt out from the default option and chose their portfolio or combination of
portfolios according to their individual investment strategy.

Pension providers in Europe still generally offer only one investment portfolio (Estonia – and indeed the other
Baltic states - being the exception). Aside from the ‘multi-funds’ restrictions, there are few limitations on
switching between portfolios (see details in Annex). Hong Kong SAR, China providers are free to choose
whether to offer their members a single or a number of portfolios. It is required by MPF legislation that at least
one of the constituent funds of an MPF scheme must be an “MPF Conservative Fund”. All MPF schemes,
however, offer more than one fund choice to scheme members. As of the end of November 2016, the number
of MPF constituent funds offered by the 36 MPF schemes ranged from 3 to 29. Scheme members may choose
to invest their contributions in any constituent funds under the MPF scheme in which they participate, and are
allowed to change the choice of constituent funds at least once a year. Most schemes allow more frequent
switching. The regulatory authority (MPFA) has no information on the fund level switching of scheme members
however. Anecdotally, providers say that on the whole switching activity is quite infrequent although there are
a small number of members who switch very frequently (weekly in some cases).

Marketing by financial advisors and intermediaries appears to be the main force driving changes in portfolios.
For example, in Chile, an online financial advisory became popular among pension fund contributors by
providing recommendations of how to time the market by switching between more and less risky portfolios.
Daily increases in switching can be seen to coincide with these recommendations.17 Since 2009, switching
between portfolios within the same provider represents the largest flow among pension funds, reaching a
stunning 20% of AUM in 2015. Unfortunately, the evidence also shows that 50% of members would have




15
   The International Organisation of Pension Supervisors has discussed the issues of marketing of DC funds in other
jurisdictions (see IOPS 2012). The UK is one example where payment of commissions on products was banned (upfront
commissions for long-term products being seen as nearly always giving an incentive for agents to switch and was
pervasive in both pension and insurance). Halan and Sane (2016) also discuss the mis-selling scandal in the Indian
pension system. There is also an on-going debate in the US around the Fiduciary Rule which touches on these issues.
For further discussion on consumer protection issues see (Paklina, forthcoming).
16
   Other pension systems (e.g. Sweden and India) have gone further and operate on a system of ‘blind accounts’ with
one central administrator aggregating fund choices so that asset managers have no incentive to advertise directly to
individuals. Such alternative industry structures, while interesting, as beyond the scope of this paper.
17
   See Da et al (2015).

                                                                                                                   14
obtained a higher return had they not changed fund and 79% would have been better off if they had remained
on the default path.18

Similar concerns have been identified in Cost Rica after the recent introduction of multiple portfolios in the
system. There is evidence that advertisement tools based on 12 months returns used by pension providers
(OPP) have been effective in influencing member investment choices. Consequently, the regulator is reviewing
the provisions on annual returns that must be included in statements and on which OPPs can advertise. Instead
of 12-month returns, returns over 36, 60 and 120 months will be published.19

The same pattern can be found in other countries, with switching following short-term investment
performance. For example, Costa Rica, Mexico and Estonia, switching among providers is more common during
years of poor performance. In the case of Chile, both type of transfers, across portfolios and across providers,
are larger when pension funds display low returns.

                           Table 1. Correlation between calendar-year returns and transfers

                                                  Across Fund
                                                   Providers            Across Portfolios
                       LAC
                         Chile                       -0.46                     -0.41
                         Colombia                    0.15                      0.04
                         Costa Rica                  -0.23
                         Mexico                      -0.41                     0.71
                         Peru                         0.18                     -0.10
                       EEC
                         Estonia                     -0.28                     -0.14
                         Romania                     -0.03


Mexico has an interesting approach to performance measurement based upon age. Performance measures are
communicated to affiliates in their statement of accounts (every 4 months) and are published on the CONSAR
webpage at the end of every month. The net return index (IRN), net of administrative fees charged by the
AFORE, of 7 years, 5 years, 3 years and 1 year for basic funds is shown. The IRN is a 6-month moving average
of end-to-end net returns (the latter computed over the point in time horizon). Individuals younger than 45 are
shown 72 month returns, older participants a shorter duration.

3.      Fund Outflows and Short-term Assets

For LAC countries and Estonia, short-term investments are positively correlated to transfers across pension
fund providers. While the evidence is consistent with fund managers using short-term assets to manage
redemption risks, there are at least two potential limitations to this interpretation. First, the share invested in
short-term assets varies mechanically in response to differences in returns across asset types. For high-
frequency data (e.g. day, week, and month), changes in portfolio weights might be more indicative of
differences in asset returns than of managerial strategies. To mitigate this concern, Table 2 reports the

18
   Superintendencia analysis. Calderon, Dominquez and Schwartz (2008) produced similar findings for the Mexico system
up to 2008.
19
   In Poland returns up to 40 years can be quoted. Romania is a more standard 2 years.

                                                                                                                  15
correlation between yearly flows and the end-of-year share invested in short-term assets. The second
limitation to the documented correlation are the potential effects from confounding factors that might
simultaneously affect flows and short-term holdings. To deal with this concern, sections 3.1 and 3.2 use a
parametric approach to estimate the effect from outflows on portfolio holdings.

                Table 2. Correlation between short-term assets and fund flows (2005-2015)

                                   Across Fund
                                    Providers           Across Portfolios*  Benefit Payouts
          LAC
             Chile                     0.53                    0.58                0.00
             Colombia                  0.63                   -0.36               -0.25
             Costa Rica                0.23                                       -0.81
             Mexico                    0.80                    0.45               -0.84
             Peru                      0.05                   -0.31                0.14
          EEC
             Estonia                   0.46                   -0.19                0.76
             Romania                  -0.07                                       -0.87
        Contemporaneous correlations between yearly fund flows and the share invested in short-term
        assets.
        *Excludes the year of introduction of multi-funds.

The correlation between flows from switching portfolios and short-term assets is mixed among the sample
countries. For instance, in Chile, short-term holdings are strongly related to transfers between portfolios.
Colombia and Peru on the other hand, display a negative relation between short-term holdings and flows across
portfolios. There are several potential explanations for the observed differences across countries. For example,
switches between portfolios is indeed most common in Chile. Moreover, flows across portfolios in Chile are
also clustered in time (Section 3.2) exerting significant pressure on fund managers to liquidate positions in
order to accommodate large transfers in short periods of time (e.g. within days). In such case, mangers are
more likely to hold cash or cash-like securities to meet redemption needs. Finally, some countries allow
managers to transfer securities across portfolios to avoid transaction costs altogether. However, whether
managers are able to transfer securities instead of cash depends on the structural differences across portfolios
and their individual limits on each asset class.

In summary, the evidence suggests that discouraging excessive switching, whether is between pension
providers or between portfolios, should allow fund managers to hold more long-term assets.

3.1     Switching between pension systems: The case of Colombia
This section studies the effects on the maturity structure of Colombian pension funds in response to outflows
from transfers across pension systems. The analysis is based on monthly information of fund flows provided by
the Colombian Association of Pension Fund Administrators (Asofondos) and portfolio transaction data from
the Securities and Exchange Market during 2006-2015.

Colombian workers can choose between a DC system based on individual accounts, and a DB scheme managed
by Colpensiones, a government-owned enterprise. Switching between systems is allowed up to one time every
5 years, except in the last 10 years before the retirement age (57 for women and 62 for men). When a worker
switches from the DC to the DB system, the balance of the retirement account is transferred by the pension

                                                                                                             16
fund provider to Colpensiones. Conversely, when a worker switches from the DB to the DC system, a pension
bond redeemable at retirement is issued under the worker’s name.20

In response to an aggressive marketing campaign by Colpensiones, the number of workers switching to the DB
system increased significantly since 2009. As a result, money flows from transfers across systems represent the
single largest source of outflows from DC pension funds (Figure 12). In 2015, while 171,526 workers switched
from DC to DB systems, only 35,151 moved in the opposite direction. In that year, pension fund managers
transferred U$3.4 billion to Colpensiones, which is 2.6 times the amount of switching among DC pension fund
providers, and 3.8 times the total amount of benefit payments during the year. According to estimates by
Asofondos and the Minister of Finance, more than 80% of members who switched pension systems would face
more unfavorable pension outcomes.

                                          Figure 12+13: Switching between DC and DB Systems

          25,000
                                              A. Net Number of Transfers to DB System

          20,000

          15,000

          10,000

           5,000

               0
                            Jul-07


                                               Jul-08


                                                                 Jul-09


                                                                                   Jul-10


                                                                                                     Jul-11


                                                                                                                       Jul-12


                                                                                                                                         Jul-13


                                                                                                                                                           Jul-14


                                                                                                                                                                             Jul-15
                   Jan-07


                                     Jan-08


                                                        Jan-09


                                                                          Jan-10


                                                                                            Jan-11


                                                                                                              Jan-12


                                                                                                                                Jan-13


                                                                                                                                                  Jan-14


                                                                                                                                                                    Jan-15
          -5,000

         -10,000

         -15,000




20
   In other words, cash only flows from the private to the public system when members switch. While no early
withdraws are allowed in either system, the expected retirement income for a worker might be higher or lower in one
system over the other depending on her individual case. For example, it depends among other factors, on the worker’s
lifetime profile of pension contributions and income range. Given the design and subsidies of each system, a worker
might face significantly different pension outcomes depending on her choice.

                                                                                                                                                                                      17
 Note: December 2010 U.S. dollars.
 Source: authors’ calculation based on data provided by Asofondos.

In response to the surge in transfers among systems, pension fund managers reduced their demand for
government bonds with longer maturity and in those that are less liquid. Table 3 presents the estimation of
monthly net trading activity by pension funds in domestic government bonds grouped by liquidity and maturity.
According to Table 3, transfers among pension systems are negatively correlated with: (i) flows to government
bonds in the medium and low liquidity group; and (ii) flows to government bonds with maturity above three
years. In other words, after an increase in monthly transfers to the DB system, pension funds managers were
less likely to buy bonds with longer maturity and those that are less liquid.

             Table 3: Pension funds excess demand of government bonds by maturity and liquidity.

Vector autoregressive model (VAR) include controls for country risk perception (10-year Colombian credit
default swaps) and stock market volatility. T-statistics in parenthesis. *, **, *** denote significance at 10, 5 and
1 percent, respectively.
                                                      Liquidity (by turnover)                    Maturity (years)
 Dependent variable: Excess demand =
 (buys - sells) / (buys + sells)            High           Medium               Low      <1       >=1 & < 3           >= 3

 Lag of system transfers / total assets21    -4.51        -109.43***      -64.91***    -30.48       26.54           -28.91***
                                            [-0.49]         [-4.41]         [-3.03]    [-0.95]      [1.23]            [-4.71]

 Lag of asset returns                       7.19*            0.67           8.427      -15.67      -22.97**          4.80*
                                            [1.77]          [0.06]         [0.893]     [-1.11]      [-2.40]          [1.78]

 Constant                                    -0.79         0.62***           -0.09     0.46***       -0.18          0.09***
                                            [-1.56]         [2.62]          [-0.82]     [2.62]      [-1.51]          [2.74]

 Observations                                107             107                107     107          107              107
 R-squared                                   0.07            0.20               0.17    0.12         0.07             0.20

Source: authors’ calculation based on data provided by Asofondos and the Securities and Exchange Market data.



21
  We report results with one-month lag of system transfers. This model provided the best fit under three common
information criteria: Akaike, Schwarz-Bayes, and Hanna-Quinn.

                                                                                                                             18
The negative selling pressure on government bonds is persistent. Model estimates indicate that after a one-
time one standard deviation increase in net transfers to the DB system, pension funds reduce their holding of
low-liquid and long-term bonds over the next six months, apparently in anticipation of new transfers.

3.2     Switching between portfolios: The case of Chile
Since 2002, pension fund providers were mandated to offer five types of funds to their members. These funds
(A through E) cater to different risk preferences, with fund A having the largest share of equity investment, and
fund E composed almost entirely by domestic fixed income securities.22 Funds B, C, and D are defaults funds
and participants are automatically shifted to less risky funds according to their age. Funds A and E, on the
contrary, are not part of the default option, and investors have to explicitly state when and how much of their
assets they want to transfer into or out of these funds.

After five years of existence and given its voluntary nature, Fund E remained small, and by December 2007 it
represented only 1.4% of Chilean pension assets. During the last decade, however, the fund has displayed
significant growth, and it currently accounts for more than 20% of total pension assets. In addition to the recent
growing trend, Fund E has also been characterized for its large and volatile flows. According to Figure 14, these
flows are clustered in time, often exceeding 15% of the value of the fund in a single month. According to local
authorities and scholarly research on the topic, fund members often switch from pension portfolios in an
attempt to time the market, typically following the recommendations of popular financial advisory agencies.23




22
  Fund E can have a maximum of 5% of its assets invested in equity instruments.
23
  After 2010 financial advisory agencies started to provide recommendations to individual investors to time the market
with their pension funds. These agencies would send investors their switching recommendation by email or by private
website login for a per year fee. Through an aggressive marketing campaign on social media, this type of advisor has
gained popularity among Chilean pension investors and the spikes in the number of account switches (and transfer value)
coincide with the advice provided. That said, there have also been other elements that prompted changes between
providers and funds (pension issues having been more in the news and discussed broadly by the general population). See
Da et al. (2014) for a comprehensive discussion on how signals and recommendations sent by these types of advisors
served as a coordination devise among pension savers. Da et al. (2014) analyzed the case of “Felices y Forrados” (FyF,
translated as “Happy and Loaded”).


                                                                                                                    19
                        Figure 14: Evolution of Fund E’s Net Amounts Transferred (% of AUM)
                     0.35
                      0.3
                     0.25
                      0.2
                     0.15
                      0.1
                     0.05
                        0
                             Oct-08

                                      Apr-09

                                               Oct-09

                                                        Apr-10

                                                                 Oct-10

                                                                          Apr-11

                                                                                   Oct-11

                                                                                            Apr-12

                                                                                                     Oct-12

                                                                                                              Apr-13

                                                                                                                       Oct-13

                                                                                                                                Apr-14

                                                                                                                                         Oct-14

                                                                                                                                                  Apr-15

                                                                                                                                                           Oct-15

                                                                                                                                                                    Apr-16
                     -0.05
                      -0.1
                     -0.15
                      -0.2


To study whether the stress caused by members switching funds affected investment strategies, this section
uses monthly information of flows and portfolio holdings of Fund E provided by the Chilean Pension Supervisory
Agency during 2008-2016. More specifically, the following asset classes were analyzed: Indexed Treasury
Bonds24, Nominal Treasury Bonds, Indexed Central Bank Bonds, Time Deposits, Bank Bonds and Corporate
Bonds. Taken as a whole, these investments represent 80% of Fund E’s portfolio. To follow the empirical
strategy from the previous section, assets were classified according to their duration25 and liquidity.26

The evidence suggests that larger flows into and out of Fund E are related with more investments in low
duration and high liquidity instruments. In particular, after 2011, Fund E investments have become more
concentrated in assets with duration below 1 year and in securities with high trading volume. These results,
which are consistent with the Colombian evidence, suggest that fund managers increase investments in short
term instruments in order to meet liquidity needs.




24
   Indexation to inflation is achieved by using Unidades de Fomento (UF), which is an account unit that is monthly
adjusted to reflect changes in the consumer price index. As of December 2016, a UF was roughly equivalent to 40 US
dollars.
25
   Less than one year, between 1 and 5 years, and more than five years.
26
   Liquidity is measured by transaction volume of each asset.

                                                                                                                                                                             20
                             Figure 15: Fund E investments by maturity and liquidity (turnover)




                                 Table 4: Fund E investments by maturity and liquidity.

Vector autoregressive model (VAR) include controls for country risk perception (10-year Chilean credit default
swaps) and stock market volatility. T-statistics in parenthesis. *, **, *** denote significance at 10, 5 and 1
percent, respectively.
                                                           Liquidity (by turnover)                    Maturity (years)
 Dependent variable: Change in Fund E holdings
 by asset type                                        High       Medium          Low         <1         >=1 & < 5         >= 5

 Lag of Fund E transfers / Total Fund E assets       0.090***      -0.009     -0.057***    0.377***     -0.108***    -0.269***
                                                      [2.776]     [-0.394]     [-2.931]    [12.932]      [-3.982]     [-8.575]

 Lag of market returns                                0.090        -0.078        0.010     -0.082**       0.021           0.080
                                                     [0.201]      [-0.810]      [1.072]    [-2.085]      [0.494]         [1.509]

 Constant                                             0.009        -0.004        -0.006     -0.003        -0.002          0.005
                                                     [1.300]      [-0.745]      [-1.453]   [-0.468]      [-0.343]        [0.729]

 Observations                                          88           88            88         88            88              88
 R-squared                                            0.107        0.020         0.117      0.687         0.168          0.496

Source: authors’ calculation based on data provided by the Chilean Pension Supervisory Agency.




                                                                                                                            21
4.       Conclusions
The paper documents a significant increase in long-term asset allocation over time, but that this is hampered
by pension fund managers having to manage redemption risk. Greater diversification of DC pension funds in
the eight LAC and CEE countries can be seen over time – whether into a broader range of domestic assets, or
overseas investments. However, the paper shows that excessive switching between fund providers and
portfolios can curtail the ability of pension fund to invest long-term. The analysis of the Colombian and Chilean
data suggest that funds hold both more liquid and shorter-term assets in order to cope with switching demands
– in Chile’s case between private pension providers and for Colombia between the public and private system.
Both factors could impede exposure to longer-term, less liquid investments (such as infrastructure related
investments) which policy makers are increasingly looking to pension funds to finance – or indeed mean that
these investments will have to be structured with these liquidity needs in mind.

Holdings of short-term or liquid assets may be required where switching levels are high, but in other cases
could be more ‘precautionary’. In some cases, (e.g. Chile, Mexico), the holding of large amounts of short-term
or liquid assets in the portfolios seems necessary due to the sometimes high levels of switching, particularly
between funds but also between providers. In other case (e.g. Romania) the large holdings of these types of
assets maybe more precautionary as the actual outflows – including those driven by switching – are relatively
limited. Whether some form of ‘liquidity reserve’ could be established to prevent such precautionary holdings
is an idea which could be discussed, with lessons possibly to be drawn from other financial sectors and products
(e.g. repos, UK ‘buy-out’ market).27

Sizeable outflows from switching produce several negative outcomes. For individuals changing provider,
portfolio, or even pension system, as is the case of Colombia (fortunately uniquely for now), the evidence
suggests that most obtain lower returns and reduce their potential retirement income. Beyond the negative
effects on their own pension accounts, members who switch often also impose a negative externality to other
fund members. Since fund managers have to rebalance their portfolio to accommodate larger outflows by
increasing their holdings in short-term assets and in those that are more liquid, pension funds end up with
lower than expected returns. Furthermore, given the size of these funds relative to their domestic markets,
flow management might lessen the ability of pension funds to provide long-term finance. Whether the benefits
of competition, marketing, and lenient switching policies outweigh the costs of a potentially weaker long-term
performance is outside the scope of this paper and needs to be investigated further. Alternative industry
structures (such as those using blind accounts) again need further consideration.

Changes in switching regulation (making such changes more administratively difficult) and marketing controls
and incentives can reduce this type of switching considerably. This in turn allows pension funds to hold a
greater percentage of longer-term while at the same time allowing for flexibility on the member’s choice.



27
  Repos are ‘sale and repurchase agreements’ whereby one party agrees to sell a security at an agreed price to another
party at time A and agrees to repurchase the same security also at an already pre-agreed (higher) price at later time B
(the difference in the two prices being known as the ‘repo rate’ which can be interpreted as the interest rate over the
period). In some pension fund insurance ‘buy-outs,’ the costs are reduced by what are called ‘in-specie’ transfers
whereby effectively the pension fund and insurance company swap title for the assets that will remain in force backing
the annuity product – so that the only assets actually sold are those that will not feature in the on-going portfolio (see
Lane Clark Peacock 2015).

                                                                                                                        22
Based on this research, recommendations for regulators are to:

   1. Use administrative controls to prevent fraudulent switching between pension providers;
   2. Provide clear performance / costs comparisons to inform members’ choice of provider/ fund and
      encourage informed decision making, beneficial to members and to the system;
   3. Supervise and control advertising and marketing (including reporting of performance periods) carefully
      to avoid switches based on misleading advice;
   4. Control financial incentives for sales agents so that switching advise in given in members’ interest and
      not for commercial gain;
   5. Concentrate issuance in government securities to create more liquid instruments;
   6. Conduct further research on the concept of a central liquidity pool to manage unexpected outflows.




                                                                                                           23
References

Acharya, S, and Pedraza, A. (2015), ‘Asset price effects of peer benchmarking: Evidence from a natural experiment’,
World Bank Working Paper WPS 7239

Alonso, J., Arellano, A., and Tuesta, D., (2015), ‘Factors that Impact on Pension Fund Investments in Infrastructure under
the Current Global Financial Regulation’, Pension Research Council, Wharton University CP2015-01

APRA, (2014), ‘2013 Annual Superannuation Bulletin’, http://www.apra.gov.au/super/publications/pages/annual-
superannuation-publication.aspx

Ashcroft, J., Inglis, E., and Price, W., J., (2016) ‘Outcomes and Risk Based Supervision in Pensions: Methodology with a
Case Study for Costa Rica’, World Bank

Berstein, S., Cataneda, P., Fajnzylber, E., Reyes, G., (2009), ‘Chile 2008: A Second-Generation Pension Reform’

Blake, D., Cairns, A., Dowd, K., (2008), ‘Turning Pension Plans into Pension Planes: What Investment Strategy Designers
of Defined Contribution Pension Plans Can Learn from Commercial Aircraft Designers’

Calderon- Colin, R., Dominquez, E., Schwartz, M., (2008), ‘Consumer Confusion: The Choice of AFORE in Mexico’

Corbo, V. and Schmidt-Hebel, K. (2003), ‘Efectos Macroeconómicos de la Reforma de Pensions en Chile’

Da, Zhi, Larrain, B, Sialm, C, and Tessada, J., (2015), ‘Price pressure from coordinated noise trading: Evidence from
pension fund reallocations’, Working paper

de la Torre, A., Ize, A., and Schmukler, S., (2011). ‘Financial Development in Latin America and the Caribbean: The Road
Ahead,’ World Bank

Halan, M., and Sane, R., S., (2016), ‘Misled and Mis-sold: Financial Misbehaviour in Retail Banks’ NSE, IFMR Finance
Foundation

IOPS, (2012), ‘Supervision of Pension Intermediaries’, IOPS Working Papers on Effective Supervision No.17

ISSA Regulation Database Country Case Studies
www.issa.int

Lane Clark Peacock, (2015), ‘Buy-ins, Buy-outs and Longevity Swaps’, 2015 Pension Derisking Report

Musalem, A., R., Pasquini, R., (2012), ‘Private Pension Systems Cross-Country Investment Performance’, World Bank SPL
discussion paper 1214

OECD, (2015), Annual Survey of Pension Fund Regulation
www.oecd.org

OECD, (2015), ‘Pensions at a Glance’

Opazo, L., Raddatz, C., and Schmukler, S., (2015), ‘Institutional Investors and Long-term Investment: Evidence from Chile,’
World Bank Economic Review, 29:3, 479-522.

Paklina N., (forthcoming), ‘The role of supervision related to consumer protection in private pension systems,’ IOPS
Working Papers on Effective Pension Supervision




                                                                                                                           24
Raddatz, C. and Schmukler, S., (2013), ‘Deconstructing Herding: Evidence from Pension Fund Investment Behavior,’
Journal of Financial Services Research, 43:1, 99-126

Randle, A., Rudolph, H., (2014), ‘Pension Risk and Risk-based Supervision in Defined Contribution Pension Funds’, World
Bank Working Paper WPS 6813
Stanko, D., (2015), ‘The Concept of Retirement Income: Supervisory Challenges’, IOPS Working Paper No.25
Stanko, D., (2003), ‘Polish Pension Funds - Does The System Work? Cost, Efficiency and Performance Measurement
Issues’, The Pensions Institute, Cass Business School, London, Discussion Paper PI-0302, (January), page 25,
Stewart, F., (2014), ‘Proving Incentives for Long-Term Investment by Pension Funds
The Use of Outcome-based Benchmarks’, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6885

Stewart, F., Despalins, R., Remizova, I., (forthcoming), ‘Pension Funds, Capital Market and the Power of Diversification’

Vittas, D., (1996), ‘Pension Funds and Capital Markets,’ FSD Note No.71, February, World Bank

Voronkova S., Bohl M.T., (2005), ‘Institutional Traders’ Behavior in an Emerging Stock Market: Empirical Evidence on
Polish Pension Fund Investors’, Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, Vol. 32(7-8): 1537-1560.

World Bank, (2015), ‘Global Financial Development Report (GFDR)’




                                                                                                                            25
Annex 1: Regulatory Details

                     Early withdrawal regulations       Restrictions on Switching      Portfolio Choice                Switching Restrictions
                                                        between Pension Fund
                                                        Providers

 Chile               Funds from mandatory               New members must               Each AFP must offer four
                                                                                                                       Members may choose up to two funds to allocate their savings. Members aged
                     contributions or agreed            remain in the default AFP      pension funds (known as
                     deposits cannot be                 for 2 years – after which      funds B, C, D and E) and        56 (men) or 51 (women) or older are not permitted to choose a type A fund, as
                     withdrawn before retirement.       they can switch freely. The    may optionally offer one        with pensioners receiving a programmed withdrawal. The latter are also not
                     Voluntary contributions can        default AFP is determined      additional fund (known as
                                                                                                                       permitted to choose a type B fund.
                     be withdrawn before                by an auction process          fund A). AFPs usually offer
                     retirement but members             where the winner is the        all five types of funds.
                     have to pay additional taxes if    AFP that charges the           Different investment            If members do not choose a fund, the AFP must allocate their savings to a
                     they do so.                        lowest management fee.         restrictions apply to each
                                                                                                                       default rule, which is defined by: the balance of male and female members up
                                                        Incentives for cross-selling   fund and each fund is
                                                        products banned.               invested in portfolios with     to age 35 must be allocated to a Type B fund, the balance of male members
                                                                                       different risk levels. Fund A   between ages 36 and 55 and female members between ages 36 and 50 must be
                                                                                       is the riskiest fund with a
                                                                                                                       allocated to a Type C fund and the balance of male members aged 55 or more
                                                                                       maximum of 80% of the
                                                                                       fund invested in stocks,        and female members aged 50 or more must be allocated to a Type D fund.
                                                                                       and fund E is the safest
                                                                                       fund with up to 5% of it        Currently about 60% of affiliates are at the default investment strategy.
                                                                                       invested in stocks.

 Colombia            Members aged 62 (men) and          Members can transfer the       Each Pension Fund
                     aged 57 (women) who have           accumulated capital in         Administrator (AFP) may
                     contributed for less than          their individual accounts to   establish and manage
                     1.150 weeks, and whose             another AFP every six          several individual
                     individual account balance is      months. Switching back         capitalization funds.
                     not enough to finance a            into the public pension
                     monthly benefit of at least        system allowed every 5
                     the minimum monthly                years, not in the last 10
                     national salary, are entitled to   years before retirement
                     a refund of their individual
                     account balance
 Costa Rica          Withdrawal of funds before         Any time after 1 year          Pension Operators (OPs)
                     retirement is only permitted                                      may establish and manage
                     for those members who do                                          one mandatory pension




                                                                                                                                                                                          26
         not obtain a pension from                                        fund and several voluntary
         any scheme                                                       pension funds.

Mexico   IMSS affiliates are entitled to   Workers can choose any                                       Any enrolee may opt to invest his/her resources in a more conservative fund
                                                                          The basic SIEFORES are
         make partial withdrawals          AFORE. Enrolees may                                          than the default option.
         from the balance in their         switch freely their AFORE      classified by the following
         accounts in two cases:            once a year, given that        employee's age brackets:
         unemployment or marriage.         they have been members
         Affiliates who on their first     of their current AFORE for
         marriage have compiled 150        at least one year.             - SB1: for 60 years-old or
         weeks of contributions are                                       older;
         entitled to a partial             The worker can change
                                                                          - SB2: between 46 and 59
         withdrawal for an amount          AFORE before one year if:
         equivalent to 30 days of          the new AFORE has a            years-old;
         current minimum wage in           higher net return in a given   - SB3: between 37 and 45
         Mexico City. The amount           time, plus an additional
                                                                          years-old;
         must be subsequently repaid.      criteria shown below i. If
         Unemployed affiliates may         the current AFORE (i.e., the   - SB4: between 27 and 36
         partial withdraw funds once       one that has already the       years-old, and
         every 5 years within limits       employee´s savings) has
                                                                          - SB5: between 26 and or
         depending on length of            obtained a consistently
         contributions.                    good performance, then         less years-old.
                                           the worker may not switch
                                           to a different AFORE. ii. If
                                                                          Each basic SIEFORE has
                                           the AFORE that the worker
                                           may wish to switch has         specific investment regime
                                           obtained a consistently bad    that depends on the age
                                           performance, then the
                                                                          and risk profile of the
                                           worker may not be
                                           transferred to AFORE           worker. For instance, the
                                           he/she wishes. - the           SB5 (young workers) has
                                           current AFORE changes its
                                                                          the most aggressive
                                           investment strategy;- the
                                           current AFORE increases its    investment regime and SB1
                                           administrative fees; - the     (workers near to
                                           current AFORE merges with
                                                                          retirement) has the most
                                           another AFORE
                                                                          conservative one. As
                                           Pension advisors must be       enrolees are getting older,
                                           registered at CONSAR and
                                                                          their pension assets are
                                           pass a technical knowledge
                                                                          invested in a more

                                                                                                                                                                        27
                       test. AFORES can use any
                                                      conservative investment
                       information published on
                       CONSAR website to              regime (with lower
                       advertise their fund. If the   exposure to equity and a
                       affiliates wish to move
                                                      greater proportion of fixed-
                       before 1 year, the IRN (net
                       performance) must be           income instruments) to
                       shown along with a             reduce the volatility of
                       comparison between the
                                                      their returns. Thus, a young
                       existing and new fund. No
                       tie in sales relating to the   enrolee will gradually move
                       financial or commercial        from Basic Siefore 5 (SB5)
                       group may be provided to
                                                      to SB4, SB3, SB2 and finally
                       the switching affiliate.
                                                      SB1.

                                                      The investment regime of
                                                      the basic SIEFORES is
                                                      characterized by its
                                                      differentiated quantitative
                                                      limits (depending on the
                                                      basic SIEFORE) and
                                                      qualitative requirements.

Peru   Not permitted   Any time after 1 month         Each Pension Fund              Type 1 fund: the choice of this fund is mandatory for members aged 60 or more
                                                      Administrator (AFP) must       and for those who opted for old-age benefits paid under programmed or
                                                      establish two pension          temporary withdrawal, unless they opt out of the fund. The decision to opt out
                                                      funds (Types 1 and 2) and      must be made in writing and the member must choose between a Type 2 and
                                                      may optionally establish       Type 3 fund.
                                                      one additional fund (Type
                                                      3) to which mandatory          Employees and self-employed persons may opt for any of the funds.
                                                      contributions are credited.

                                                      Type 1 fund (Capital
                                                      preservation fund): This
                                                      fund must be established
                                                      by AFPs to pursue steady
                                                      growth with low volatility.

                                                      Type 2 fund (Mixed fund):
                                                      This fund must be



                                                                                                                                                     28
                                                                   established by AFPs to
                                                                   pursue moderate growth
                                                                   with medium volatility.

                                                                   Type 3 fund (Growth fund):
                                                                   This fund may be
                                                                   established by AFPs to
                                                                   pursue high growth with
                                                                   high volatility.

Estonia             Not permitted   Members may change units       PMCs may establish and
                                    of mandatory pension           manage several mandatory
                                    funds three times a year       pension funds. However,
                                    and may start to contribute    every company must offer
                                    to new pension fund with       at least one conservative
                                    no time restrictions. The      fund, the assets of which
                                    redemption of units in the     are only invested in fixed
                                    former pension fund and        income instruments (bonds
                                    purchase of units in the       and deposits). PMCs
                                    new pension fund takes         usually offer three or four
                                    place on 1 January, May,       funds that invest 0 per cent
                                    September                      (conservative fund), 25 per
                                                                   cent, 50 per cent and up to
                                                                   75 per cent, respectively,
                                                                   of total assets in equities.

Poland (pre 2014)   Not permitted   Switching between pension      No portfolio choice
                                    funds is allowed.
                                    If the fund member joins
                                    another fund, it is obliged
                                    to notify the previous fund
                                    in written form.
                                    Transfer payments
                                    between pension funds are
                                    executed 4 times a year (on
                                    the last working day of
                                    February, May, August, and
                                    November).

                                    Acquisition activity for the
                                    pension fund is prohibited.



                                                                                                  29
                          Acquisition activity is
                          defined as an activity
                          aimed at inducing a person
                          to join to the open pension
                          fund or remain a member
                          of the fund, particular by
                          offering additional
                          pecuniary benefits to be
                          gained for reasons of
                          membership in the pension
                          fund or by using superiority
                          resulting from employment
                          or another legal
                          relationship.
                          Intermediaries, brokers
                          cannot perform any
                          activities for the acquisition
                          of pension funds.

Romania   Not permitted   Members can switch the           No portfolios choice
                          pension fund only on their
                          own initiative (is not
                          allowed for marketing
                          agents to interfere with the
                          process). The marketing
                          activity of pension funds is
                          regulated, the private
                          pension broker may carry
                          out the marketing activity
                          if it meets the
                          requirements and is
                          authorised by the Authority
                          and registered in the
                          Registry. The natural
                          person marketing agents
                          shall carry out the
                          marketing activity of
                          pension fund only for one
                          manager or for one legal
                          person marketing agent,
                          where appropriate. It is


                                                                                  30
                                                        prohibited that the natural
                                                        and legal person marketing
                                                        agents to interfere with the
                                                        switching process.

Hong Kong SAR, China   Not allowed (with usual          Employer chooses the           A mandatory provident       The MPFA has issued the Conduct Guidelines to provide guidance in respect of
                       exceptions of early              provider in MPF system. On     fund scheme may consist     the minimum standards of conduct expected of the registered intermediaries.
                       retirement, permanent            changing jobs, the             of a single constituent     The MPFA may make disciplinary order against a regulated person (i.e. existing
                       emigration, small and inactive   employee can transfer                                      or former registered intermediaries) if the regulated person has failed to comply
                                                                                       fund, or of two or more
                       balances                         accrued benefits into a                                    with a conduct requirement.
                                                        personal account or into       constituent funds. Each
                                                        the new employer’s             constituent fund must be
                                                        scheme or retain them in       approved by the
                                                        the previous employer’s        Mandatory Provident Fund
                                                        scheme. From 2012              Schemes Authority (MPFA).
                                                        onwards, employees have        If the scheme comprises
                                                        been able to transfer their
                                                                                       two or more constituent
                                                        own contributions to a
                                                        scheme of their choice 1x      funds, each of the funds
                                                        year. Personal accounts        must have different
                                                        can be switching between       investment policies among
                                                        providers without              which the members of the
                                                        restriction.                   scheme may choose to
                                                                                       invest their accumulated
                                                                                       capital.




                                                                                                                                                                                     31
Annex 2: Requested Country Information

Portfolio Information - country representatives please provide
                                                                                        2005           2006          2007           2008           2009          2010            2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
Total AUM (local currency amount)
                    1
Short-term assets
Medium-term assets (between 2 and 5 years maturity)
Annual contribution inflow
Annual returns (local currency amount)
Annual amount switching between pension fund / portfolio
Amount of switching between pension fund providers
                                 2
Amount of benefit payments (PW old age, survivor and disability)
Transfers for annuity purchases
                                 3
Amount of early withdrawals
Duration of Pension Funds (in years)

Please provide amounts in local currency figures
1 short-term assets = local government treasuries securities <1 year maturity / local bank term deposits/ foreign treasury securities < 1 year maturity/ foreign term deposits
2 annual benefit payments = transfers to PW/ for annuity purchases/ disability and survivor related payments
3 early withdrawals= withdrawals before retirement age allowed by regualtions by age/ if minimum balance achieved /for housing purchase etc.




                                                                                                                                                                                                      32
