                                                  WPS8078


Policy Research Working Paper                    8078




 Deterring Kickbacks and Encouraging Entry
       in Public Procurement Markets
  Evidence from Firm Surveys in 88 Developing Countries

                              Stephen Knack
                             Nataliya Biletska
                             Kanishka Kacker




Development Research Group
Macroeconomics and Growth Team
May 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8078


  Abstract
 There is relatively little systematic evidence on the links                        external auditing systems. These findings—particularly on
 between procurement systems and outcomes such as compe-                            kickbacks—are robust to the inclusion of many controls
 tition and corruption levels. This paper adds to the evidence                      and to a range of sensitivity tests. The study finds evidence
 base, using data on almost 34,000 firms from the World                             that better procurement systems matter more for smaller
 Bank’s Enterprise Surveys, in 88 countries that also have                          firms’ participation in procurement markets and payment
 procurement systems data from Public Expenditure and                               of kickbacks to obtain contracts, consistent with the view
 Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessments. The analysis                          that information and transactions costs that are incurred in
 finds that in countries with more transparent procurement                          learning about bidding opportunities and fulfilling bidding
 systems, where exceptions to open competition in tendering                         requirements are more onerous for smaller firms. Falsifi-
 must be explicitly justified, firms are more likely to partici-                    cation tests show that other, non-procurement indicators
 pate in public procurement markets. Moreover, firms report                         from the PEFA assessments are not associated with procure-
 paying fewer and smaller kickbacks to officials in countries                       ment outcomes, and that the PEFA procurement indicators
 with more transparent procurement systems, effective and                           are not strongly associated with other “governance”-related
 independent complaint mechanisms, and more effective                               outcomes in firm surveys that are unrelated to procurement.




  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Growth Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors
  may be contacted at sknack@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
       Deterring Kickbacks and Encouraging Entry in Public Procurement Markets:
                Evidence from Firm Surveys in 88 Developing Countries




                   Stephen Knack*, Nataliya Biletska and Kanishka Kacker
                                          The World Bank




JEL: O10, H50
Keywords: procurement, governance, corruption, bribery, kickbacks

*Corresponding author, The World Bank, 1818 H St. NW, Washington DC 20433 USA
(sknack@worldbank.org). We are grateful to Luis Serven and Joel Turkewitz for helpful
comments, but all errors remain the responsibility of the authors. The conclusions of this paper
are not intended to represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the
countries they represent.
1. Introduction
           Public procurement of services, works and supplies is estimated to account for 15-20% of GDP
in developing countries, and up to 50% or more of total government expenditure (World Bank, 2015).
Efficient and effective procurement is vital to core government functions, including public service
delivery and provision of infrastructure. Weaknesses in procurement systems can lead to large-scale
waste of public funds, reduced quality of services, corruption, and loss of trust in government.
           Where procurement processes are vulnerable to fraud and other forms of corruption, public
expenditure allocation may be distorted, in favor of highly-differentiated products where corruption is
more difficult to detect, due to the absence of comparable reference prices (Mauro, 1998; Evenett and
Hoekman, 2005a). If tendering processes are rigged, “competition cannot play its role of driving the
prices down and the quality up” (World Bank, 2016).
           Maximizing “value for money” and minimizing corruption in procurement are thought to be
facilitated in general by competitive tendering procedures that limit discretion on the part of
procurement officials (Ware et al., 2007: 297). More transparent systems that make procurement
information widely accessible, and complaints mechanisms and auditing procedures that establish
accountability for procurement decisions, are believed to encourage participation by more firms and
deter “kickbacks” and other forms of fraud and corruption (Ware et al., 2007: 296-297).
           However, there is relatively little systematic evidence on the links between procurement
systems and outcomes. “The paucity of quantitative, cross-country analyses of national procurement
practices is striking” (Evenett and Hoekman (2005b: 11). This paper adds to the evidence base, using
data on almost 34,000 firms from the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys, in 88 countries that also have
data on procurement systems from PEFA (Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability)
assessments.1 We find that in countries with more transparent procurement systems, where exceptions
to open competition in tendering must be explicitly justified, firms are more likely to participate in
public procurement markets. Moreover, firms report paying fewer and smaller kickbacks to officials in
countries with more transparent procurement systems, with effective and independent complaints




1
    Descriptions of these data sources can be found at http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/data and https://pefa.org/.

                                                                    2
mechanisms, and with more effective external auditing systems. These findings – particularly on
kickbacks – are robust to the inclusion of numerous controls and to a range of sensitivity tests.
       Another procurement indicator, on the appropriateness of the legal and regulatory framework,
is not associated with firms’ kickbacks or participation in procurement markets. That measure is
primarily a de jure indicator of official rules regarding transparency, competition, etc., in contrast to
the other more de facto indicators of actual systems and practices.
       We expect better procurement systems to matter more for smaller firms’ participation in
procurement markets and payment of kickbacks to obtain contracts. The information and transactions
costs incurred in learning about bidding opportunities and fulfilling bidding requirements (including
paying fees and deposits) should be more onerous for smaller firms. Larger firms are more likely to
have the necessary expertise and connections to meet bidding requirements while avoiding the need to
pay bribes. Dividing the sample into three groups of small, medium-sized, and large firms, these
expectations find support in the data.
       Although we cannot fully rule out endogeneity bias in our estimated relationships between
procurement systems and outcomes, there are several arguments for a causal interpretation. First, a
causal argument from procurement systems to outcomes is consistent with the heterogeneous effects
by firm size. Arguments for reverse causation, or for simultaneity bias, cannot easily predict stronger
relationships for smaller firms. Second, any reverse causality is likely to bias key coefficient estimates
downward (in absolute value) rather than upward. Poor outcomes in the form of corruption scandals or
lack of competition are more likely than favorable outcomes to motivate reforms in procurement
practices, particularly where pressure from donors is involved. This downward bias should apply
particularly for our de jure indicator (legal and regulatory framework for procurement), which is the
only one that is never significant in our tests. Third, we report a series of falsification tests showing
that other, non-procurement indicators from the PEFA assessments are not associated with
procurement outcomes, and that the PEFA procurement indicators are not strongly associated with
other “governance”-related outcomes in the firm surveys unrelated to procurement. Results from these
tests do not support a view that our main findings merely reflect simultaneity bias, whereby
procurement systems and outcomes indicators are both correlated with some broader, omitted aspects
of “good governance.”
       Section 2 below summarizes related literature on participation and corruption in procurement
markets. It also describes the indicators on procurement systems and outcomes, and briefly
                                                         3
summarizes the research literature that analyzes either the PEFA indicators or the Enterprise Survey
question on kickbacks in procurement. Section 3 explains the main hypotheses and rationale for
various control variables. Sections 4-7 report empirical results, including for tests that disaggregate by
firm size, and from a series of robustness tests. Section 8 builds the case for a causal interpretation of
the main findings, while section 9 concludes.


2. Related Literature and Data Sources
        To ensure value for money, procurement systems are designed to generate competition among
suppliers for contracts. Hoekman (1998: 255) cites evidence from several sources that noncompetitive
procedures can increase costs by 30% or more, and asserts that “in most situations competition is the
best rule of thumb” in procurement.
        A larger number of bidders on a contract does not necessarily reflect stronger competition,
depending on the particular auction mechanisms used, and on whether firms are colluding. In general,
however, “the presence of numerous bidders is at least one indication of active competition for
contracts” (Kenny and Crisman, 2016: 3). Costs generally fall with larger numbers of bidders,
although the number of bidders needed to minimize costs (and the actual number of bidders on a
typical contract) appears to vary by sector (Estache and Iimi, 2008). Using data on donor-financed
road projects in developing countries, Estache and Iimi (2008) estimate that the average cost per
kilometer of road construction is $700,000 USD when there are only two bidders but falls below
$500,000 when there are six or more bidders for each contract. Rigid bidding systems that eliminate
buyer discretion and mandate selection to the lowest-cost bidder reduce costs, but often at the expense
of lower-quality works, goods or services (e.g. Cameron, 2000; Celentani and Ganuza, 2002;
Decarolis, 2014).
        Two studies exploit value thresholds to test the impact of more widespread advertising of
contract tenders on bidding, using regression discontinuity designs. Using a database of World Bank
financed contracts, Kenny and Crisman (2016) show that better advertising of contract tenders2
increases the number of bidders. Coviello and Mariniello (2014) analyze Italian procurement auctions,
where values above a certain threshold must be publicized in the Regional Office Gazette and two



2
 Contracts above a certain threshold in value must be published in UN Development Business online, with bidding
documents available in English, French or Spanish.
                                                               4
provincial newspapers. They find the publicity requirement reduced procurement costs (by 7%), and
that an increase in the number of bidders (by 9.3%) was the channel through which publicity cut costs.
There were no apparent effects on quality or on delays in executing contracts. A third study (Ohashi,
2009) exploits the introduction of a transparency requirement for large contracts in a Japanese
prefecture, and shows from a difference-in-differences analysis that bidding rates increased while costs
declined (by 8%). A fourth study, by Lewis-Faupel et al. (2016), analyzes data from the gradual
adoption of e-procurement at the state or provincial level in India and Indonesia. They concluded from
their difference-in-differences tests that e-procurement did not reduce prices paid by government, but
improved road quality in India and reduced delays in Indonesia. The positive findings of these four
studies suggest that other transparency-related rules may potentially improve procurement outcomes.
         Greater competition not only tends to lower costs, but also prevents collusion among suppliers
(Estache and Iimi, 2008). A larger number of bidders does not necessarily deter (or encourage)
another type of corruption in procurement: “kickbacks” from firms to buyers.3 If open competition is
the rule and departures from it must be justified, purchasers likely have less discretion in awarding a
contract to the firm offering the largest bribe instead of to a firm offering a lower price or higher
quality. On the other hand, where renegotiation of contracts is common, firms may underbid, pay the
bribe, and obtain more generous terms that compensate it for the bribe payment.
         At higher decision-making levels in government, opportunities for corruption can distort the
composition of public expenditure toward works or services where bribery is less easily detected (e.g.,
Mauro, 1998; Keefer and Knack, 2007; Hessami, 2014). Standardized items that are frequently
purchased (e.g. textbooks) are more likely to have comparable reference prices than highly-
differentiated works or services (e.g. aircraft or construction projects), making it easier in the latter
case to inflate prices to cover the cost of kickbacks (e.g., Evenett and Hoekman, 2005a: 178-179).
         Bandiera et al. (2009) document large variations in prices for generic goods paid by public
bodies in Italy. By exploiting a policy change in the procurement system (namely, the establishment of
a centralized procurement agency from which public bodies have the option of ordering generic
goods), they estimate that most of the excessive spending was attributable to mismanagement rather
than to corruption. Collier et al. (2015) document a large dispersion in unit costs for comparable road



3
 “Kickbacks are bribes – generally a percentage of the value of the contract - by a company to public officials who
awarded the contract to that company, despite offering less value for money than other bidders” (Ware et al., 2007: 306).
                                                                 5
work activities, and find that costs are significantly higher on average in countries that score poorly on
corruption indicators.
         Analyzing a large database on firms’ banking transactions, Mironov and Zhuravskaya (2016)
conclude that “tunneling” of cash to fly-by-night firms is likely directed to politicians in exchange for
allocation of procurement contracts. They show that where procurement awards depend more on
bribes and kickbacks, contracts tend to get awarded to less productive firms.
         Several studies provide evidence that external audits reduce corruption in procurement. In a
randomized control trial in Indonesian villages, Olken (2007) found that a large increase in the
probability of being audited reduced corruption in road construction. Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2003)
found prices paid for homogeneous inputs in public hospitals in Buenos Aires fell by 17% when
intensive audits were performed as part of a crackdown on corruption. The introduction of random
audits of procurement processes in Brazilian municipalities significantly reduced corruption, even
when the probability of being audited remained low (Avis et al., 2016; Zamboni and Litschig (2016).
         Cross-country evidence on the relationships between procurement systems and outcomes is
very sparse. Evenett and Hoekman (2005b: 3) note the dearth of evidence on the relative payoffs to
alternative types of procurement reforms, and the need for research “to shed light on the success or
otherwise of public procurement policies in a range of developing countries.” This paper aims to begin
filling this evidence gap, using data for 88 countries from PEFA assessments and the World Bank’s
Enterprise Surveys. We look at two outcomes experienced by business firms: participation in
procurement markets, and kickbacks needed to obtain government contracts. According to Ware et al.
(2007: 306): “kickback schemes are the primary vehicles through which corruption is perpetrated in
public procurement.” Our data do not measure other aspects of procurement processes experienced by
firms, such as other forms of corruption, transactions costs, or payment delays, or outcomes valued by
public procuring agencies, such as cost, quality, or collusion by firms.
         Procurement outcomes are measured in our study by two linked questions in the World Bank’s
Enterprise Surveys.4 The first question asks: “Over the last year, has this establishment secured or
attempted to secure a government contract?” Among the 33,385 firms in the 88-country surveys in our



4
  Surveys are designed to be broadly representative of formally-registered firms in the manufacturing and service sectors.
Sampling is stratified by size, sector, and geographic region. Sample sizes typically vary from about 150 to 1,800,
increasing with the size of the country. Survey methodology and content are described in more detail at
http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/methodology.
                                                                  6
sample with valid responses, 18.8% replied affirmatively. Despite some ambiguity regarding the term
“attempted,” we use this variable as a proxy for whether firms actually submitted a bid for a
government contract. We are thus assuming that firms that are deterred from actually submitting a bid
by high transactions costs, lack of information, distrust in the integrity of the process, etc., do not
report that they attempted to obtain a contract.
        For firms replying in the affirmative to this first question, a second question asks: “When
establishments like this one do business with the government, what percent of the contract value would
be typically paid in informal payments or gifts to secure the contract?” Bribe-paying is a sensitive issue
so the question asks about “establishments like this one” instead of specifying “your establishment” to
encourage candor. We follow common practice in using responses as a proxy for the firm’s own
payments (World Bank, 2000).5 Among the 5,371 firms in our sample that report they attempted to
secure a government contract, 1,050 replied that an informal payment was needed, with an average
payment of 11.6% of the contract value. Among all 5,371 firms, including those reporting that no
payment (0%) is needed, the average value is 2.3%.
        The World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys have been used in numerous research studies, but the
procurement questions have received relatively little attention. World Bank (2002) reports that
informal payments for obtaining government contracts tend to be larger for smaller and privately-
owned firms, and lower for foreign-owned firms, in an analysis of over 6,500 firms in Enterprise
Surveys conducted in 2002 in 26 transition countries. World Bank (2005) has similar findings
regarding firm ownership, in a later round of surveys for the same set of countries, and reports that the
“kickback tax” – its term for informal payments for obtaining public contracts - is higher on average
for younger firms.
        Kisunko et al. (2013) analyze data from a Russian Federation Enterprise Survey with 4,223
firms, designed to be representative at the level of 37 regions. Of the 27% of firms reporting that they
attempted to obtain a government contract, 23% stated that an informal payment was needed, and that
the required payments averaged 15% of the contract value. Firm-level characteristics were mostly not
significant in explaining differences in these informal payments. However, such payments were




5
 Some managers responding to the survey may not be well informed about their firms’ payments, adding one more source
of measurement error.
                                                              7
significantly higher for firms located in larger (higher-population) regions, and in regions where
information on public procurement was more transparent.6
        Kenny (2009) uses Enterprise Surveys for ECA (Eastern Europe and Central Asia) countries to
examine bribe-paying by construction firms. He reports that kickbacks are lower on average in
wealthier countries, and for larger firms. Ownership of firms (state, private foreign, or private
domestic) and city size made no significant difference in kickbacks.
        We add to this literature by analyzing the impact of procurement institutions on kickbacks and
on bidding rates. This study is the first one to analyze the relationship between procurement outcomes,
as measured by the Enterprise Surveys, and procurement rules and practices, as measured by question
19 in the PEFA assessments.7 Although PEFA assessments have been conducted since 2005, the
procurement question was changed substantially beginning in the 2011 assessments, and again in 2016.
Of the three versions, the largest number of assessments were implemented using the second version,
between 2011 and 2015. The quality of assessments is also believed to be more consistent in recent
years than in PEFA’s earlier years (PEFA Secretariat, 2016). We therefore limit our use of PEFA
procurement indicators to this period.8
        The PEFA indicators are measured for the central government level. In some countries a
substantial share of public procurement occurs at sub-national levels, using systems that are likely
weaker (Transparency International, 2014). The quality of procurement systems at the central
government and sub-national levels are plausibly correlated across countries, but not perfectly. For
this reason, and because the share of procurement occurring at sub-national levels varies across
countries, our ability to measure system quality only at the central government level introduces some
measurement error.9
        The PEFA indicators have been used in a limited number of cross-country research studies, and
most of these do not single out the procurement question for emphasis. In regression analyses of 57


6
  The transparency measure is from Balsevich et al. (2011), who examined how well 83 regional public procurement
websites complied in 2007 with the recently-passed Federal Law on Public Procurement.
7
  Detailed information can be found in PEFA Secretariat (2011), available at https://pefa.org/sites/default/files/PMFEng-
finalSZreprint04-12_1.pdf.
8
  Three of the four sub-indicators from the second version (“PEFA 2011’) are changed only slightly in the third version
(“PEFA 2016”), so those could be treated as comparable. To date, however, very few assessments have been implemented
using PEFA 2016 and no cross-country data set has been compiled for it.
9
  PEFA assessments have been conducted at the sub-national level but only for a limited number of countries and sub-
national units in each of them. Note the procurement questions in the Enterprise Surveys do not ascertain from which
public entities firms are trying to obtain contracts.
                                                                8
PEFA assessments conducted between 2005 and 2007, De Renzio (2009) uses as a dependent variable
the average of the 28 questions, and finds that the quality of public financial management systems is
positively associated with country size (population), per capita income, and aid dependence
(ODA/GNI). Andrews (2010, 2014) notes that countries tend to suffer “implementation gaps” on
public financial management systems in general, scoring better on PEFA’s de jure indicators of laws
and official procedures on the books than on de facto indicators of PFM practices and performance.
Scores also tend to be higher in areas of PFM where reform implementation requires the engagement
of only a relatively small number of “concentrated agents” (e.g. in a Ministry of Finance), in contrast
to procurement and other areas where implementation requires the engagement of a larger number of
“distributed agents” (e.g. across sectoral ministries or sub-national governments). Knack (2014) finds
that donors’ use of recipient countries’ national procurement systems (defined as the share of aid to
government that is “not subject to additional or special requirements by donors for procurement of
works, goods and services”) is positively and significantly related to the quality of procurement
systems, as measured by PEFA question 19. Each 1-unit increment in the 7-point PEFA-19 scale is
associated with a 3 percentage point increase in use of country procurement systems.
        Numerous countries have multiple Enterprise Surveys, but only a small number have multiple
PEFA assessments with the second version of the procurement question. It is therefore not practicable
to construct a time-series cross-sectional panel. In constructing a cross-sectional database, we
maximized the number of countries where PEFA assessments precede the relevant Enterprise Survey
in time. In the relatively few cases where more than one PEFA assessment using the second version of
the procurement question was available, this meant selecting the first one that was conducted. We then
selected the first Enterprise Survey conducted subsequent to that PEFA assessment. In many cases,
however, there was not one, and we then selected the most recently completed Enterprise Survey, as
long as it was from 2009 or later. These decision rules produced a sample of 88 countries. For the
median country, the Enterprise Survey actually precedes the PEFA assessment by two years. We
therefore rely rather heavily on the assumption that the quality of procurement systems is fairly
persistent, i.e. that practices in effect in year t are very highly correlated across countries with those in
effect in year t-2. However, our key results on kickbacks (but not on bidding) reported below are
highly robust to dropping all countries for which the Enterprise Survey precedes the PEFA assessment
in time, despite the drastic decline in sample size.


                                                          9
3. Hypotheses and Control Variables
           The overall score for the PEFA procurement question (numbered PI-19 in the PEFA
questionnaire) is assigned as the average of four separately-scored components:
           19-1: transparency, comprehensiveness and competition in the legal and regulatory framework;
           19-2: use of competitive procurement methods;
           19-3: public access to complete, reliable and timely procurement information;
           19-4: existence of an independent administrative procurement complaints system.
For brevity we name these four sub-indicators LEGAL (19-1), METHODS (19-2), ACCESS (19-3),
and COMPLAINT (19-4), and the PI-19 average grade, OVERALL.
           The PEFA procurement indicators were developed by the PEFA Secretariat and staff from the
PEFA partner institutions, including the World Bank, IMF, EU and many bilateral donor countries.
Their content is consistent with recommendations on procurement systems and policies from the
OECD (2009) and Transparency International (2014).
           The sub-indicators have possible scores of A, B, C and D. For the overall PEFA-19 indicator,
the average of them, possible scores include A, B+, B, C+, C, D+ and D.10 We follow De Renzio
(2009) and others in assigning numerical values on a 1 (D) to 7 (A) scale and treating them as cardinal
indicators in our initial tests, but we also construct dichotomous versions of the sub-indicators as
described in a subsequent section, after testing whether cardinality can be justified.
           Ware et al. (2007: 298) argue that “a clear and adequate regulatory environment” is needed to
foster perceptions of fairness and predictability, encouraging participation by more firms in bidding
processes. If so, firms operating in countries with higher LEGAL scores should have a greater
likelihood other things equal of reporting that they bid on a public contract in the last year. To the
extent the legal framework promotes transparency, it may also be associated with less corruption,
including lower kickbacks by firms to procurement agents.
           Higher scores for METHODS are awarded where exceptions to open competition are more
consistently justified in compliance with legal requirements, indicating less discretion on the part of
officials to award contracts using inappropriate criteria. Open bidding “generally attracts more bidders
than restricted procedures,” maximizing competition and obtaining better “value for money” (World
Bank, 2015: 33). Where exceptions to open bidding are allowed, the rules should be clear and


10
     See PEFA Secretariat (2011: 11) for the full conversion chart from each combination of four grades to an overall grade.
                                                                   10
discretion by officials thereby restricted (Ware et al., 2007). Excessively discretionary procedures can
adversely affect perceptions of fairness and predictability, discouraging firms from entering a market
(Evenett and Hoekman, 2005b: 32). The incidence of corruption, including kickbacks, should be less
frequent where officials have less discretion in deciding contract winners (Kenny, 2009: 28; Yakovlev
et al., 2015), and where exceptions to competitive bidding are “justified and recorded in writing to
provide an audit trail” (OECD, 2009: 25). Accordingly, METHODS should be positively associated
with the likelihood of bidding, and inversely related to kickbacks.
         ACCESS measures the public availability of key procurement information, including
procurement plans, bidding opportunities, contract awards, and data on resolution of procurement-
related complaints. We expect ACCESS to be positively associated with bidding probabilities, as more
widespread advertising of tenders and of how to submit bids reduces information and transactions costs
for firms, particularly small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). According to World Bank (2015:
11), “SMEs identified difficulties in accessing public procurement information as one of the major
obstacles to entering” the EU’s public procurement markets.11 Transparent information on contract
awards and complaints resolution can also encourage participation by improving perceptions of
fairness, integrity and predictability. Bids may also be deterred, particularly for SMEs, if bribe
payments are more common in less transparent systems (Evenett and Hoekman, 2005a: 179).
         Higher ACCESS scores may be associated with lower corruption, including kickbacks, through
several channels. By encouraging more entry, widespread advertising can undermine bid-rigging
schemes (Ware et al., 2007: 309). Insufficient information provides procurement agents with more
discretion, and creates more opportunity for fraud and corruption (World Bank, 2015: 13-14, 16):
“When the government has no obligation to publish the name of the contract winner, it cannot be held
accountable for its decision and there is a greater risk of tendering rules being broken.”
         An independent and effective complaints mechanism for bidders to challenge decisions can
encourage participation by enhancing confidence in the system’s integrity and fairness. It also provides
a check against fraud and favoritism (World Bank, 2015: 62), potentially deterring procurement
officials from demanding kickbacks. Higher COMPLAINT scores should thus be associated with
lower kickbacks and a higher likelihood of bidding for contracts.



11
  In Chile, the introduction of an integrated information system to centralize public procurement information is reported to
have doubled participation by SMEs, and generated sizeable cost savings (World Bank: 2015: 15).
                                                                 11
       Performance and financial audits of procurement systems by an external auditing agency can
also deter corruption schemes (World Bank, 2015: 84). “Reporting and auditing are critical to
identifying corrupt transactions and to increasing the risks of detection” (Ware et al., 2007: 321; also
see Avis et al., 2016; Olken, 2007; Di Tella and Schargrodsky, 2003). The PEFA assessments include
a question (PI-26) on the comprehensiveness and timeliness of external audits, as well as on evidence
of follow up on recommendations. The question encompasses audits of procurement systems,
including performance audits such as assessing value for money in major infrastructure projects.
However, there is no separate score provided for auditing of procurement and other elements of public
expenditure systems. We expect higher scores on this indicator (AUDIT) to be associated with lower
kickbacks. By enhancing firms’ perceptions of fairness and integrity, and reducing their expectations
of paying costly bribes, AUDIT may also be positively related to the likelihood of bidding on contracts
(World Bank, 2015: 84-87; Ware et al., 2007: 315-321).
       We estimate equations of the general form:
                                          Yij   Pj  X j  Z ij  u ij

where Yij is the relevant procurement outcome (bidding or making informal payments) for firm i in
country j, Pj is the relevant procurement system indicator(s), Xj is a vector of country-level controls,
including region dummies and survey year, and Zij is a vector of firm-level controls, including sector
dummies.
       Firm-level control variables include size (log of the number of employees), age (log of the
number of years it has operated), the top manager’s experience (log of the number of years), ownership
composition, and a dummy for whether the establishment being surveyed is part of a larger firm or not.
Smaller and younger firms with less experienced managers are more likely to “lack the resources and
management expertise to plan, draft and complete tender applications,” and face greater difficulty in
obtaining necessary information and providing required financial guarantees (World Bank, 2016: 7).
Procurement systems sometimes establish preferences for domestic over foreign-owned firms, so we
expect higher shares of foreign ownership to be associated with a lower probability of bidding for
contracts, other things equal. Foreign firms might resort to kickbacks to gain access when
discriminated against, but foreign firms might resort to bribery less often than domestic firms overall




                                                          12
as a result of the OECD’s anti-bribery convention.12 Firms with a larger share of state ownership may
have beneficial ties with the procuring agencies that increase their likelihood of bidding, and reduce
their need to pay bribes.13
         In bidding regressions, we control for two additional firm-level variables. The first is a dummy
indicating whether or not the firm has an internationally recognized quality certification, which may
either reflect or give it advantages over other firms. The second is the share of the firm’s sales that are
national, i.e. not exported, directly or indirectly. We expect firms producing mostly for export markets
will be less likely to bid on public contracts.14
         We also control for sector or industry with 53 dummy variables. Some sectors have larger
procurement markets than others, so more potential bidding firms. Sectors (such as construction) that
involve “large, complex, non-standard activities in which quality can be very difficult to assess” are
more vulnerable to kickbacks and other corruption schemes (Kenny, 2009).15
         Country-level controls include (log of) per capita income, size (log of population and log of
land area in square kilometers), and aid (log of per capita official development assistance). These and
other country-level controls used later in robustness tests are all lagged by one year.
         Higher income and size are rough proxies for market size so may be positively correlated with
the likelihood of bidding for public contracts. Smaller markets may facilitate collusion among firms,
or between firms and procuring agents. Interactions between officials and suppliers are more likely to
involve ties between family and friends, so may increase the number of improper awards but perhaps
not with any direct informal payments being made. In micro-states with extremely limited public
sector capacity, it may not be possible in many cases to separate the various functions of procurement
systems among different officials, as “good practice” recommends (OECD, 2009: 57, 72). In larger
countries, however, a larger share of procurement transactions may occur at sub-national levels using
weaker systems; if so, area and population may be positively associated with kickbacks. Countries
with higher incomes tend to have higher scores on the PEFA procurement indicator (De Renzio, 2009),



12
   See http://www.oecd.org/corruption/oecdantibriberyconvention.htm.
13
   The survey excludes enterprises that are 100% state owned. About 1 in 60 firms in our sample have some state
ownership, but only 40 firms (out of more than 33,000) are majority state-owned. About 14% of firms have some foreign
ownership, and about 2% are wholly foreign-owned.
14
   This control variable is not exogenous, however, as successful bids will increase the non-exported sales share.
15
   Based on surveys of business executives around the world, Transparency International’s “Bribe Payers Index” ranks 19
sectors with respect to the incidence of bribery, with bribery least frequent in agriculture and light manufacturing, and most
frequent in public works and construction. See http://www.transparency.org/bpi2011/.
                                                                  13
and on a newly-available index of transparency in procurement (World Bank, 2016: 4). Kenny (2009:
29-30) finds that corruption in procurement is lower in higher-income countries. Kenny (2009: 29-30)
and Avis et al. (2016) respectively find that corruption in procurement is lower in higher-income
countries and in higher-income Brazilian municipalities.
       Aid could matter in several ways. A small share of aid directly supports procurement reform,
e.g. through technical assistance, IT projects, or policy conditions in budget support grants or loans. De
Renzio (2009) reports that an index of 9 PEFA indicators on budget execution, including the one on
procurement, is positively related to aid/GNI, controlling for per capita income and other variables. To
the extent aid finances infrastructure projects and other non-salary public expenditures, it can enlarge
procurement markets and expand bidding opportunities. The World Bank and some other donors
require contracts above a certain value to be advertised more widely through being subject to
international competitive bidding. However, some aid from certain bilateral donors is tied to purchases
from home-country providers (Hoekman, 1998: 266; Evenett and Hoekman, 2005a: 7). When aid is
provided in response to natural disasters or other humanitarian crises, pressures to disburse quickly
may result in more sole source contracts or other exceptions to competitive bidding, and weaker
oversight, making aid funds more vulnerable to corruption.16 Moreover, aid in general is sometimes
viewed as a source of windfall revenues (akin to natural resource revenues) that fuels corruption and
rent-seeking. On the other hand, international financial institutions such as the World Bank actively
monitor procurement systems in borrowing countries, and investigate numerous complaints, sometimes
resulting in sanctions against firms (Ware et al., 2007: 321). Aid from at least some donors thus may
have a deterrent effect on corruption, including kickbacks. Rather than attempting to disaggregate aid
by donor and purpose to assess the various ways in which it might influence bidding and kickbacks, we
simply control for overall aid per capita, to measure its net effects.
       We also control for regional dummies, using the World Bank’s classification: Sub-Saharan
Africa (AFR), East Asia and the Pacific (EAP), Eastern Europe and Central Asia (ECA), Latin
America and the Caribbean (LCR), Middle East and North Africa (MNA), and South Asia (SAR). We
have no particular hypotheses regarding regional differences, although Evenett and Hoekman (2005b:
19) note that transition economies “had to create from scratch procedures for purchasing from their




       16
            For example, see “Nigeria’s President orders probe into missing aid funds” (Financial Times, April 19, 2017).
                                                                 14
(often recently developed) private sectors.” Finally, we control for a simple time trend, defined by the
year in which the Enterprise Survey was completed.


4. Basic Results
       Table 1 reports results from probit regressions for BID. Marginal effects are reported instead
of unadjusted probit regression coefficients, which are not readily interpretable. Standard errors in all
regressions are adjusted for non-independence of errors within each country cluster of observations.
       Equation 1.1 tests the OVERALL score (PEFA question 19). Its coefficient is positive and
significant, with each 1-unit improvement on the 7-point scale associated with an increase of .01 in the
likelihood of bidding for a contract, e.g. from the mean of .188 to .198 (or from 18.8% to 19.8%).
Thus, firms located in countries scoring more highly on PEFA question 19 overall are more likely (as
hypothesized) to bid on contracts. However, this finding does not tell us which aspects of procurement
rules and practices matter more for procurement outcomes experienced by firms. Accordingly, in
equations 1.2-1.5 respectively we test each of the four components or sub-indicators of PEFA 19.
Coefficients are positive and significant for two of the three de facto sub-indicators, METHODS and
ACCESS, but not for COMPLAINT, or for the mostly de jure sub-indicator, LEGAL. The sub-
indicators can take on only one of four possible values (D=1, C=3, B=5, and A=7), so the METHODS
coefficient, for example, implies that a 1-grade increment is associated with an increase in BID of 1.8
percentage points. The positive coefficient for ACCESS is consistent with other studies (e.g. Kenny
and Crisman, 2016), using entirely different data and methods, that find easier access to information on
public procurement increases bidding. Coefficients for AUDIT are positive but not significant in each
of the BID regressions.
       Larger and older firms, and those with more experienced managers, international certification,
a higher share of sales in country, a higher percentage of state ownership, and that are merely one
“establishment” in a larger firm, are significantly more likely to bid for contracts. Foreign ownership
is associated with a significantly lower likelihood of bidding, relative to the omitted category of private
domestic ownership, perhaps reflecting explicit preferences for domestic suppliers. Bidding
probabilities increase with the share of state ownership.




                                                        15
           Any given firm is more likely to bid for a contract in a less-populated country,17 but also (other
things equal) in a geographically-larger country. Per capita income and aid are not significant. Time
trend coefficients imply an increasing likelihood of bidding, but this trend is not significant. Regional
effects (not shown in the table) are jointly significant, with predicted bidding highest for AFR and
LCR, by about 11 percentage points over the lowest region, SAR.
           Table 2 presents OLS tests with unofficial payments (KICKBACKS) as the dependent variable.
In equation 2.1 the coefficient for OVERALL is negative and marginally significant (at the .10 level).
Each 1-unit increment on the 7-point scale is associated with a decrease in informal payments paid of
1/4th of a percentage point, e.g. a reduction from the mean of 2.3% of the contract value to just over
2%. The difference between the minimum score of D and maximum score of A can account for a 1.5-
point decline on average, i.e. a nearly two-thirds reduction in the average size of kickbacks. Of the
three other de facto sub-indicators, METHODS (in equation 2.3) and COMPLAINT (equation 2.5)
have negative and significant coefficients. Each 1-grade (i.e., 2-point) increase in METHODS or
COMPLAINT, respectively, is associated with a decrease in kickbacks of .29 or .64 percentage points.
The finding on COMPLAINT is consistent with the view that an independent complaints mechanism
can deter procurement officials from requesting kickbacks as a condition for awarding contracts. The
METHODS result suggests that where procurement officials have more discretion to limit competition
without an explicit justification, it is easier for them to award contracts based on criteria other than
price and quality - including which firm offers the largest kickback.
           Coefficients for AUDIT are negative and significant in every case, and imply fairly sizeable
deterrent effects on kickbacks. Each 1-unit increment is associated with a decrease in informal
payments of about 0.4 percentage points. The difference between the minimum score of D and
maximum score in the sample of B+ can thus account for a decline of about 2 points. This finding on
AUDIT is consistent with other studies showing that an increased likelihood of an external audit deters
corruption in public procurement (Avis et al., 2016; Olken, 2007; Di Tella and Schargrodsky, 2003).
           Larger and older firms, and those with a higher share of foreign or state ownership, pay less in
kickbacks on average. Establishments that are part of a larger firm pay (about 1 percentage point)
more. Managerial experience is not significantly related to kickbacks.




17
     Note this does not necessarily mean that there are more bidders on average for any given contract in smaller countries.
                                                                    16
        Country-level regressors in Table 2 are mostly insignificant, but higher aid is associated with
larger kickbacks (significant at the .10 level). Understanding the mechanism behind this association
would require more detailed analysis, however. For example, aid in response to disasters may be more
prone to corruption due to disbursement pressures. Or, reverse causation could be partly responsible, if
donors provide more aid for governance reform where they observe more corruption.
        Predicted kickbacks are significantly lower for MNA, by about 3 percentage points, than in
each of the other five regions.18 The time trend is positive but insignificant.
        If the four components of the overall PEFA 19 OVERALL measure were highly inter-
correlated, one could argue their coefficients in Tables 1 and 2 are biased upwards (in absolute value,
in Table 2). Testing them all together in a single regression, on the other hand, would risk
multicollinearity problems. These correlations turn out to be relatively modest. At the country level,
the highest (Spearman) rank correlation is .61 (for METHODS and ACCESS), and the lowest is .29
(for LEGAL and METHODS). The average of the six inter-correlations is .39.
         Table 3 summarizes results from regressions that test all four components together,
recognizing the likelihood of some collinearity problems. In the table, only results for the PEFA
variables are reported, but the specifications otherwise are identical to those for the baseline tests in
Tables 1 and 2. When all four components are entered together in the BID regression (equation 3.1),
only METHODS is significant, with a coefficient only slightly smaller than in equation 1.3 of Table 1.
By contrast, the coefficient for ACCESS is less than half as large as in equation 1.4, and it is not
significant when controlling for METHODS and other components of PEFA question 19. For informal
payments, COMPLAINT remains significant, with a coefficient nearly identical to that in equation 2.5
of Table 2, when all four components are included together. In contrast, the METHODS coefficient is
cut by half, and it is no longer significant.
        The one component that is never significant in any regressions in Tables 1-3 is LEGAL, which
assesses the legal and regulatory framework for procurement, with respect to its comprehensiveness,
transparency, and its promotion of competition. It can be viewed primarily as a de jure measure of how
the procurement system is designed to function, while the other three components are de facto
measures of its actual functioning. It is unsurprising that bidding and kickbacks are more strongly



18
  The mean of kickbacks for firms in the three MNA countries (Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia) is only .54%, compared to
2.35% for non-MNA countries.
                                                              17
related to actual practices on competition (METHODS), transparency (ACCESS), or dispute resolution
(COMPLAINT) than they are to how those systems are designed to operate (LEGAL). Andrews
(2010) notes that countries tend to suffer “implementation gaps” on public financial management
systems in general, scoring better on de jure than on de facto PEFA indicators. Consistent with this
finding, average scores in our sample on LEGAL are higher (4.48) than for METHODS (3.09),
ACCESS (3.96) or COMPLAINT (3.29).19
          Thus far we have treated PEFA question 19 (OVERALL) and its four components as interval-
level scales, although they are technically only ordinal level. In doing so, we follow De Renzio (2009)
and other precedents, but it is not clear that this practice is justified. Accordingly, we constructed a
full set of dummies for each of the five PEFA question 19 indicators (OVERALL and its four
components) as well as for AUDIT. By testing them in regressions otherwise identical to those in
Tables 1 and 2, we found some evidence for threshold effects that indicate some categories on certain
sub-indicators can be collapsed, with little or no loss of information. For METHODS, for example,
coefficients for all dummies corresponding to a score of B or lower were all similar to each other, but
notably smaller in magnitude than coefficients for a score of A, in both BID and KICKBACK
regressions. For both ACCESS and COMPLAINT, there is little evidence for distinguishing between
A and B grades, or between C and D grades. In subsequent tests, we therefore use dichotomous
transformations of those three components: “METHODS-A” = 1 for countries graded A, and = 0 for
those graded B, C or D. “ACCESS-AB” and “COMPLAINT-AB” = 1 for countries graded A or B,
and = 0 for those graded C or D.
          Equations 3.2 and 3.4 in Table 3 replicate equations 3.1 and 3.3, respectively, but substituting
the three dichotomized sub-indicators for their 4-point counterparts. In equation 3.3, METHODS-A
remains as the only component significantly related to the likelihood of bidding. Its coefficient implies
that an A or B grade is associated with an increase of about 5 percentage points in the likelihood of
bidding, compared to having a grade of C or D. In equation 3.4, COMPLAINT remains the only
component significantly related to kickbacks. Its coefficient implies that an A or B grade is associated
with a decrease of about 2.2 percentage points in kickbacks, compared to having a grade of C or D.
          For consistency with the use of these three dichotomous sub-indicators, we constructed a new
composite procurement indicator, as an alternative to the OVERALL score. Specifically, we


19
     Median grades are B for LEGAL, C for ACCESS, D for METHODS and COMPLAINT, and C/C+ for OVERALL.
                                                         18
standardized the four sub-indicators LEGAL, METHODS-A, ACCESS-AB, and COMPLAINT-AB to
have means equal to 0 and standard deviations equal to 1, and computed the average of these four
values. We use this composite measure, INDEX, or one of its four components, in subsequent tests
reported below.20


5. Disaggregating by Firm Size
         There are strong theoretical reasons to believe that procurement practices designed to reduce
transactions costs, and encourage competition and transparency, will have greater effects on smaller
than on larger firms. “High costs affect all bidders, but small and medium enterprises to a greater
extent, hindering their participation and access to the public procurement market” (World Bank, 2016:
4). Greater public access to procurement information, as measured by ACCESS-AB, should reduce
transactions costs, which will tend to be proportionately larger for smaller firms (OECD, 2009: 23).
We therefore expect the effect of ACCESS-AB on the likelihood of bidding on contracts to be largest
for small firms (those with fewer than 20 employees), and smallest for large firms (those with 100 or
more employees). Similarly, a low-cost, independent complaints mechanism (as measured by
COMPLAINT-AB) is likely to encourage participation more for smaller than for larger firms. Bidding
tends to be more frequent for larger firms: about 16% of small firms in the sample report they tried to
secure a government contract, compared to about 21% for medium-sized firms and 23% for large
firms. Informal payments are higher on average for smaller firms, averaging 2.9% of contract value
for firms with fewer than 20 employees, 2.0% for medium-sized firms, and 1.3% for firms with 100 or
more employees.21 Prevailing procurement practices on balance appear to disadvantage small firms,
but systems that encourage transparency, competition, and trust, and that reduce transactions costs, can
potentially level the playing field somewhat for smaller firms.
         Accordingly, we ran the BID and KICKBACK regressions for each of three sub-samples -
small, medium-sized, and large firms – as well as for the full sample, for comparative purposes.
Results are summarized in Table 4. Each regression includes only one procurement sub-indicator (or
the composite INDEX), and otherwise follows the specifications of Table 1 (for bidding) and Table 2


20
   This index is correlated at .94 with an alternative index based on weights from a principal-components analysis, and
results reported below are similar if this alternative index is used instead.
21
   Small (21%) and medium-sized (18.6%) firms are more likely to report having to pay a bribe than large firms (13.5%).
For those who report that bribes are needed, average size of bribes is also largest for small firms (13.9% of contract value),
with modest differences between medium (11%) and large firms (10.4%).
                                                                  19
(for kickbacks). For each regression, however, only the coefficient and standard error for the
procurement indicator are shown. The first row, for example, shows that LEGAL has small,
insignificant coefficients in BID regressions for the full sample and for each of the sub-samples of
small, medium, and large firms. In KICKBACK regressions, the coefficient for LEGAL is much
larger (in absolute value) for the small-firm sub-sample, but is also not significant.
       In the BID regressions, coefficients for METHODS-A are fairly similar in magnitude across all
three size categories, but are significant only for the small and medium-sized groups. In KICKBACK
regressions, the METHODS-A coefficient is significant only for small firms, and is about twice as
large (in absolute value) as in the regressions for medium-sized or large firms.
       ACCESS also appears to “level the playing field” for small and medium-sized firms with
respect to bidding. Coefficients on ACCESS-AB are larger for those groups, and statistically
significant only for them. In KICKBACKS regressions, the ACCESS-AB coefficient is largest in the
case of small firms, but is not significant in any of the sub-samples.
       Complaints mechanisms are not significant in BID regressions for any of the three size
categories, although the coefficient is largest for the small-firm group. Stronger complaints systems
are significantly related to lower informal payments for each of the three size groups, but the
COMPLAINT coefficient again is largest for the small-firm sub-sample.
       Coefficients for INDEX exhibit their predicted signs in both BID and KICKBACK regressions,
for all three sub-samples. They are significant, however, only in the small-firm sub-samples.
       Results overall are consistent with theoretical reasons for expecting stronger competition,
transparency and dispute resolution systems to help level the playing field for smaller firms, which are
likely to have less expertise on public procurement and to face disproportionately high transactions and
information costs. There are six significant coefficients (all with the expected signs) for the small-firm
sub-samples, three for medium-sized firms, and only one for large firms. Coefficients are larger for
small-firm than for large-firm sub-samples in all five pair-wise comparisons for BID regressions, and
they are larger in absolute value in all five pair-wise comparisons for KICKBACK regressions.
       Admittedly, the differences in these coefficient magnitudes across size categories are not
statistically significant in most cases. The most straightforward way to test explicitly for such
differences is to interact firm size with the relevant procurement indicator, e.g. adding the product of
log of employees and ACCESS-AB to a regression using the full sample of firms. In BID regressions,
interactions of both ACCESS-AB (t = -2.82) and INDEX (t = -1.95) with firm size are significant,
                                                        20
implying that access to information matters less for larger firms. In the kickback regressions, an
interaction of METHODS-AB and firm size is significant at the .01 level (t = 1.88), consistent with the
view that unjustified exceptions to competitive methods are disproportionately associated with higher
kickbacks for smaller firms.


6. Robustness to Additional Regressors
       For the full sample of firms, Table 3 showed that bidding is most strongly associated with
METHODS-A, when testing all four components of question 19 in the same regression. Similarly,
kickbacks are most strongly associated with COMPLAINT-AB. We therefore focus on those
indicators, and on the INDEX of the four sub-indicators, in robustness tests.
       Table 5 tests robustness to the addition of more control variables, not included in the baseline
specifications of Tables 1 and 2 because they substantially reduce the sample size. Regressions
reported in Table 5 are otherwise based on those specifications, but results are shown only for the
procurement system indicators and the added controls.
       Legal systems, specifically well-functioning courts, can play an important role in resolving
disputes and deterring corruption in procurement. If more firms have faith in the courts’ integrity,
fairness and efficiency, they may be more encouraged to participate in bidding processes, and less
likely to pay kickbacks (either because firms are less likely to be asked for bribes, or less likely to
comply with such requests). Table 5 shows that results on the procurement system indicators
(METHODS-A in equation 5.1 and INDEX in 5.2) remain significant, controlling for firms’ level of
agreement that “the court systems is fair, impartial and uncorrupted.” In equations 5.1 and 5.2, this
measure of trust in courts itself is not significantly related to the likelihood of bidding. However,
kickbacks are significantly and inversely related to perceptions of quality of the courts, as shown in
equations 5.5 and 5.6. Each 1-point increment in the 1-4 scale of courts’ quality is associated with a
decline of about 0.4 percentage points in kickbacks. Results for COMPLAINT-AB (in equation 5.5),
INDEX (5.6) and AUDIT are robust to the addition of this variable and the associated reduction in
sample size.
       More firms are likely to participate in bidding where government procurement markets are
larger. In equations 5.3 and 5.4, we show that results on METHODS-A and INDEX are robust to the
addition of two more proxies for the size of procurement markets: government consumption and public


                                                         21
investment as shares of GDP.22 Coefficients for government consumption and investment are both
positive and highly significant. A one-standard-deviation increase in public investment/GDP (3.7
percentage points) or government consumption (5.3 points), respectively, is associated with an increase
in the likelihood of bidding by about 2.5, or 3.2, percentage points.
         Compared to bidding, there is less reason to expect kickbacks as a share of contract value to be
affected systematically by the size of government expenditures. In equations 5.6 and 5.7, government
consumption is unrelated to kickbacks, but more public investment is associated with large and highly
significant reductions in kickbacks. There is no obvious explanation for this result, but it is consistent
with the possibility that when each procurement official is handling a larger volume of contracts, the
average bribe request is reduced (e.g., if the probability of detection is a positive function of an
official’s total bribe receipts).23 COMPLAINT-AB remains significant with the addition of these
variables (and the associated reduction in sample size) in equation 5.7, but INDEX is not significant in
equation 5.8.
         In several more robustness tests not reported in tables (but available from the authors on
request), results on these procurement system measures are affected very little by the addition of other
regressors. First, we added three city size dummies, the inclusion of which reduces sample sizes by
about 7%. Firms located in larger cities may have more bidding opportunities. For some services
“…geographic proximity may be a precondition for effectively contesting procurement markets;
procurement agents can economize on marketing costs by choosing local suppliers” (Evenett and
Hoekman, 2005a: 167). Consistent with these arguments, firms located in larger cities are more likely
to report having bid for a contract. METHODS-A and INDEX retain their positive and significant
coefficients in these tests. Kickbacks are unrelated to size of the city in which firms are located,
consistent with a finding by Kenny (2009: 36).
         Second, we controlled for inflation, as measured by the implicit GDP deflator.24 Higher
inflation can increase bidding participation by adding to uncertainty about the winning bid’s price
offer. It may also increase kickbacks, if higher inflation makes it easier to incorporate the cost of
kickbacks in the contract price. Inflation turns out to be positively and significantly related to bidding:


22
   Public investment is measured as the difference between total and private gross fixed capital formation. It is missing for
33 of the 88 countries in the sample.
23
   As noted in section 2 above, the composition of government expenditure, including the amount devoted to public
investment, may be endogenous to opportunities for corruption at higher levels.
24
   Inflation data are missing for one country in our sample, the Democratic Republic of Congo.
                                                                  22
each 1 percentage point increase in inflation is associated with an increase in the likelihood of bidding
by 0.2 percentage points. Surprisingly, inflation is associated with lower kickbacks (significant at .10
level). Recall that kickbacks is measured as a share of contract value, and it is possible that bribe
payments tend to adjust more slowly than contract values to inflation.
       Third, we controlled for legal heritage, using the classifications from LaPorta et al. (2008).
Pimenta and Rezai (2015: 331-332) argue that “public procurement systems in Latin America are
endowed with an emphasis on legalism, control and procedural formality…triggering excessive rigor
in the application of norms that stifle competition and increase the costs of doing business with
government.” They attribute these characteristics to the region’s legal heritage, however, and
specifically to “principles of Napoleonic or Roman law.” We therefore controlled for legal heritage,
but found no significant differences between groups (British, French and German). Moreover, results
on the procurement indicators are unaffected.
       Fourth, we controlled for the professionalization of government bureaucracy index from the
Quality of Government project’s survey of experts (Dahlstrom et al., 2015). Higher scores reflect
greater reliance on merit in recruitment and promotion. Ware et al. (2007: 317-318) and OECD (2009:
30) argue that corruption in procurement is likely to be lower where procurement staff are more
independent from political pressure, and where remuneration, career prospects and personnel
development are sufficient to attract and retain capable staff willing to abide by ethics codes. The
professionalization index is a rough proxy for such arguments. Among the 88 countries in the sample,
37 are missing data on the professionalization index. Coefficients on COMPLAINTS-AB and INDEX
remain significant in the KICKBACK regressions despite the reduction in sample size. However,
results on METHODS-A and INDEX in the BID regressions are no longer significant with this smaller
sample. Moreover, the professionalization index itself is not significant in the BID or KICKBACKS
regressions.
       Finally, we controlled for two more PEFA indicators potentially related to bidding or
kickbacks. If payments to suppliers are often delayed, bidding may be deterred, particularly for
smaller firms. The PEFA assessments include (but for only 65 of the 88 countries in our sample) an
indicator (question 4 in the PEFA 2011 Framework) on “stock and monitoring of payment arrears”
with higher scores assigned to countries with smaller stocks of arrears. This variable can be used as a
rough proxy for payment delays to suppliers, although it covers arrears to employees and creditors, as
well as to contractors and suppliers. When added to our regressions, however, it turns out to be
                                                        23
unrelated to bidding, for the full sample or for any single size category of firms. The procurement
system indicators remain significant in these tests, for the full sample of firms. In the kickbacks
regressions, we controlled for a second auditing-related variable, question 20 on “effectiveness of
internal controls for non-salary expenditure,” which addresses among other issues “compliance with
rules in procurement…” (PEFA Secretariat, 2011). Coefficients for this internal controls indicator in
kickbacks regressions are positive and significant, but the procurement systems and external audit
indicators also remain significant.
         Corruption and competition in procurement markets may be mutually endogenous. The
presence of corruption may induce exit from markets, reducing the number of bidders (Bliss and Di
Tella, 1997). The number of bidders in a market can affect certain forms of corruption - e.g., if
collusion is easier when fewer firms participate in a market – although not necessarily kickbacks
(Ware, 2007: 319; Celentani and Ganuza, 2002). Fully addressing these relationships is beyond the
scope of this paper, but we re-ran our tests with country-level averages for BID on the right-hand-side
of the KICKBACK regressions, and vice versa, as additional controls.25 Results on the procurement
variables are not sensitive at all to these additional controls, and the country-level averages for BID
and KICKBACK are not significant in any of these tests.



7. Robustness to Changes in Sample and Methods
         The main findings are robust to dropping firms from the 11 countries with populations under
500,000 from our 88-country sample. Results are also robust to dropping firms from the 10 countries
for which no kickbacks are reported. These are mostly very small countries, with fewer firms in their
samples. On average, only 22 firms in each of these countries report that they bid on contracts, so the
absence of any reported kickbacks does not necessarily reflect a lack of candor or survey
administration problem.
         Kickbacks as a share of contract value is bounded by 0% (4,930 observations) and 100% (6
observations). We therefore ran the kickback tests using tobit regression. Coefficients for
COMPLAINT-AB and INDEX remain highly significant.




25
  Ideally it would be feasible to use country-sector instead of country averages, but there are too few firms in each sector
within countries.
                                                                  24
       We also separated the kickbacks variable into two parts: whether or not firms report that an
informal payment is needed, and (conditional on one being needed) its size as a share of contract value.
Results from the probit regression found that bribes are significantly less likely to be needed where
COMPLAINT-AB or INDEX scores are higher. Among the approximately 1,050 firms reporting that
a bribe is needed, the OLS regression found a highly significant inverse relationship between the size
of bribes and COMPLAINT-AB or INDEX scores.
       Conditional on a bribe being needed, one might expect the average size of kickbacks to
increase with AUDIT: as the risk of detection and punishment rises, a larger bribe may be required to
justify the risk from an official’s standpoint (e.g., Kenny, 2009: 29). If so, the coefficient on AUDIT
should be negative for the probit equation but positive in the OLS equation (for observations with
kickbacks > 0). However, the coefficient estimates were negative (and significant) in both regressions:
a stronger external audit mechanism is associated with a lower likelihood an informal payment is
needed, and with a smaller bribe conditional on one being needed.
       Kickback regressions could suffer from sample selection bias, if firms that report bidding on
contracts, and that respond to the survey question on informal payments needed to obtain contracts, are
systematically different from other firms. We therefore tested a Heckman selection model, using as
selection variables in the first stage the firm’s share of sales made in the domestic market, and the
dummies for international certification and city size. Inverse Mills ratios were not significant,
consistent with the null hypothesis of no selection effects. Coefficients for COMPLAINT-AB and
INDEX remain significant, and differ little in magnitude from OLS tests.


8. Endogeneity of Procurement Systems
       Reverse causation is often a potential concern when governance outcomes are found to be
associated with policies or institutions. For example, perceptions of corruption levels across countries
may influence subjective assessments of public institutions. In our case, PEFA assessments are
implemented by specialists in public financial management, and procurement (question 19) is merely
one of 28 topics assessed. Bidding and kickbacks are measured by objective experiential questions in
enterprise surveys, and it is highly unlikely that country-level results from these surveys are known by
the PFM specialists conducting PEFA assessments.
       Governance outcomes can also motivate policy or institutional reform. For example,
procurement reforms may be triggered by low levels of competition or by corruption scandals in
                                                        25
procurement (Pimenta and Rezai, 2015: 332). If so, a bias would be created against finding a positive
(negative) link between bidding (kickbacks) and the PEFA procurement indicators. It is easier to pass
laws (e.g. establishing a complaints mechanism) than to implement them fully (e.g. ensuring a
complaints mechanism functions as intended), so reforms prompted by poor performance would likely
affect the de jure indicator (LEGAL) more than the de facto indicators (METHODS, ACCESS and
COMPLAINT). Reverse causation may thus be partly responsible for the fact that LEGAL is never
significant in any of the regressions, and may reduce the coefficients (in absolute value) of the de facto
indicators, even where they are nevertheless significantly related to bidding and kickbacks.
        Another potential threat to a causal interpretation of our results is that our procurement system
indicators and procurement outcomes indicators could be capturing a much broader relationship
between “good institutions” and good governance outcomes. Some countries may score highly on a
range of indicators measuring recommended practices on tax administration, legal systems, private
sector regulation, etc., and on a range of governance outcomes (tax compliance, corruption in various
sectors, delays in issuing permits, etc.), while other countries score poorly. If so, our indicators for
procurement policies and outcomes - as merely one of many elements of governance systems - could
be proxying for these broader systems. Then, well-governed countries may score highly on PEFA
procurement indicators and on procurement outcomes in Enterprise Survey questions, even if there is
no causal effect of the former on the latter.
       However, there is a surprising degree of variation in country performance across policy areas or
sectors within countries. For the Enterprise Surveys, Kenny (2009) reports considerable variation in
corruption experiences across economic sectors within countries. Nor are country rankings on
different types of corruption measured by the Enterprise Surveys very highly correlated with each
other. Moreover, (Spearman) rank correlations among the various aspects of public financial
management, as measured by PEFA, are quite modest, averaging +.10 and ranging from -.34 to +.42.
       If the results in Tables 1-5 merely reflect something about the quality of governance more
broadly, and not about procurement systems and outcomes more narrowly, then they should be
spuriously “robust” to substituting less conceptually relevant indicators from the same data sets. We
report results from these falsification tests in Table 6. First, we replicate Tables 1 (BID regressions)
and 2 (KICKBACK) regressions, substituting PEFA question 18 (on payroll controls) and its four sub-




                                                         26
indicators for question 19 (on procurement) and its four sub-components.26 The first two columns of
Table 6 show, for bidding (column 6.1) and kickbacks (column 6.2), only the coefficient and standard
error for the relevant PEFA indicator. None of the ten coefficients are significant: the largest test
statistic is -1.64 and they are below 1 in every other case.
        Second, we replicate the KICKBACK regressions from Table 2, including the question 19
procurement indicators, but substitute two broader outcomes for kickbacks. Column 6.3 reports results
with the “time tax” – a measure of the regulatory burden - as the dependent variable: the percentage of
top managers’ time spent dealing with government regulations, including taxes, customs, licenses,
etc.27 Of the five procurement indicators, only COMPLAINT is significant. In contrast, three of them
were significant (including OVERALL at the .10 level) in Table 2 with kickbacks as the dependent
variable. Column 6.4 reports results with the “bribe tax” as the dependent variable: total “gifts” or
“informal payments” needed “to get things done” with regard to licensing, taxes, etc., as a percentage
of firm revenues.28 Of the five procurement indicators, again only one (METHODS) is significant.
        To summarize, better procurement policies tend to predict more favorable procurement
outcomes (more bidding, fewer and smaller kickbacks), but they do not predict other “good
governance” outcomes very well. Nor do better PFM practices in other areas such as payroll controls
predict more favorable procurement outcomes. Our findings thus appear to be reflecting particular
relationships about procurement practices and outcomes, and not merely distinguishing well-governed
from poorly-governed countries more broadly. Consistent with this interpretation, our main results are
also robust to controlling for country-level measures of “good governance,” such as the Freedom
House indexes of political freedoms and civil liberties.


9. Conclusion




26
   The procurement and payroll controls questions are grouped with several others in the PEFA questionnaire under the
heading “predictability and control in budget execution.” Of all the PEFA questions, payroll controls is conceptually the
most closely related to procurement, as it measures the performance of systems for implementing and monitoring another,
even larger, expenditure category: salaries of public employees. As with procurement, deficiencies in payroll systems can
result in corruption, in this case in the form of “ghost workers.”
27
   The mean value in our sample is 10.7%. The manual for survey enumerators (World Bank, 2011) states that responses to
this question “should not include time spent negotiating procurement contracts with the government – only time dealing
with red tape and bureaucracy” associated with regulations, inspections, etc.
28
   The mean value in our sample is 0.27%. It is not possible to subtract kickbacks from this amount, because there is no
measure of the volume of sales to government.
                                                                27
       This study contributes to the literature on competition and corruption in procurement markets.
It finds fairly robust evidence that more firms participate on procurement markets when exceptions to
competitive methods must be explicitly justified. There is some evidence that more transparent
systems also encourage more bidding by firms. We also find highly robust evidence for the
importance of independent, effective complaints mechanisms in deterring kickbacks. Comprehensive
and timely external audits are strongly associated with lower kickbacks, and with a higher likelihood of
bidding by firms in some but not all specifications.
       Despite the robustness of these relationships in terms of statistical significance, the estimated
effects implied by the regressions coefficients we report should be interpreted cautiously. They may
be subject to some endogeneity bias (likely downward, in absolute value), and affected somewhat by
multicollinearity among the various PEFA indicators, including the one on external audit. They also
represent average effects over 88 countries and numerous industries or sectors, and the highest payoff
reforms will vary somewhat by country and sector (Kenny, 2009: 26). Moreover, we recognize that
reforms in other areas of public sector management, “both upstream towards budgeting and project
selection, and downstream towards the final quality of deliverables,” will often be necessary to reap
the full benefits of reforms in procurement systems (Kenny, 2009: 33-34).
         As our insignificant results on the de jure procurement indicator suggest, implementation can
be a more difficult challenge than identifying the most promising reform areas. For example,
establishing an e-procurement site to improve transparency and reduce transactions costs has limited
benefits if links to tender documents merely lead users to an empty page (World Bank, 2016: p. 3).
       We also readily acknowledge that our study is not designed to answer many other aspects of
procurement quality, such as quality or cost, or the appropriate choice of projects in upstream
procurement needs assessments. For example, a differently-designed study could test for links
between another PEFA indicator on whether budget documents reflect a multi-year perspective
(question 12 in the PEFA 2011 framework), and more “downstream” outcomes such as quality of
public infrastructure and service delivery. Nor does our study address all forms of corruption in
procurement, e.g. bid rigging among firms where no kickback to a public official occurs. “Corrupt
actors” can “intrude into a procurement procedure at many points along the procurement chain” (Ware
et al., 2007: 297). OECD (2009: 10) notes that “the stage of needs assessment…is particularly
vulnerable to political interference.”


                                                       28
       Finally, future cross-country analysis of procurement can benefit from new indicators as more
data become available. A new sub-indicator on “procurement monitoring” in the 2016 PEFA
Framework assesses the accuracy and comprehensiveness of databases on procurement contracts.
More importantly, a new “Benchmarking Public Procurement” data set for 180 countries provides
objective indicators on various stages of the procurement life cycle, from the standpoint of information
and other transactions costs to private suppliers (World Bank, 2017). Numerical indexes cover the
stages of needs assessment, call for tender and bid preparation; bid submission; bid opening, evaluation
and award; content and management of the procurement contract; performance guarantee, and payment
of suppliers. In addition to the indexes, the underlying information on which they are calculated is
available, as well as (non-scored) information on complaints mechanisms.




                                                      29
                                                 References
Andrews, Matt (2014). “Why distributed End Users Often Limit Public Financial Management Reform
      Success.” Harvard Kennedy School Faculty Working Paper Series, RWP14-026.

Andrews, Matt (2010). “How Far Have Public Financial Management Reforms Come in Africa?”
      Harvard Kennedy School Faculty Working Paper Series, RWP10-018.

Avis, Eric; Claudio Ferraz and Frederico Finan (2016). Do government audits reduce corruption?
       Estimating the impacts of exposing corrupt politicians.” NBER Working Paper 22443
       (http://www.nber.org/papers/w22443).

Balsevich, Anna; Svetlana Pivovarova and Elena Podkolzina (2011). “Information Transparency in
       Russian Procurement: How it Works in Russian Regions.” National Research University,
       Higher School of Economics, Working Paper WP BRP 01/EC/2011.

Bandiera, Oriana; Andrea Prat and Tommaso Valletti (2009). “Active and passive waste in government
      spending: Evidence from a policy experiment.” American Economic Review 99(4): 1278-1308).

Bliss, Christopher and Rafael Di Tella (1997). “Does competition kill corruption?” Journal of Political
        Economy 105(5): 1001-1023.

Cameron, Lisa J. (2000). “Limiting Buyer Discretion: Effects on Performance and Price in Long-Term
      Contracts.” American Economic Review 90(1): 265-81.

Celentani, Marco and Juan-Jose Ganuza (2002). “Corruption and competition in procurement.”
       European Economic Review 46:1273-1303.

Collier, Paul; Martina Kirchberger and Mans Soderbom (2015). “The cost of road infrastructure in
        low- and middle-income countries.” World Bank Economic Review 30(3): 522-48.

Coviello, Decio and Mario Mariniello (2014). “Publicity requirements in public procurement:
       Evidence from a regression discontinuity design.” Journal of Public Economics 109: 76-100.

Dahlström, Carl; Jan Teorell, Stefan Dahlberg, Felix Hartmann, Annika Lindberg and Marina
       Nistotskaya (2015). The QoG Expert Survey Dataset II. University of Gothenburg: The Quality
       of Government Institute.

Decarolis, Francesco (2014). “Awarding price, contract performance, and bids screening: Evidence
      from procurement auctions.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6(1): 108-32.

De Renzio, Paolo (2009). “Taking Stock: What do PEFA Assessments Tell Us About PFM Systems
      Across Countries?” ODI Working Paper 302. London: Overseas Development Institute.




                                                      30
Di Tella, Rafael and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2003). “The Role of Wages and Auditing During a
       Crackdown on Corruption in the City of Buenos Aires.” Journal of Law and Economics 46(1):
       269-92.

Estache, Antonio and Atsushi Iimi (2008). “Procurement efficiency for infrastructure development and
       financial needs reassessed.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4662.

Evenett, Simon J. and Bernard M. Hoekman (2005a). “Government procurement, market access,
       transparency, and multilateral trade rules.” European Journal of Political Economy 21: 163-83.

Evenett, Simon J. and Bernard M. Hoekman (2005b). “International cooperation and the reform of
       public procurement policies.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3720.

Hessami, Zohal (2014). “Political corruption, public procurement, and budget composition: Theory
      and evidence from OECD countries.” European Journal of Political Economy 34: 372-89.

Hoekman, Bernard (1998). “Using international institutions to improve public procurement.” World
     Bank Research Observer 13(2): 249-69.

Keefer, Philip and Stephen Knack (2007). "Boondoggles, Rent-seeking and Political Checks and
       Balances: Public Investment Under Unaccountable Governments." Review of Economics and
       Statistics, 89(3), 566-72.

Kenny, Charles (2009). “Transport construction, corruption and developing countries.” Transport
      Reviews 29(1): 21-41.

Kenny, Charles and Ben Crisman (2016). “Results through transparency: Does publicity lead to better
      procurement?” Center for Global Development Working Paper 437.

Kisunko, Gregory; Knack, Stephen; Islam, Roumeen; Ponamariov, Branco (2013). Russian Federation
      - National and regional trends in regulatory burden and corruption. Washington DC ; World
      Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/906081468307476753/Russian-Federation-
      National-and-regional-trends-in-regulatory-burden-and-corruption

Kenny, Charles (2009). “Transport Construction, Corruption and Developing Countries.” Transport
      Reviews 29(1): 21-41.

Kenny, Charles and Ben Crisman (2016). “Results Through Transparency: Does Publicity Lead to
      Better Procurement?” Center for Global Development Working Paper 437. Washington DC.

Knack, Stephen (2014). "Building or Bypassing Recipient Country Systems: Are Donors Defying the
       Paris Declaration?" Journal of Development Studies, 50(6): 839-54.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2008). “The Economic
       Consequences of Legal Origins.” Journal of Economic Literature 46 (2): 285-332.

                                                     31
Lewis-Faupel, Sean; Yusuf Neggers, Benjamin A. Olken and Rohini Pande (2016). “Can electronic
      procurement improve infrastructure provision? Evidence from public works in India and
      Indonesia.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8(3): 258-83.

Mauro, Paolo (1998). “Corruption and the composition of public expenditure.” Journal of Public
      Economics 69: 263-79.

Mironov, Maxim and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya (2016). “Corruption in procurement and the political
      cycle in tunneling: Evidence from financial transactions data.” American Economic Journal:
      Economic Policy 8(2): 287-321.

OECD (2009). OECD Principles for Integrity in Public Procurement.
     http://www.oecd.org/gov/ethics/48994520.pdf

Ohashi, Hiroshi (2009). “Effects of transparency in procurement practices on government expenditure:
       A case study of municipal public works.” Review of Industrial Organization 34: 267-85.
Olken, Benjamin A. (2007). “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.”
       Journal of Political Economy 115(2): 200-249.

PEFA Secretariat (2016). “PEFA Phase IV (2012-2017) Program Document.”
      https://pefa.org/sites/default/files/attachments/PEFA%20Phase%20IV%20Program%20Docum
      ent%20-%20Final%20-%20April%2025%2C%202012.pdf

PEFA Secretariat (2011). “PFM Performance Measurement Framework (updated January 2011).”
      https://pefa.org/sites/default/files/PMFEng-finalSZreprint04-12_1.pdf

Pimenta, Carlos and Natalia Rezai (2015). “Public procurement in Latin America.” Chapter 8 in C.
      Pimenta and M. Pressoa, eds., Public Financial Management in Latin America. Washington,
      DC: Inter-American Development Bank.

Transparency International (2014). Curbing corruption in public procurement: A practical guide.
       http://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/publication/curbing_corruption_in_public_procuremen
       t_a_practical_guide.

Ware, Glenn T., Shaun Moss, J. Edgardo Campos, and Gregory P. Noone (2007). “Corruption in
      public procurement: A perennial challenge.” Chapter 9 in J.E. Campos and S. Pradhan, eds.,
      The Many Faces of Corruption: Tracking Vulnerabilities at the Sector Level. Washington, DC:
      The World Bank.

World Bank (2017). Benchmarking Public Procurement 2017: Assessing Public Procurement Systems
      in 180 Economies. Washington, DC.

World Bank (2016). Benchmarking Public Procurement 2016: Assessing Public Procurement Systems
      in 77 Economies. Washington, DC.


                                                    32
World Bank (2015). Benchmarking Public Procurement 2015: Pilot Report Assessing Public
      Procurement Systems in 10 Economies. Washington, DC.

World Bank (2011). “World Bank’s Enterprise Survey: Understanding the Questionnaire.”
      http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/~/media/GIAWB/EnterpriseSurveys/Documents/Methodolog
      y/Questionnaire-Manual.pdf.

World Bank (2005). Anticorruption in Transition 3: Who is Succeeding…and Why?. Washington, DC:
      World Bank.

World Bank (2002). Anticorruption in Transition 2: Corruption in Enterprise-State Interactions in
      Europe and Central Asia 1999-2002. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Yakovlev, Andrei; Oleg Vyglovsky, Olga Demidova and Alexander Bashlyk (2015). “Incentives for
      repeated contracts in public sector: Empirical study of gasoline procurement in Russia.”
      National Research University, Higher School of Economics, Working Paper WP BRP
      24/PA/2015.

Zamboni, Yves and Stephan Litschig (2016). “Audit risk and rent extraction: Evidence from a
     randomized evaluation in Brazil.” Barcelona Graduate School of Economics Working Paper
     No. 554.




                                                    33
                                      Table 1: Bidding for public contracts (probit)

Equation                         1.1                  1.2                1.3                   1.4                1.5
PEFA question                OVERALL               LEGAL             METHODS               ACCESS            COMPLAINT
PEFA 19 score                  0.010                -0.002             0.009                 0.008              0.002
                               (2.04)              (-0.52)             (2.43)                (2.24)             (0.48)
AUDIT                          0.005                0.006              0.008                 0.007              0.006
(PEFA 26)                      (0.94)               (1.09)             (1.60)                (1.28)             (1.15)
Log of no.                     0.031                0.031              0.031                 0.031              0.030
Employees                      (9.97)              (10.08)            (10.10)                (9.89)             (9.80)
Log of firm age                0.013                0.012              0.013                 0.014              0.011
                               (3.23)               (2.81)             (3.31)                (3.39)             (2.73)
Log of                         0.017                0.020              0.017                 0.017              0.018
mgr. experience                (3.23)               (3.55)             (3.08)                (3.17)             (3.30)
Establishment part             0.021                0.021              0.021                 0.019              0.023
of larger firm                 (1.76)               (1.73)             (1.71)                (1.58)             (1.82)
Other                         -0.011                -0.011            -0.012                -0.014             -0.010
ownership (%)                 (-0.96)              (-0.96)            (-1.10)               (-1.30)            (-0.88)
Private foreign               -0.049                -0.056            -0.054                -0.050             -0.052
ownership (%)                 (-2.35)              (-2.69)            (-2.59)               (-2.41)            (-2.50)
State ownership                0.165                0.162              0.170                 0.163              0.156
(%)                            (2.87)               (2.81)             (2.90)                (2.84)             (2.75)
International                  0.034                0.034              0.035                 0.036              0.034
Certification                  (2.84)               (2.78)             (2.93)                (2.96)             (2.75)
National sales                 0.001                0.001              0.001                 0.001              0.001
(%)                            (5.10)               (5.18)             (5.01)                (5.14)             (4.72)
Log of GDP per                -0.014                -0.017            -0.018                -0.014             -0.016
capita                        (-0.88)              (-1.09)            (-1.25)               (-0.95)            (-1.05)
Log of population             -0.031                -0.027            -0.027                -0.029             -0.024
                              (-2.44)              (-2.27)            (-2.34)               (-2.42)            (-1.82)
Log of land area               0.022                0.023              0.022                 0.023              0.022
(sq. km)                       (3.38)               (3.61)             (3.36)                (3.68)             (3.20)
Log of per capita              0.017                0.022              0.022                 0.020              0.020
ODA                            (1.24)               (1.60)             (1.63)                (1.46)             (1.49)
Enterprise survey              0.006                0.004              0.007                 0.007              0.003
Year                           (0.97)               (0.69)             (1.22)                (1.07)             (0.47)
# obs., countries            33385, 88            33385, 88          32793, 86             32929, 87          32561, 86
Mean dep. var.                  .188                 .188               .189                  .190               .184
pseudo R2                        .07                  .07                .07                   .07                .07
Dependent variable is dummy for whether firms report attempting to procure a government contract in the last 12 months.
All regressions include region and sector fixed effects. T-statistics, reported in parentheses below point estimates, are based
on standard errors adjusted for non-independence of errors within country clusters of observations. Marginal effects are
reported rather than unadjusted probit regression coefficients.


                                                                  34
                                    Table 2: “Kickbacks” needed to obtain contracts

Equation                         2.1                  2.2                2.3                 2.4                  2.5
PEFA question                OVERALL               LEGAL             METHODS              ACCESS             COMPLAINT
PEFA 19 score                  -0.252               -0.126             -0.147              -0.117              -0.319
                               (-1.78)              (-0.69)            (-1.98)             (-1.02)             (-2.34)
AUDIT                          -0.377               -0.374             -0.429              -0.399              -0.336
                               (-2.30)              (-2.37)            (-2.51)             (-2.40)             (-1.91)
Log of number                  -0.326               -0.324             -0.323              -0.319              -0.340
employees                      (-3.81)              (-3.76)            (-3.73)             (-3.75)             (-3.90)
Log of firm age                -0.373               -0.361             -0.368              -0.370              -0.393
                               (-2.05)              (-1.97)            (-2.00)             (-2.02)             (-2.18)
Log of                         -0.150               -0.189             -0.176              -0.176              -0.088
mgr. experience                (-0.74)              (-0.93)            (-0.83)             (-0.86)             (-0.46)
Establishment part              0.915                0.910              0.908               0.910               0.990
of larger firm                  (1.98)               (1.97)             (1.95)              (1.95)              (2.06)
Other                           0.834                0.847              0.833               0.825               0.887
ownership (%)                   (1.24)               (1.25)             (1.22)              (1.23)              (1.34)
Private foreign                -2.418               -2.328             -2.317              -2.377              -2.483
ownership (%)                  (-1.77)              (-1.73)            (-1.73)             (-1.75)             (-1.84)
State ownership                -3.089               -3.220             -3.352              -3.138              -2.780
(%)                            (-2.18)              (-2.13)            (-2.18)             (-2.15)             (-2.17)
Log of GDP per                 -0.059               -0.101              0.001              -0.032               0.025
capita                         (-0.10)              (-0.20)             (0.01)             (-0.06)              (0.05)
Log of population               0.784                0.697              0.738               0.741               0.944
                                (1.59)               (1.50)             (1.50)              (1.49)              (1.69)
Log of land area               -0.083               -0.109             -0.069              -0.111              -0.106
(sq. km)                       (-0.39)              (-0.55)            (-0.32)             (-0.52)             (-0.48)
Log of per capita               0.584                0.502              0.541               0.543               0.767
ODA                             (1.82)               (1.60)             (1.77)              (1.66)              (2.31)
Enterprise survey               0.095                0.136              0.087               0.129               0.083
year                            (0.50)               (0.68)             (0.45)              (0.65)              (0.41)
# obs., countries             5371, 88             5371, 88           5333, 86            5363, 87            5119, 86
Mean dep. var.                   2.27                 2.27               2.28                2.27                2.35
R2                               .05                   .05                .05                 .05                 .06
Dependent variable is percentage of contract value “typically paid in informal payments or gifts to secure the contract.” All
regressions include region and sector fixed effects. T-statistics, reported in parentheses below point estimates, are based on
standard errors adjusted for non-independence of errors within country clusters of observations.




                                                                  35
                                 Table 3: Multiple PEFA-19 components

Column #                             3.1             3.2           3.3            3.4
Dependent variable                 Bid for public contract         Informal payments
LEGAL                              -0.003          -0.004        -0.038          0.059
                                   (-0.67)         (-0.67)       (-0.22)        (0.37)
METHODS                             0.008                        -0.072
                                    (2.12)                       (-0.83)
ACCESS                              0.003                         0.112
                                    (0.76)                        (0.87)
COMPLAINT                          -0.004                        -0.321
                                   (-1.04)                       (-2.31)
METHODS-A                                           0.048                       -0.246
                                                   (1.97)                       (-0.49)
ACCESS-AB                                           0.025                       -0.004
                                                   (1.43)                       (-0.01)
COMPLAINT-AB                                       -0.016                       -2.176
                                                   (-0.78)                      (-2.94)
AUDIT                               0.010           0.011        -0.343         -0.394
                                    (1.78)          (1.90)       (-1.97)        (-2.10)
# obs., countries                 31971, 84      31971, 84      5081, 84       5081, 83
Mean dep. var.                      .186            .186           2.36           2.36
R2                                     .07            .07             .06              .06
Dependent variable in columns 3.1 and 3.2 is dummy for whether firms report attempting to procure a
government contract in the last 12 months. Dependent variable in columns 3.3 and 3.4 is percentage of
contract value “typically paid in informal payments or gifts to secure the contract.” T-statistics,
reported in parentheses below point estimates, are based on standard errors adjusted for non-
independence of errors within country clusters of observations. Results are shown only for PEFA 19
indicators, from regressions based on equations 1.2 and 1.4 in Table 1.




                                                     36
                                                   Table 4: Disaggregating by Firm Size

Column                    4.1            4.2            4.3           4.4           4.5            4.6           4.7            4.8
Dependent variable                    Bid for public contract                                      Informal payments
Sample of firms           All           Small       Medium           Large          All           Small       Medium
                                                                                                                           Large (1107)
                                      (16937)        (10457)        (5455)                       (2842)        (2110)
LEGAL                    -0.002        -0.001         -0.004        -0.002        -0.126         -0.256         0.032         -0.059
                         (-0.52)       (-0.15)        (-0.60)       (-0.42)       (-0.69)        (-1.09)        (0.23)        (-0.31)
METHODS-A                 0.055         0.051          0.068         0.045        -1.169         -1.474        -0.733         -0.784
                          (2.29)        (2.17)         (2.41)        (1.40)       (-2.55)        (-2.45)       (-1.62)        (-1.47)
ACCESS-AB                 0.040         0.051          0.037         0.019        -0.764         -0.981        -0.097         -0.658
                          (2.43)        (3.01)        (1.83)         (1.00)       (-1.53)        (-1.48)       (-0.23)        (-1.16)
COMPLAINT-AB              0.018         0.028          0.004        -0.001        -2.183         -2.629        -1.163         -2.311
                          (0.86)        (1.43)         (0.15)       (-0.03)       (-3.13)        (-3.43)       (-2.00)        (-2.22)

INDEX                      0.054           0.032         0.026        0.014          -1.539        -1.371         -0.446         -0.886
                           (2.29)         (2.39)        (1.41)        (1.00)         (-2.69)       (-2.80)        (-1.44)       (-1.63)
# of obs.                 33,385          17,287        10,607        5,465           5371          2,319          1,962         1,090
Mean dep. var.              .188           .156          .213          .231            2.27          2.90           1.88          1.39
Dependent variable in columns 4.1-4.4 is dummy for whether firms report attempting to procure a government contract in the last 12
months. Dependent variable in columns 4.5-4.8 is percentage of contract value “typically paid in informal payments or gifts to secure
the contract.” T-statistics, reported in parentheses below point estimates, are based on standard errors adjusted for non-independence
of errors within country clusters of observations. For probit regressions (columns 4.1-4.4), marginal effects are reported rather than
unadjusted regression coefficients. Results are shown only for PEFA question 19 indicators, from regressions based on specifications
in Tables 1 and 2. INDEX is the mean of the standardized scores of the LEGAL, METHODS-A, ACCESS-AB, COMPLAINT-AB.
Number of observations and mean of dependent variable apply to regressions with INDEX. “Small” firms have fewer than 20
employees; “medium” firms have 20-99 employees; “large” firms have 100 or more employees.




                                                                      37
                                                       Table 5: robustness to additional regressors
 Equation                       5.1          5.2          5.3              5.4              5.5               5.6             5.7            5.8
 Dependent variable                       Bid for public contract                                   Informal payments for obtaining contract
 METHODS-A                    0.059                      0.050
                              (2.44)                    (2.04)
 COMPLAINT-AB                                                                             -2.320                                 -1.162
                                                                                          (-3.15)                                (-2.23)
 INDEX                                       0.027                       0.032                               -1.150                                 -0.349
                                             (2.03)                      (2.39)                              (-2.55)                                (-1.10)
 AUDIT                        0.008          0.006         0.019         0.020            -0.408             -0.429              -0.265             -0.312
                              (1.45)         (1.05)        (3.39)        (3.58)           (-2.36)            (-2.60)             (-1.57)            (-2.15)
 Court system fair,          -0.0002         0.001                                        -0.401             -0.444
 Impartial                   (-0.06)         (0.32)                                       (-2.23)            (-2.62)
 Government                                                0.005         0.006                                                    0.068              0.069
 consumption/GDP                                           (2.29)        (2.78)                                                  (1.20)             (1.08)
 Public inv./GDP                                           0.006         0.007                                                   -0.208             -0.214
                                                           (2.28)        (2.47)                                                  (-3.60)            (-3.72)
 # obs.                       29351          29865         20534         20534             4683               4907                3259               3345
 # countries                     85             87           55            55               85                  87                  54                 54
 Mean dep. var.                .193           .191          .190          .190             2.40               2.32                2.07               2.03
 R2/pseudo R2                   .07            .07           .09           .09              .07                .07                 .07                .07
Dependent variable in equations 5.1-5.4 is dummy for whether firms report attempting to procure a government contract, and in equations 5.5-5.8 is percentage
of contract value “typically paid in informal payments or gifts.” T-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors adjusted for clustering by country.
Results are shown only for PEFA indicators and added regressors, but regressions also include all control variables from Tables 1 and 2. “INDEX” is the mean
of the standardized scores of PEFA components LEGAL, METHODS-A, ACCESS-AB, COMPLAINT-AB.




                                                                                    38
                                                 Table 6: Falsification tests

            Column #                             6.1              6.2                  6.3                 6.4
            Dependent variable                   BID           KICKBACK              Time tax           Bribe tax
Row #       PEFA indicator
1           OVERALL                                                                   -0.262              -0.075
                                                                                      (-0.63)             (-1.58)
2           LEGAL                                                                     -0.579              -0.020
                                                                                      (-1.46)             (-0.56)
3           METHODS                                                                   -0.032              -0.046
                                                                                      (-0.11)             (-2.13)
4           ACCESS                                                                     0.057              -0.036
                                                                                       (0.14)             (-1.20)
5           COMPLAINT                                                                 -0.537              -0.034
                                                                                      (-2.58)             (-1.37)
6           PEFA 18 (payroll                    0.005               0.048
            controls)                           (0.74)             (0.35)
7           18-1                               0.0001              -0.134
                                                (0.01)             (-1.07)
8           18-2                               -0.002               0.033
                                               (-0.38)             (0.33)
9           18-3                                0.001              -0.339
                                                (0.20)             (-1.64)
10          18-4                                0.001             -0.1874
                                                (0.08)             (-0.87)
Each cell in the table summarizes the key result from a separate regression. Dependent variables in columns 6.1-6.4
respectively are: dummy for whether firms report attempting to procure a government contract in the last 12 months,
percentage of contract value “typically paid in informal payments or gifts to secure the contract,” percentage of senior
managers’ time spent dealing with government regulations, and total unofficial payments to government officials as
percentage of firm sales. T-statistics, reported in parentheses below point estimates, are based on standard errors adjusted
for non-independence of errors within country clusters of observations. Results are shown only for PEFA indicators, from
regressions based on Table 1 and Table 2 specifications.




                                                                  39
                                           Table A1
                                        Summary statistics
                                                 mean Std. dev.   Min.    Max.      N
Firm level
Bid for public contract                           .188     .390    0        1      33385
Informal payment to obtain contract               2.32     7.64    0       100      6059
No. of employees                                  87.0    375.8    1      17000    33385
Firm age                                         21.0     74.4     0      2025     33385
Establishment part of larger firm                 .168     .374    0        1      33385
Private domestic ownership                        .872     .310    0        1      33385
Private foreign ownership                         .032     .162    0        1      33385
State ownership                                   .001     .025    0       .99     33385
International certification                       .384     .486    0        1      33385
National sales %                                  89.1     26.9    0       100     33385
Senior mgmt. time dealing with regulation        10.66    19.34    0       100     31564
Court system fair, impartial, uncorrupt           2.27     1.00    1        4      29865
Unofficial payments “to get things done”/sales    .267    3.535    0       100     26838

Country level
OVERALL (PEFA 19)                                 3.76     1.66      1       7     33385
LEGAL (19-1)                                      4.48     1.68      1       7     33385
METHODS (19-2)                                    3.09    2.55       1      7      32793
ACCESS (19-3)                                     3.96     2.19      1       7     32929
COMPLAINT (19-4)                                  3.29     2.51      1       7     32561
METHODS-A                                         0.23    0.42       0      1      31806
ACCESS-AB                                         0.49     0.50      0       1     31806
COMPLAINT-AB                                      0.45     0.50      0       1     31806
INDEX (of 4 standardized components)              -0.02    0.69   -1.10    1.61      33
AUDIT (PEFA 26)                                   3.57     1.63      1       6     33385
GDP per capita                                    3048    2643     220    15921    33385
Population (millions)                             45.5    64.6    .052    254.0    33385
Area (thousands of sq. km)                       446.2    514.5     .26    2267    33385
Enterprise Survey year                           2011.6     2.1   2009    2015.7   33385
ODA per capita                                    70.1     87.1   -1.53   901.1    33385
Government consumption/GDP                        13.8     5.3      5.0    26.0    20535
Public investment/GDP                              6.1      3.7    -2.8    17.7    20535




                                                  40
                                         Table A2
country                  ES year   PEFA year   proportion   kickback %   PEFA 19    obs.
                                                bidding                   index
Afghanistan                2014       2013          0.145        5.921      0.798     365
Albania                    2013       2012          0.058        1.154      1.110     313
Antigua and Barbuda        2010       2014          0.154        0.000     -0.779     149
Armenia                    2013       2014          0.159        0.182      0.798     352
Azerbaijan                 2013       2014          0.070        0.529      0.604     374
Bangladesh                 2013       2016          0.053        3.054      0.798    1421
Barbados                   2010       2013          0.250        0.276     -0.779     128
Belarus                    2013       2014          0.254        0.976     -1.063     347
Belize                     2010       2014          0.194        0.000     -0.779     144
Benin                      2016       2014          0.322        4.595      0.012     149
Bhutan                     2015       2016          0.344        0.287      0.295     253
Bosnia and Herzegovina     2013       2014          0.118        0.333      0.012     355
Botswana                   2010       2013          0.529        0.794      1.110     263
Burkina Faso               2009       2014          0.417        1.172      1.110     367
Burundi                    2014       2015          0.365        2.220     -0.494     156
Cambodia                   2016       2015          0.124        1.677     -0.494     338
Cape Verde                 2009       2016          0.084        0.000      0.012     143
Colombia                   2010       2016          0.304        1.488      1.110     936
Congo, Dem. Rep.           2013       2013          0.120        3.870      0.012     518
Congo, Rep.                2009       2014          0.226        3.000     -0.494     106
Costa Rica                 2010       2016          0.256        0.146     -0.209     520
Côte d'Ivoire              2009       2013          0.110        6.056      0.513     490
Dominica                   2010       2015          0.113        0.000     -1.063     150
Dominican Republic         2010       2016          0.156        1.717     -0.494     327
Ecuador                    2010       2014          0.313        2.064      0.604     361
El Salvador                2016       2013          0.170        1.513      0.604     717
Ethiopia                   2015       2015          0.320        0.500      0.012     847
Fiji                       2009       2013          0.163        0.136     -0.779     153
Gabon                      2009       2014          0.149        2.500     -0.209     148
Georgia                    2013       2013          0.201        0.074      1.394     343
Ghana                      2013       2013          0.218        3.904      0.012     683
Grenada                    2010       2015          0.184        1.038     -0.779     152
Guatemala                  2010       2013          0.183        2.916     -1.063     579
Honduras                   2010       2013          0.118        2.722      0.292     331
Indonesia                  2015       2012          0.056        1.981     -0.494    1311
Jamaica                    2010       2013          0.162        0.250     -0.278     327
Jordan                     2013       2011          0.154        0.000     -0.182     571
Kenya                      2013       2012          0.190        3.280      0.513     737
Kosovo                     2013       2013          0.361        2.952      0.007     202
                                                41
Kyrgyz Republic         2013   2015        0.278    4.036    0.007    263
Lesotho                 2016   2012        0.233    5.233   -0.494    150
Liberia                 2009   2016        0.193    6.222    0.012    140
Macedonia, FYR          2013   2015        0.100    0.886    0.825    359
Madagascar              2013   2014        0.092    6.222   -0.494    251
Malawi                  2014   2011        0.273    2.303    0.012    466
Mali                    2016   2016        0.525    6.672    0.012    185
Mauritania              2014   2014        0.310    2.030    0.798    126
Mauritius               2009   2015        0.187    1.016   -0.278    363
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.   2009   2013        0.176    0.000   -1.063     68
Moldova                 2013   2015        0.234    1.871    0.007    696
Mongolia                2013   2015        0.349    1.682   -0.494    347
Montenegro              2013   2013        0.097    0.000    0.292    144
Morocco                 2013   2016        0.191    0.317    0.007    393
Namibia                 2014   2015        0.263    0.803   -0.779    543
Nepal                   2013   2015        0.059    6.917    0.012    476
Nicaragua               2010   2015        0.187    3.333    0.292    321
Niger                   2009   2013        0.429    3.558    0.798    147
Nigeria                 2014   2013        0.177   10.817   -1.063   1080
Pakistan                2013   2012        0.091    6.371   -0.494   1005
Panama                  2010   2013        0.020    0.000   -0.494    344
Papua New Guinea        2015   2015        0.246    1.000   -0.779     65
Paraguay                2010   2016        0.304    3.346    0.889    345
Peru                    2010   2015        0.250    1.756    1.110    980
Philippines             2015   2016        0.094    1.815    0.513   1279
Rwanda                  2011   2015        0.543    0.404    0.894    230
Samoa                   2009   2014        0.390    3.061    0.103    100
Senegal                 2014   2011        0.171    0.547    1.110    572
Serbia                  2013   2015        0.081    0.650    1.110    356
Sierra Leone            2009   2014        0.083    6.667   -0.209     72
Solomon Islands         2015   2012        0.238    2.265   -1.063    147
South Sudan             2014   2012        0.148    7.942   -0.779    664
Sri Lanka               2011   2013        0.086    1.081   -0.563    582
St. Kitts and Nevis     2010   2016        0.209    0.767   -0.857    148
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines              2010   2012        0.211    0.000   -0.779   152
Suriname                2010   2015        0.086    0.000   -1.063   152
Tajikistan              2013   2012        0.286    3.000    0.007   336
Tanzania                2013   2013        0.048    2.273   -0.243   546
Timor-Leste             2015   2014        0.333   14.850   -0.494   126
Togo                    2009   2016        0.293    1.486    0.513   150
Tunisia                 2013   2016        0.301    0.837    0.331   592
Uganda                  2013   2012        0.137    4.500   -0.494   652
                                      42
Ukraine      2013   2016        0.154   16.545    0.007   214
Uruguay      2010   2012        0.191    0.018   -0.182   593
Uzbekistan   2013   2012        0.124    0.614   -1.063   386
Vanuatu      2009   2013        0.213    3.375   -1.063   122
Vietnam      2015   2013        0.182    3.382    0.228   982
Zambia       2013   2013        0.166    2.939   -0.494   706
Zimbabwe     2011   2012        0.217    0.136   -0.273   594




                           43
