                                                        WPS8189


Policy Research Working Paper                          8189




                    Shelter from the Storm?
         Household-Level Impacts of, and Responses to,
                 the 2015 Floods in Malawi

                                Nancy McCarthy
                                    Talip Kilic
                              Alejandro de la Fuente
                                  Josh Brubaker




Development Economics
Development Data Group
  &
Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8189


  Abstract
 As extreme weather events intensify due to climate change,                          access to social safety nets increased food consumption out-
 it becomes ever more critical to understand how vulner-                             comes, particularly for those in moderately-affected areas,
 able households are to these events and the mechanisms                              the proportion of households with access to certain safety
 households can rely on to minimize losses effectively. This                         net programs was lower in 2015 compared with 2013.
 paper analyzes the impacts of the floods that occurred                              The latter finding suggests that linking these programs
 during the 2014/15 growing season in Malawi, using a                                more closely to disaster relief efforts could substantially
 two-period panel data set. The results show that while yields                       improve welfare outcomes during and after a natural
 were dramatically lower for households severely affected                            disaster. Finally, risk-coping strategies, including finan-
 by the floods, drops in food consumption expenditures                               cial account ownership, access to off-farm income sources,
 and calories per capita were less dramatic. However, dietary                        and adult children living away from home, were generally
 quality, as captured by the food consumption score, was                             ineffective in mitigating the negative impacts of the floods.
 significantly lower for flood-affected households. Although




  This paper is a product of the Development Data Group, Development Economics and the Poverty and Equity Global
  Practice Group.. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution
  to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://
  econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at nmccarthy@leadanalyticsinc.com.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
Shelter from the Storm? Household-Level Impacts of, and Responses to, the 2015 Floods in Malawi

                Nancy McCarthy†, Talip Kilic‡, Alejandro de la Fuente*, and Josh Brubaker#1




JEL Codes: D60; I38; Q12; Q54.
Keywords: Extreme Weather Shocks; Flood; Household Welfare; Malawi; Sub-Saharan Africa.




1
  The senior authorship is shared between Nancy McCarthy and Talip Kilic. †Principal Researcher, LEAD Analytics,
Washington, DC. ‡Senior Economist, Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS), Survey Unit, Development Data
Group, The World Bank, Rome, Italy. *Senior Economist, Poverty and Equity Global Practice, The World Bank,
Washington, DC. #Research Analyst. LEAD Analytics, Washington, DC. The authors would like to thank Heather G.
Moylan for her inputs into the survey design and the field staff training, and (in alphabetical order) Simone Balog,
Ruth Hill, and the participants of the World Bank Global Disaster Reduction and Recovery Facility (GFDRR) seminar
(October, 2016 - Washington, DC), and the World Bank LSMS International Conference: The Use of LSMS Data for
Research, Policy, and Development (February, 2017 - Dar es Salaam, Tanzania) for their comments on the earlier
versions of this paper.
    1. Introduction

Rural households in developing countries rely on rain-fed farming as a significant source of income. In the
African context, the average share of rural household income originating from agriculture could be up to
69 percent (Davis et al., 2017), and as of 2013, only 3.4 percent of cultivated land in Sub-Saharan Africa
was irrigated, with a 0.1 percentage point increase since 1993 (FAO, 2016). Smallholders are, therefore,
clearly vulnerable to crop losses due to extreme weather events, whose frequency, intensity and duration
has been increasing over the past decades (Ummenhofer and Meehl, 2017). Further, climate scientists are
providing new links between the increase in extreme events and climate change (IPCC, 2012; Alexander,
2016). For instance, Cai et al. (2014) provide evidence that the frequency of El Nino events could double,
which would in turn lead to increased extreme weather events around the world. Other research suggests
that La Nina events can similarly lead to greater frequency of extreme weather events (Ummenhofer et
al., 2015). This suggests that farmers are likely to suffer more frequent and severe crop losses in the
future.

There is a dearth of evidence of the impact of extreme events on household-level outcomes, precisely
because extreme events are rare and because household data collection activities are generally scheduled
following other concerns, so that collecting household data after an extreme event has generally
happened by chance. There is some evidence of the impacts of extreme events on crop yields, but very
limited evidence on impacts on household welfare, such as food consumption and dietary quality.
Additionally, there is limited evidence on the mechanisms that farm household members rely on to buffer
large losses in crop harvest when they – and many of their neighbors – are hit by an extreme weather
shock. This is precisely the type of information needed to better inform disaster risk management
strategies, to develop and implement effective climate change adaptation strategies, and to optimally
integrate disaster risk management with adaptation efforts.

During the 2014/15 growing season in Malawi, severe flooding affected large numbers of farmers across
the country. An assessment undertaken by the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination unit
(UNDAC) estimated that over a million people were directly affected by the floods, with over 200,000
displaced and over 100 killed (UNDAC, 2015). A Government of Malawi Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
estimated the total costs of the flood damages at USD 335 million (Government of Malawi, 2015).
Consistent with the global and regional evidence on the increased frequency and severity of extreme
weather events, evidence from Malawi also suggests that the frequency of both flood and drought events
is increasing, and likely to increase further still with climate change (Venalainen et al., 2016; Chinsinga,
2012). Farmers are particularly vulnerable to weather shocks in Malawi, where landholdings are very
small, generally less than one hectare (Asfaw et al., 2016). Mirroring the continent-wide outlook, 2.3
percent of cropland in Malawi is irrigated, but, according to FAO’s AQUASTAT, nearly all irrigated land is
on large estates, meaning that irrigation on smallholder plots is virtually non-existent (Frenken, 2005).
Crop revenues per family member are correspondingly small (Asfaw et al., 2016; Ricker-Gilbert, Jumbe
and Chamberlain, 2014), and rural poverty rates remain stubbornly high at 57 percent in 2010 based on
the latest available official statistics on poverty for the country (World Bank, 2016).


                                                                                                          2
In this paper, we estimate the impacts of these flood events on household welfare outcomes in the period
following the floods, including the impacts on food consumption expenditures, caloric intake, and the
food consumption score. The latter is a measure of dietary quality developed by the World Food
Programme that is based on dietary diversity (World Food Programme, 2008). Further, we are interested
in determining which factors helped households minimize the negative impact of floods on welfare; we
focus particularly on potential household risk-coping strategies as well as access to social safety nets. Our
analysis relies on a multi-topic, panel household survey that was implemented by the Malawi National
Statistical Office in November-December 2015, and that tracked and re-interviewed approximately 600
households in Southern Malawi that had previously been interviewed by the national Integrated
Household Panel Survey (IHPS) in 2010 and 2013 under the World Bank Living Standards Measurement
Study-Integrated Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA) initiative. Southern Malawi showed great variability
in the extent and intensity of floods, and the existence of the pre-flood IHPS infrastructure in the country,
as well as the ability to link all available rounds of household survey data to publicly available geospatial
biophysical and agro-climatic data, created a unique opportunity to study the impact of a natural disaster.

The paper contributes to the literature in three main ways. First, it provides direct evidence of the impact
of a severe weather event on household food consumption measures using a panel data set, and is one
of a very limited number of studies to do so. Second, we evaluate the impacts of flood events on a range
of consumption measures; doing so enables us to highlight that the primary impact of the floods was to
reduce the quality of the food consumption basket rather than quantity consumed per se. This result has
important policy implications; increasing the accessibility to a wider range of food groups in response to
natural disasters can significantly increase dietary quality. Third, we are able to document the importance
of three social safety net programs – direct food aid, school feeding programs2, and Malawi Social Action
Fund (MASAF) assistance for work – with implications for how such programs may be made more effective
in responding to natural disasters in the future.

The results show that while crop production was much lower in areas severely affected by the floods,
drops in food consumption expenditures and calories per capita were less dramatic. However, food
consumption scores were significantly lower for households located in both medium- and high-affected
flood areas. At the same time, while the floods did lead to lower food consumption outcomes for some
households, many were able to shield consumption outcomes from production losses. Access to social
safety nets increased food consumption outcomes, particularly for those in moderately affected areas.
However, we note that the proportion of households with access to certain safety net programs declined
in 2015 versus 2013, suggesting that linking these programs more closely to disaster relief efforts could
substantially improve welfare outcomes during and after a natural disaster. Finally, risk-coping variables,
including financial accounts, access to off-farm income sources, and adult children living away from home,
were generally not effective in mitigating negative impacts of the floods.



2
  The specific programs captured under “school feeding programs” were the School Feeding Programme, free
distribution of Likuni Phala to children and mothers, and supplemental feeding for malnourished children at a
nutritional rehabilitation unit. The most frequent of these three is by far the School Feeding Programme.

                                                                                                           3
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature on the micro-level impacts of extreme
weather impacts. Section 3 describes the data and provides descriptive statistics. Section 4 explains our
empirical approach to studying the household-level impacts of the 2015 floods in Malawi. Section 5
discusses the results and Section 6 concludes.



    2. Literature Review

The primary impact of weather shocks on rural households’ welfare is through impacts on crop
production. Due to data limitations, only a limited number of studies have attempted to uncover the
impacts of extreme weather events on crop production at the household level. Michler et al. (2016), using
panel data from Zimbabwe, find that extreme weather events have significant negative impacts on crop
yields; descriptive statistics show that average yields in extremely low rainfall years were about 34 percent
lower than in normal years. Similarly, Wineman et al. (2017), using panel data from Kenya, find that
extremely low rainfall conditions result in a 29 percent decrease in the value of crop production per adult
equivalent.3 Estimates of flood impacts on crop production, and in particular those that are based on panel
data sets, are more scarce. Del Ninno et al. (2001), using cross-sectional data collected after the large-
scale 1998 floods in Bangladesh, document crop losses of 42 to 62 percent for the flood-affected
households, with many households losing their entire harvest.

Several studies attempt to estimate the impacts of extreme weather on a range of household welfare
outcomes, most often those that are linked to consumption. Wineman et al. (2017) find that very low
rainfall lowered income per adult equivalent per day by 18.3 percent. And while calories per adult
equivalent per day were not affected on the whole, the share originating from own crop and livestock
production was lower, and the share of purchased calories was higher as a result of the low rainfall shock.
Del Ninno et al. (2001) show that though overall food expenditures were not affected by flood intensity,
expenditures on calorie-dense foods fell, as did calorie consumption per capita for most flood-affected
household categories, except for the most severely hit. The authors hypothesize that food aid may have
helped households in the most severely-hit areas to maintain caloric intake.

Other studies estimate a 5 to 19 percent drop in consumption expenditures subsequent to a weather
shock (Arouri et al., 2015 in Vietnam; Baez et al., 2016 in Guatemala; Christiansen and Dercon, 2007 and
Dercon et al., 2005 in Ethiopia). Premand and Vakis (2010) document that households in Nicaragua that
experienced a drought over three years were 10 percent more likely to remain impoverished four years
later, while Reardon and Taylor (1996) show that the poverty rates in the Sudanian zone of Burkina Faso,
and in the drier Sahalian zone were 12 to 15, and 2 to 19 percentage points higher, respectively, after the
1984-85 droughts.


3
  Fafchamps et al. (1998) use panel data collected in six villages in Burkina Faso, where the sampled villages
experienced at least two years of extremely low rainfall compared with the long-term average. The authors find the
expected negative impacts of low rainfall on the value of crop production, though the authors do not report the size
of these impacts.

                                                                                                                  4
Weather shocks can also have indirect effects on welfare through their effects on prices and wages.
Banerjee (2007) finds that agricultural wages decrease during months with floods in Bangladesh, and
decline more when floods are “extreme.” Likewise, focusing on the extreme 1998 flooding in Bangladesh,
Mueller and Quisumbing (2010) estimate wages to have declined 4 percent for every foot the flood
deviated from normal flood depth in agricultural markets (an effect which “stabilizes” over time), and
about 7 percent in nonagricultural markets (an effect which grows over time). Del Ninno et al. (2001) also
find that wages for day laborers fell after the floods. With respect to staple food prices, Hill and Fuje (2017)
examine the impact of drought on local food prices in Ethiopia over 17 years. On average, local grain prices
in the months following harvest were estimated to increase by 2.5 percent subsequent to a 10 percent
loss in yields, but this effect dissipated until no significant effect on grain prices was observed 6 months
after the shock had realized. A higher local price after a drought would likely have a negative impact on
consumption expenditures for net-grain purchasing households.

There are numerous mechanisms that households can rely on to reduce the impact of shocks when they
do occur. A key finding in the literature is that protection through these mechanisms against disasters is
never more than partial, as consumption shortfalls remain high when faced with extreme shocks (Baez
and Mason, 2008; Dercon, 2005; Alderman and Paxson, 1994). This inability to smooth consumption has
implications for poverty in a direct way.4

The main coping mechanisms identified in the literature include household risk-coping measures such as
selling livestock (particularly smallstock) and other productive assets, and reducing food consumption
and/or dietary diversity (del Ninno et al., 2001; Kazianga and Udry, 2006). The latter mechanisms are
potentially “harmful” in the sense that relying on them may lead to lower income in the medium-long
term (Heltberg et al. 2015; Hoddinott and Kinsey, 2001). Households may also draw on coping
mechanisms that are less likely to compromise future income, such as re-allocating labor off-farm, relying
on transfers from friends and family, and/or accessing credit (Heltberg et al., 2015; Kochar, 1995; Dercon,
2002).

The empirical evidence provides a mixed picture on which of these household risk-coping strategies are
more effective, suggesting that efficacy of various strategies is context-specific. For instance, Wineman
et al. (2017) show that off-farm income fell in response to low rainfall shocks, and, therefore, was not
effective in mitigating lower crop incomes. Del Ninno et al. (2001) find that participation in the labor
market for day laborers fell initially after the floods, and was still below self-reported pre-flood levels 6
months later, in addition to lower wages as described above. On the other hand, Groger and Zylberberg
(2016) document that internal migration for wage work was effective in securing remittances to help cope
with the effects of a typhoon in Vietnam, while Arouri et al. (2015) demonstrate that internal migration
enabled households to better cope with natural disasters in Vietnam.


4
 Natural disasters of all kinds can push the near poor into poverty (de la Fuente and Dercon, 2008). A comparative
study on mobility into and out of poverty in 15 countries of Africa, South Asia, East Asia and Latin America with about
9,000 household interviews found that natural disasters (along with health adversities and death) were the second
most important reason why people became poor (Narayan et al., 2009).

                                                                                                                     5
Kazianga and Udry (2006) showcase a limited role of livestock sales in aiding households to smooth
consumption in response to a severe drought shock in Burkina Faso, consistent with households’
attempting to maintain current assets to ensure future income. Wineman et al. (2017), too, estimate no
impacts of very low rainfall on livestock incomes in Kenya. Other evidence suggests that selling livestock
is an important risk-coping mechanism for households, particularly those with larger herds who are able
to retain the most productive animals (Lybbert et al., 2004; Miura et al., 2016).

The evidence on the importance of access to credit to smooth consumption in the face of shocks is more
consistent. For instance, Wineman et al. (2017) find that credit availability within a village reduced a
household’s chances of falling into poverty due to the low rainfall shock, but that participation in a savings
group had no impact. Arouri et al. (2015) show that greater credit availability enabled households to
better cope with the effects of natural disasters in Vietnam.

Additionally, food assistance and cash transfers following a disaster can help households cope by
protecting consumption, boosting caloric intake, and potentially avoiding sales of productive assets.
Yamano et al. (2005) demonstrate that food aid offset the increase in child (0.5 to 2 years old) malnutrition
following drought-induced harvest failure in Ethiopia between 1995 and 1996. By contrast, in the absence
of food aid, a 10 percent increase in crop damage reduced children’s growth by 0.12 centimeters (1.8
percent). Also in Ethiopia, the households that were affected by the drought in 2007 and that received
transfers from the Productive Safety Net Programme (PSNP)5 consumed 30 percent more calories than
the non-beneficiaries (World Bank, 2010). De la Fuente et al. (2017) observe that participant households
in the conditional cash transfer program Progresa in Mexico displayed higher food consumption between
1998 and 2003, even in the presence of drought and flood shocks. Undoubtedly, important challenges
remain for food aid programs in the aftermath of disasters, so one should not draw broad conclusions
from a limited set of case studies in any direction. Previous work has argued that assistance is often too
small and infrequent to play a major role (Gilligan et al., 2008 in Ethiopia; Ahmed et al., 2009 in
Bangladesh), or may be ineffectively allocated due to political reasons or errors in targeting (del Ninno
and Lundberg, 2002 in Bangladesh; Jayne et al., 2002 in Ethiopia; Reardon et al., 1988 in Burkina Faso;
Francken et al. 2009 in Madagascar).

Finally, market integration can further buttress the impact of safety nets by reducing the inflationary
effects in local markets (Christiaensen and Subbarao, 2005). In Bangladesh, the openness to private rice
markets (by decreasing import tariffs and caps on rice imports and expediting the customs process) helped
stabilize prices and maintain households’ purchasing power and thus ease the impacts of the 1998 floods.
The analysis indicates that the impacts of the food transfers combined with trade liberalization
contributed between 64 and 133 kilocalories to each person’s daily consumption. Without these changes
in trade policy, it is estimated that targeted transfers would have had to be 3 to 5 times higher to make




5
    For details on the PSNP see Country Spotlight 4. Ethiopia: Deaths from Droughts or Derg?


                                                                                                            6
the same calorific contribution (del Ninno, Dorosh and Smith, 2003).6 Hill and Fuje (2017) note that the
impact of droughts on local grain prices has diminished over time, particularly in areas where market
access has improved.

In summary, the empirical evidence suggests that households subject to extreme weather events often
suffer large losses in agricultural income. The impact on consumption and calories tends to be lower than
the impact on crop income but still significant, indicating that households are not able to perfectly smooth
consumption. Nonetheless, households can mitigate negative impacts via household risk-coping
strategies, such as re-allocating labor, selling assets and accessing transfers from friends and relatives.
Additionally, greater access to a number of institutions also enables households to cope with the impacts
of extreme weather, including access to credit, to well-functioning markets and to social safety net
programs.



    3. Data

Our analysis uses data from the Malawi Flood Impact Assessment Survey (FIAS), which was conducted by
the National Statistical Office (NSO) in November-December 2015.7 FIAS attempted to track 590 rural
households who had previously been surveyed by the Malawi Integrated Household Panel Survey (IHPS)
in 2013, and before that by the Malawi Third Integrated Household Survey (IHS3) in 2010.8,9 Since FIAS



6
  Despite huge floods in September 1998 and the loss of 10 percent of annual food consumption, these safety nets
combined with the longer-term changes in economic structure meant that recovery from the floods was relatively
rapid. By April 1999, income for flood-affected households had increased 45 percent on that of the previous
December following the floods, and a further 50 percent by the following November.
7
  FIAS 2015 was implemented with technical support from the World Bank Living Standards Measurement Study
(LSMS), the World Bank Poverty and Equity Global Practice, and LEAD Analytics, and with the World Bank funding
from the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), the Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance
team, the Finance and Markets Global Practice, and the Global Solutions Group on Managing Risks within the Poverty
and Equity Global Practice.
8
  IHPS and IHS3 were both implemented by the NSO, with financial and technical support from the World Bank Living
Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA) program. In 2013, the IHPS was
implemented from April to December 2013, with the objective of tracking and resurveying 3,246 households across
204 enumeration areas (EAs) that had been previously surveyed as part of the IHS3 2010/11. The IHPS sample had
been designed in 2010 to be representative at the national-, urban/rural, regional levels, and for the six strata
defined by the combinations of region and urban/rural domains. In 2013, IHPS targeted all individuals that were part
of the IHS3, including those that moved away from the IHS3 dwelling locations between 2010 and 2013. Once a split-
off individual was located, the new household that he/she formed or joined since the IHS3 interview was brought
into the IHPS sample. As a result, the overall IHPS database includes 4,000 households, which could be traced back
to 3,104 IHS3 households. Attrition was limited to only 3.8 and 7.4 percent of households and individuals,
respectively. The anonymized, unit-record data and documentation from the IHPS 2013 and the IHS3 2010/11 can
be accessed through www.worldbank.org/lsms.
9
  FIAS was implemented on a computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) platform that was designed using the
World Bank Survey Solutions CAPI software (www.worldbank.org/capi). The FIAS CAPI experience was a key input
into the design and implementation of the Fourth Integrated Household Survey (IHS4) and Panel Subcomponent
later in 2016/17, also using a Survey Solutions-powered CAPI platform.

                                                                                                                  7
builds on a high-quality panel household survey infrastructure that was in place prior to the 2014/15
floods, we have two pre-flood data points, coupled with one data point in the post-flood period.

The identification of the target sample of 590 rural FIAS households was driven by several factors. The
financial arrangements for the FIAS fieldwork implementation did not permit the preparations to take
place prior to August 2015. Once there was clarity around the survey implementation, the budget
constraints, together with the research team’s desire to maximize inter-annual comparability (i.e. IHPS
2013 versus FIAS 2015) of the timing of the household interviews, led the research team to focus on the
IHPS sub-sample that had been interviewed in the time frame of August-December 2013, and that were
residing either in a Southern region district or Ntcheu; a Central region district that borders the Southern
region and that was the most adversely-affected Central region district during the 2014/15 floods. The
target households that moved in their entirety to other districts between the IHPS 2013 and the FIAS 2015
interview were also tracked – a crucial design decision to fully understand flood impacts. The final FIAS
sample size was 558 households, representing an impressive attrition rate of 5.3 percent with respect to
the target sample.

FIAS survey instruments were modeled after the multi-topic Household Questionnaire and the Agriculture
Questionnaire that had been used for the IHPS 2013. The Household Questionnaire collected individual-
disaggregated information on demographics, education, health, wage employment, nonfarm enterprises,
as well as data on housing, food consumption, food and non-food expenditures, food security, and durable
and agricultural asset ownership, among other topics. The sample households that were involved in
agricultural activities (through ownership and/or cultivation of land, and/or ownership of livestock) were
administered the Agriculture Questionnaire, which solicited information on land areas, labor and non-
labor input use, crop cultivation and production at the plot10 level for the 2014/15 growing season. Similar
to the IHPS and the IHS3 practice, all FIAS household locations were geo-referenced in order to link the
household survey data with publicly available geospatial biophysical and agro-climatic data.

The resulting data set has extensive information on agricultural production and productivity; household
consumption and expenditures; household caloric intake; as well as risk-coping mechanisms. Bringing in
household location-specific geospatial variables, we are also able to compute objective measures of
household exposure to flooding. First, we use the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) ARC2 rainfall estimate data covering the period 1983-2015, and generate the percent difference
in flowering season rainfall in the relevant cropping period and long-term mean flowering season
rainfall.11 Figure 1 depicts the kernel densities of the percent deviation of the 2012/13 flowering season
rainfall, and the 2014/15 flowering season rainfall from historical average flowering season rainfall. All
households in the sample experienced rainfall over the historical average in 2015, and the mean rainfall
difference was over 55 percent, well above the 14.4 percent mean difference observed in 2013.

10
   A plot was defined as a continuous piece of land on which a unique crop or a mixture of crops is grown, under a
uniform, consistent crop management system, not split by a path of more than one meter in width. Plot boundaries
were defined in accordance with the crops grown and the operator.
11
   We calculate the flowering season rainfall as the cumulative rainfall over the last dekad in December through the
third dekad in January.

                                                                                                                  8
3.1. Descriptive Statistics

       3.1.1. Flood Events, Welfare Outcomes

The percent difference measure can capture both above and below rainfall yields, though we note here
that in 2015, all areas received greater than average rainfall. The measure captures deviations from
expected rainfall and is expected to have a negative impact on yields. Alone, the deviation measure is not
likely to adequately capture the extent of flooding, since flood damage is also related to geological and
topographical features in addition to rainfall (Merz et al., 2007). To better capture the extent of flooding,
we match the data to the mean flood intensity generated from University of Maryland’s flood simulation
model, which is at a rather coarse resolution, of .125 arc degrees, or approximately 14 km2 in Malawi. In
order to obtain a more precise flooding estimate, we consider two household-specific variables that are
expected to be highly correlated with flood events, namely elevation at household GPS location at 90m
resolution12, and distance from household GPS location to the nearest river (Merz et al., 2007; National
Research Council, 2015). We subsequently perform a principal component analysis (PCA) of the mean
flood intensity, elevation and distance to nearest river, and compute an index of flood affectedness. As
shown in Table 1, the PCA scores are lower for those areas with higher mean flood intensity, further from
a river, and higher in elevation. We multiply the resulting index by -1 for more intuitive interpretation as
a measure of flood affectedness; thus, a higher score is associated with higher mean flood intensity, closer
to a river, and lower in elevation.

To present descriptive statistics in a meaningful way, we define three categories of flood-affectedness
using index thresholds. Since maize is the dominant crop in Malawi, with 87 percent of the households in
our sample cultivating maize, we define the thresholds by maximizing the difference between mean yields
across three groups, while keeping a minimum of 20 percent of the sample in each group. This leads to
154 households categorized as being low-affected, 256 households as medium-affected, and 148
households as high-affected.

As shown in Table 2, maize yields were indeed much lower in 2015 versus 2013, for all three categories of
flood affectedness, and for both local and hybrid maize. The differences in mean and distribution of
overall, local and hybrid yields are significantly different for households located in the medium- and high-
affected areas. In low-affected areas, the mean local maize yield is not statistically different across years,
though the distribution is; on the other hand, while the mean hybrid yield is significantly lower in 2015,
the distribution of hybrid yields is not statistically different in 2015 versus 2013.

While analyzing the impacts of floods on crop production is not the focus of this paper, we expect that
the primary impact of floods on household welfare measures of interest is through the impact on crop
production. McCarthy et al. (2017) use the flood-affectedness index to analyze the impact of floods on

12
     The description can be found at: https://lta.cr.usgs.gov/srtmgl3.html.

                                                                                                            9
maize yields and value of crop production per hectare, and find that it is a strong negative predictor.
Below, we will instrument for the value of crop production per capita as a regressor in our consumption
equations to examine the link between production and consumption.

Using the three flood-affected categories, we can look at the impacts on food expenditures per capita,
caloric intake per capita, and the Food Consumption Score (FCS). The Food Consumption Score (FCS) is a
standardized composite score that brings together information on dietary diversity, food frequency, and
considers relative nutritional importance of different food groups (WFP, 2008). The indicator was
developed by the World Food Programme (WFP) and is calculated using a module specifically designed to
capture the required information built into the FIAS and the IHPS questionnaires. The FCS has been shown
to relate strongly with detailed measures of household calorie consumption in a study across Burundi,
Haiti, and Sri Lanka (Weismann et al., 2009).

For food expenditures, in order to compare expenditures over time, we convert all unit values to 2015
real values, adjusting for the difference in inflation between the household’s interview month in 2013 and
2015 using publicly available NSO consumer price index data for rural households, and differentiating
between food and non-food inflation. Figure 2 shows that food expenditures per capita were significantly
lower in 2015 versus 2013 for both low- and medium-affected households. The drop in food expenditures
for high-affected households, however, is not significant. On the other hand, when we look at the
distributions of food expenditure per capita over time, applying the Kolmogorov-Smirnov equality of
distributions test shows that all three flood category distributions have shifted significantly to the left
from 2013 to 2015.13

Turning next to calories per capita, Figure 3 illustrates that calories per capita in fact increased over time
for both the medium and high affected households, but there was no significant change for low-affected
households. There are many reasons why total real expenditures fell but calories increased in 2015 versus
2013. The primary reason is that the real unit values for many food items fell over the period. As noted
above, the Malawi economy was suffering high inflation resulting from the currency devaluation in May
2012. As shown in Table 3, the real unit values fell for all categories shown, including for the two most
important calorie sources, refined and unrefined maize flour. And, households shifted consumption of
maize towards the cheaper unrefined maize flour. Thus, even though calories per capita were higher in
2015, lower real unit values and the shift to cheaper maize flour led to lower overall food expenditures
per capita in 2015.

In particular, total calories from the two types of maize flour and other grains rose from just over 1,600
calories per person per day to close to 1,900, a statistically significant increase. Calories from other sources
increased for certain food items and decreased for others. The increase in meat, fish & dairy is primarily
driven by increases in consumption of fish, which is relatively low in cost compared to other components
of the food type.

13
  The p-values for the Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests are (.114) for the low-affected, (.003) for the medium-affected,
and (.029) for the high-affected.

                                                                                                             10
Another potential explanation is that food aid deliveries kept the market prices of maize flour in check.
The WFP Malawi country office provided us with district-level data on food aid deliveries over the period
January – July 2015. The simple correlation coefficient between calories of food aid delivered and
unrefined maize flower prices in 2015 is significant but fairly low, at -.22. In many districts, households fell
into all three flood categories, meaning that the food aid delivery data may be too coarse to adequately
capture local market price effects.14

Finally, despite the increase in calories per capita, the food consumption score decreases significantly
across time as seen in Figure 4. Although the reductions are significant across the board, the drop is
particularly marked for the high-affected households. The shifts in FCS suggest that although diet quantity
is remaining steady or increasing, the shifts in household consumption are coming at a price in terms of
diet quality, and thus weakening food security.

     3.1.2. Weather and Climate Variables

In our regressions, we use the percent difference of absolute flowering season rainfall from the long-term
mean, which captures the potential impact of deviations from expected rainfall in both years, 2013 and
2015. We complement this variable with the dichotomous variables for medium and high flood-
affectedness, with low affectedness being the omitted category.15 The regressions also control for a long-
term measure of rainfall variability, the coefficient of variation of flowering season rainfall, calculated over
the period of 1983 – 2015. It has long been recognized that farmers subject to riskier climates are more
likely to grow lower-yielding but more stable crops, use fewer purchased inputs, and invest less in land
(Hardaker et al., 2004; Hazell, 1992; Hurley, 2010 and references cited therein). Additionally, McCarthy
and Kilic (2015) provide empirical evidence that this long-term measure of risk has a significant negative
impact on maize yields in Malawi. Thus, we hypothesize that the coefficient of variation of growing season
rainfall will have a negative impact on crop productivity, with subsequent negative impacts on household
welfare outcomes of interest.

     3.1.3. Household Demographics and Wealth

Household demographic controls include the number of adult equivalents; the dependency ratio
calculated as the number of household members below 15 years old and over 60 years old divided by the
number of members between 15 and 60 years old; the natural logarithm of the age of the household
head; and a dichotomous variable capturing whether the household head is female. We expect that larger


14
   We believe being able to document the impact of food aid deliveries on local prices may show important indirect
impacts on consumption, and hope that such data will be made available on a more disaggregated scale in the future.
15
   We considered using in our regressions the flood affectedness PCA index itself, in addition to the dichotomous
variables for flood affectedness categories. The index did not perform as well as the dichotomous variables,
particularly when we include interaction terms with our social safety net variables. As our results highlight, the
interaction terms indicate that impacts on consumption outcomes are inconsistent with a linear specification of
flood intensity.

                                                                                                                11
households will have higher values of crop production, while the dependency ratio may reduce time
allocated to productive versus domestic activities. Older household heads may have higher crop
production due to greater experience, and potentially to more dense information networks., and female-
headed households may experience lower on and off-farm income, due mainly to social norms that can
limit their ability to access resources in general and in times of crises (Kilic et al., 2015; Aguilar et al., 2015).
We use the maximum number of years of education completed by any member in the household to
capture productivity and income-generating capacity, anchored in the evidence on positive intra-
household spillovers stemming from individual educational attainment (Mussa, 2014; Basu et al., 2001).
Lastly, we include three measures of household wealth, namely (1) a PCA index of household consumer
durables and dwelling attributes16; (2) the total number of agricultural implements17, and (3) the total
landholdings per capita. Greater household wealth is expected to exert a positive effect on welfare
outcomes, both directly and indirectly through crop production.

     3.1.4. Risk Management Strategies

The regressions include several independent variables to capture households’ ability to manage farming
risks ex ante. Risk management strategies include “sustainable land management” (SLM) techniques that
are hypothesized to lead to more stable yields and thus to more stable crop incomes, specifically the
dichotomous variables for whether the household has terraces and drainage ditches; bunds to control
erosion; bunds for water harvesting; and any plots intercropped with legumes. Both types of bunds are
included in the analysis, as water harvesting structures may be expected to perform differently, and
potentially worse, than those constructed to prevent erosion in the face of flood events, as described in
McCarthy et al. (2017).

     3.1.5. Risk Coping Strategies and Interaction Terms

Risk coping strategies are captured by the following controls: a dichotomous variable capturing whether
any household member has any type of account at a financial institution18; the number of adult children
living away from home; and three measures of labor diversification, namely a dichotomous variable for
whether any household member was receiving formal wages, a dichotomous variable whether any
household member was self-employed, and the number of household member days engaged in ganyu
(informal/casual) labor. Households with savings accounts would have greater coping capacity, as would
those with more adult children living away from home since adult children’s income is not expected to be

16
   The index is based on (i) the dichotomous variables for whether the household has any bed, table, chair, or other
living room furniture; any of fan, air conditioner, clock or solar panel; any of radio or tape/CD/DVD player; any of
sewing machine, washing machine, iron; any of TV, VCR, computer, satellite dish, or generator; any mobile phone.,
and (ii) the dichotomous variables for whether the household’s dwelling has improved walls; improved roof;
improved floor; improved lighting fuel; electrification; access to an improved drinking water source; access to an
improved latrine; insecticide treated .bed nets. The number of dwelling rooms per capita is also included in the
index.
17
   The implements include hand hoes, slashers, axes, knapsack sprayers, panga knives, and sickles.
18
   Financial institutions include any of banks, credit unions, micro finance institutions, post offices, village savings
organizations, or another financial institution.

                                                                                                                     12
perfectly correlated with the household’s own. The ability to diversify labor off one’s own farm in response
to a weather shock should also increase coping capacity; we expect that access to formal sector wages
would provide greater relative coping capacity than self-employed or ganyu work.

Sale of assets can further help households to cope in the short-term, though at the expense of the longer-
term productivity. However, the data set does not have information on asset sales, so we cannot directly
control for this as a coping strategy. We do have information on livestock sales. Livestock, however, except
for chickens, are not widely held in Malawi. For instance, only 3.2 percent of the FIAS households have
had cattle during any survey round.

Without doubt, the ability to access multiple sources of income from work or from one’s social network
can increase households’ income generating capacity in good years as well as bad years. In order to test
whether these sources actually provided ex-post risk coping, the regressions include the interaction of
each variable with each of the dichotomous flood-affectedness variables.

Finally, we have information on whether the household benefited from three different types of social
safety nets, namely direct food assistance; school feeding programs targeted at children; and
participation in the Malawi Social Action Fund (MASAF) public works program. These mechanisms should
enable households to cope with floods; and we include interaction terms to determine if they are indeed
relatively more important to households who were more affected by the floods.

While we concede that these variables may be subject to endogeneity bias, we do not have good
instruments for the full set of potential risk coping mechanisms. We discuss the evidence for endogeneity
and the robustness of results in section 4, which details our estimation strategy.

    3.1.6. Community/Location Characteristics

In addition to household-level variables, the regressions control for community/location characteristics
expected to impact household welfare, including district fixed effects; household EA-location specific
unrefined maize flour price; and an access index, which is a proxy for the relative ease of transportation
and access to infrastructure, services and markets. All else equal, we expect that greater access will
increase engagement with markets and lower barriers to information, leading to greater ability to (i)
generate larger and more diversified incomes, and (ii) cope with shocks. Another independent variable is
the district population density, which is expected to perform similarly to the access index – higher
population density should lead to greater opportunity to cope with shocks. We consider two additional
district-level controls that proxy for the level of government engagement in agriculture. The first is the
number of 50 kilograms bags of fertilizer sold in the district per capita under the Farm Input Subsidy
Program (FISP). More subsidized fertilizer should increase crop productivity in a district. The second is the
proportion of households in the district that received any extension advice, constructed from our




                                                                                                          13
household survey data.19 We expect greater access to extension advice to lead to more productive and
climate-resilient farming.

Table 4 provides the descriptive statistics for the explanatory variables used in the analysis, for 2013, and
then by flood affectedness category for 2015. Of key interest are the potential risk-coping strategies and
the social safety nets. First, we note that ganyu labor market participation and earnings increased
substantially from 2013 to 2015, but that there is no significant difference by flood-affectedness in 2015.
Participation in self-employment also increased significantly between years, but again we see no
significant difference between flood-affectedness groups in 2015. We do see that the high-affected were
relatively less likely to have a member with formal wage employment. This relationship was the same in
2013, and overall, there is no significant change between years in incidence of wage employment. There
are no other significant differences between flood-affectedness groups in 2015 in terms of risk coping
strategies.

With respect to the social safety nets, we note that there was an increase in children having access to
school feeding over time, but a decrease in households accessing food aid or engaging in the MASAF
program. The overall decrease in household access to food aid is somewhat surprising given that food aid
was provided extensively in response to floods; nonetheless, households in high affected areas were
significantly more likely to receive food aid than those in medium and low affected areas, and those in
medium affected areas were significantly more likely to receive food aid than those in low affected areas.
Also, if we combine food aid to the household and to the children via school feeding programs, we see
that the incidence of receiving any food aid increased significantly from 27.5 to 39.4 percent of
households: a 43 percent increase.



     4. Empirical Strategy

We have a balanced, two-period panel data set, and three outcomes of interest, namely the logarithmic
transformations of real household annual food consumption expenditures per capita and household
caloric intake per capita, and the household food consumption score. These outcomes are denoted as Y
for household i at time t (2013, 2015) in the following linear regression:

     =   +       +       +       + (      ∗     )+        +	 (     ∗     )+         +      +      +     +      +    	 	[   ]	

where F is a vector of dichotomous variables capturing households’ medium and high flood affectedness
status in 2015, as defined above, with low flood affectedness excluded as the reference category; RF is
the percent difference of absolute flowering season rainfall from the long-term mean; RC and SN are

19
  In cases where we had very few FIAS households in a district due to households moving between survey rounds,
households were matched to their district from the previous round. There were 25 households that moved to
districts that had 5 or fewer surveyed households located in the new district. We ran the regressions dropping these
households; results are nearly identical in terms of signs and significance of coefficients, and thus we include the full
sample in our analysis. These results are available upon request.

                                                                                                                           14
vectors of household-level risk coping strategies and social safety nets, respectively, which are interacted
with the vector F; RM is a vector of household-level risk management strategies; H is a vector of controls
on household demographics and wealth; C is a vector of household EA- or district-location specific control
variables; T s; T is the time fixed effect – i.e. a dichotomous variable that is equal to 1 for the survey year
2015; 	is a vector of household-level inter-annual averages for the set of explanatory variables in H, RC,
SN, and RF with inter-annual variation greater than 4%; and ε and α are the error term and the constant,
respectively. The variables included in the vectors H, RM, RC and SN, and C have been noted above in
sections 3.1.3, 3.1.4, 3.1.5, and 3.1.6, respectively. This panel regression is estimated with random effects,
and the inclusion of the vector 	transforms it into a correlated random effects model, and enables us to
still control for time-invariant household-level unobserved heterogeneity that may otherwise jointly
predict the outcomes and explanatory variables of interest.20 The standard errors are clustered at the EA-
level.

Further, given our hypothesis regarding the household flood exposure affecting the food consumption
outcomes of interest through its adverse effects on household crop production, we attempt to recover
the direct effect of changes in real household value of crop production per capita on the same set of
dependent variables. To do so, we address the endogeneity of real household value of crop production
per capita through the use of a linear instrumental variable (IV) regression, which involves the joint
estimation of two equations:

     =       +         +          +          +         +        +        +        +      	 	[   ]	

     =     +          +           +          +         +        +        +         +     	 	[   ]	

where Equation 2 and Equation 3 are the first and the second stage regressions, respectively; and CP is
the logarithmic transformation of real household value of crop production per capita. The subscripts 1
and 2 are used to denote the comparable vector of coefficients across the first and the second stage
regressions. The variables included in the vectors RC, SN, H, C and T are identical to those included in
Equation 1. The vector in Equation 2 and Equation 3 includes inter-annual household-level averages of
the variables included in the vectors RC, SN, and H. Equation 2 includes the vector Z of identifying
instrumental variables (IVs) that are assumed to affect the food consumption outcomes of interest only
through their effects on the real household value of crop production per capita, known as the exclusion
restriction. The IVs include the flood-affectedness index, the coefficient of variation of flowering season

20
   With standard errors clustered at the EA-level, following each estimation of Equation 1 with an alternative
dependent variable, we test whether the household-level inter-annual averages included in the vector X are jointly
statistically significant. This is known as the Mundlak (1978) test, and in each instance, as reported in the Appendix
Table A2, we find that the coefficients are not jointly statistically significant, providing support for the use of the
correlated random effects model instead of the fixed effects estimation. The results from the fixed effects
estimations, i.e. the estimations of Equation 1 with household-level fixed effects but net of the vector M, are
nevertheless provided in the Appendix Table A3, which highlights the similarities with respect to the findings from
the correlated random effects models.



                                                                                                                    15
rainfall over the period 1983-2015, and a binary variable identifying whether the household had any maize
plots that were intercropped with legumes during the 2014/15 season. The predicted values of CP,
denoted as       , that are obtained from Equation 2 are in turn fed into Equation 3 to recover the coefficient
of interest β2. The predictive power of the IVs is sufficiently large to avoid weak instrumental variable bias,
and they take on statistically significant coefficients in Equation 2 with the expected signs, as discussed in
the subsequent section. The empirical tests additionally provide support for the exclusion restriction.



       5. Results

Table 5 presents the selected results from the estimations of Equation 1. Regarding the household-level
risk coping strategies, only one of the coefficients on the interaction terms was statistically significant, so
we did not include these in Table 5.21 This result is interesting in and of itself; none of the identified
potential strategies provided additional protection against floods. This is also consistent with the fact that
one-third of the households that reported experiencing floods or erratic rains in 2015 as one of the three
most significant shocks noted that they “did not do anything” in response. Among those that have
reported suffered from floods or erratic rains in 2015, 23 percent mentioned changing their consumption
habits; 21 percent reported that they received support, including from family members and non-relative
friends; just over 7 percent noted selling assets or livestock, accessing credit, or migrating for work. While
it may be difficult to reconcile the self-reported data with the actual actions, in this case, the self-reported
information is consistent with the lack of statistical significance on the household-level risk-coping
strategies we have considered.

As shown in Table 5, the percent difference in flowering season rainfall from the long-term mean led to
lower food expenditures and calories consumed per capita. This variable is observed in both years, and
indicates that rural households are not able to perfectly protect against even more modest deviations
from expected rainfall such as those occurring in 2013.

Turning to the dichotomous variables capturing flood-affectedness, we see that medium-affected
households had significantly lower per capita food expenditures compared to their low-affected
counterparts, but there were no additional negative impacts on food expenditures for those residing in
high affected areas. Furthermore, there were no statistically significant impacts on calories per capita for
households in medium- and high-affected areas. These results suggest that, for the most part, the impacts
on food and calorie consumption per capita are adequately captured by the percent difference in
flowering season rainfall from the long-term mean. However, those in medium- and high-affected areas
did have significantly lower food consumption scores than households located in low-affected areas. Thus,
the main non-linear impacts of the floods are found on food quality rather than quantity per se.

Looking at household-level risk-coping strategies, only self-employed income has a positive impact on
food expenditures but has no impact on calories consumed. For the social safety nets, receiving food

21
     The full regression results are reported in Appendix Table A1. All dependent variables are in natural logarithms.

                                                                                                                    16
assistance had no direct impact on any of our food consumption measures. Households with access to the
school feeding program had lower food expenditures, but with no subsequent impact on calories or food
consumption scores, indicating that households substituted school feeding for home provision of calories
and food consumption scores. On the other hand, having access to wages from MASAF led to increased
food expenditures similar to those with access to school feeding, it appears that households were able to
use the wages to maintain calories and food quality.

Finally, our interaction terms show that having access to food assistance increased food consumption
scores for households in both medium- and high-affected areas, vis-à-vis those located in low-affected
areas. On the other hand, access to school feeding led to improvements in all three of our consumption
measures, but only for those found in medium affected areas. Similarly, access to MASAF led to higher
food expenditures and calories consumed, but only for those in medium affected areas.

The evidence suggests that only food aid was an important safety net for households in high-affected
areas, whereas all three safety nets led to improved consumption outcomes for those located in medium-
affected areas. At the same time, it is worth noting that the proportion of households with access to food
aid and MASAF actually decreased between 2013 and 2015. Access to school feeding increased between
2013 and 2015, but access to school feeding only improved outcomes for those in medium-affected areas.
Overall, the evidence suggests that safety nets do improve consumption outcomes, but there is room to
improve the reach of these programs into areas that suffer severe weather events.

In Table 6, we present the results from the IV estimations, in which we instrument for the logarithmic
transformation of real household value of crop production per capita. We present only the results for the
instruments in the first stage, and the value of crop production per capita in the second stage.22 We note
that the number of observations does not match in Table 5 and Table 6. This is due to the necessary
exclusion of the few households that did not produce any crops from the analysis in 2015. Our instruments
are fairly strong, with F-statistics just below 10 in all three equations, and the p-values associated with the
Hansen’s J statistic are over .1 in all three equations, in support of the exclusion restriction. We document
that while food expenditures are positively correlated with the value of crop production per capita, the
estimated elasticity is just 6.7 percent, implying very limited transmission from production to
consumption.23 Higher values of crop production per capita are also estimated to lead to higher food
consumption scores, though not necessarily to higher calories per capita.




22
   The full set of results from the IV estimations are available upon request.
23
   In line with this finding, World Bank (2016) also finds that all else being equal, a 1 percent increase in maize yields
in Malawi leads only to an estimated 0.13 percent increase in consumption per capita and an estimated 0.06 percent
increase in caloric intake per capita.

                                                                                                                       17
6. Concluding Comments

The floods that occurred during the 2014/15 growing season in Malawi had significant and large impacts
on maize yields and value of crop production per capita. Households located in the most highly affected
areas faced average yield losses of 35 percent for local maize and over 50 percent for hybrid maize.
Impacts on food expenditures per capita were more muted, and even more so for calories consumed per
capita. Looking at the direct impact of the value of crop production on food expenditures, we find that
the elasticity is 6.7 percent, meaning that a 50 percent drop in value of crop production would translate
into just a 3.35 percent drop in food expenditures per capita. One explanation lies in the fact that food
prices were lower in 2015 versus 2013, and food expenditures are higher when maize flour prices are
higher. Looking at the spatial price variation in 2015, we note a negative correlation between maize flour
prices and food aid delivery data at the district level, but the data proved too coarse to test this hypothesis.
However, the flooding had a particularly pronounced impact on food consumption scores, leading to 10
percent lower scores for those in medium-affected areas, and 12 percent lower scores in high-affected
areas. Overall, then, the primary impact was to reduce the quality of the food consumption basket rather
than quantity per se.

Further, we found that the risk coping variables were of limited use in helping households buffer the
effects of floods. A number of social safety net programs did help households maintain food quantity and
quality, particularly for those located in medium-affected areas. In high-affected areas, only access to food
aid was effective, but access to MASAF and school feeding programs were not. Thus, the evidence
suggests that ensuring access to these two programs in areas highly affected by extreme weather events
like flooding can help ensure households maintain both food quantity and quality. While careful planning
ahead of a disaster is needed to make sure such programs are accessible during and immediately after a
severe weather event, our data were collected within 9 to 11 months after the floods, and all communities
were accessible by that time.

On the other hand, as the descriptive statistics show, the proportion of households with access to direct
food aid was actually lower in 2015 versus 2013, though the difference is not statistically different. As we
noted earlier, we did not have households located in the most severely-affected areas, where presumably
much of the food aid was delivered. Nonetheless, this is a surprising finding, and highlights the need for
expanded access to food aid to communities in areas that suffered significant crop damage, even if not
located in the most severely-affected areas. Additionally, access to MASAF work was lower in 2015 versus
2013, even while such access has positive impacts on food expenditures and calories per capita. On the
whole, the evidence suggests a great deal of scope for aligning different social safety net programs with
disaster risk management and emergency food aid programs.




                                                                                                             18
References

Aguilar, A., Carranza, E., Goldstein, M., Kilic, T., and Oseni, G. (2015). “Decomposition of gender
         differentials in agricultural productivity in Ethiopia.” Agricultural Economics, 46, pp. 311-334.
Ahmed, A.U., Quisumbing, A.R., Nasreen, M., Hoddinott, J., and Bryan, E. (2009). “Comparing food and
         cash transfer to the ultra-poor in Bangladesh.” International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI)
         Research Monograph No. 163.
Alderman, H., and Paxson, C.H. (1994). “Do the poor insure? A synthesis of the literature on risk and
         consumption in developing countries.” In: Bacha, E.L. (ed.), Economics in a changing world,
         Chapter 3, pp. 48-78. London: Macmillan.
Alexander, L.V. (2016). “Global observed long-term changes in temperature and precipitation extremes:
         a review of the progress and limitations in IPCC assessments and beyond.” Weather and Climate
         Extremes, 11, pp. 4-16.
Arouri, M., Nguyen, C., and Youssef, A.B. (2015). “Natural disasters, household welfare, and resilience:
         evidence from rural Vietnam.” World Development, 70, pp. 59-77.
Asfaw, S., McCarthy, N., Lipper, L., Arslan, A., and Cattaneo, A. (2016). “What determines farmers’
         adaptive capacity? Empirical evidence from Malawi.” Food Security, 8, pp. 1-22.
Baez, J.E., Lucchetti, L., Genoni, M.E., and Salazar, M. (2016). “Gone with the storm: rainfall shocks and
         household wellbeing in Guatemala.” Journal of Development Studies, 53, pp. 1253-1271.
Baez, J.E., and Mason, A. (2008). “Dealing with climate change: household risk management and
         adaptation in Latin America.” Retrieved on August 18, 2017 from
         http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1320666.
Banerjee, L. (2007). “Effect of flood on agricultural wages in Bangladesh: an empirical analysis.” World
         Development, 35., pp. 1989-2009.
Basu, K., Narayan, A., and Ravallion, M. (2001). “Is literacy shared with households? theory and evidence
         for Bangladesh.” Labour Economics, 8, pp. 649-665.
Cai, W., Borlace, S., Lengaigne, M., Van Rensch, P., Collins, M., Vecchi, G., Timmermann, A., Santoso, A.,
         McPhaden, M.J., Wu, L., and England, M.H. (2014). “Increasing frequency of extreme El Nino
         events due to greenhouse warming.” Nature Climate Change, 4, pp. 111-116.
Chinsinga, B. (2012). “The political economy of agricultural policy processes in Malawi: a case study of
         the fertilizer subsidy programme.” Future Agricultures Working Paper No. 39.
Christiaensen, L., and Dercon, S. (2007). “Consumption risk, technology adoption and poverty traps:
         Evidence from Ethiopia.” Journal of Development Economics, 96, pp. 159-173.
Christiaensen, L., and Subbarao, K. (2005). “Towards an understanding of household vulnerability in
         rural Kenya.” Journal of African Economies, 14, pp. 520-558.
Davis, B., Di Giuseppe, S., and Zezza, A. (2017). “Are African households (not) leaving agriculture? Patterns
         of households’ income sources in rural Sub-Saharan Africa.” Food Policy, 67, pp. 153-174.
De la Fuente, A., and Dercon, S. (2008). “Disasters, growth and poverty in Africa: revisiting the
         microeconomic evidence.” Background paper for the 2009 Global Assessment Report in Disaster
         Risk Reduction.
De la Fuente, A., Borja-Vega, C., and Yaschine, I. (2017). “El Rol del Programa Oportunidades ante
         Desastres Generados por Fenómenos Naturales” Mimeo.

                                                                                                          19
Del Ninno, C., and Lundberg, M. (2002). “Treading water: the long-term impact of the 1998 flood on
          nutrition in Bangladesh.” Economics and Human Biology, 3, pp. 67-96.
Del Ninno, C., Dorosh, P.A., Smith, L.C., and Roy, D.K. (2001). “The 1998 floods in Bangladesh: Disaster
          impacts, household coping strategies, and response.” IFPRI Research Report No. 122.
Dercon, S. (2005). “Risk, poverty and vulnerability in Africa.” Journal of African Economies, 14, pp. 483-
          488.
Dercon, S. (2002). “Income risk, coping strategies, and safety nets.” The World Bank Research Observer,
          17, pp. 141-166.
Dercon, S., Hoddinott, J., and Woldehanna, T. (2005). “Shocks and consumption in 15 Ethiopian villages,
          1999-2004.” Journal of African Economies, 14, pp. 559-585.
Fafchamps, M., Udry, C., and Czukas, K. (1998). “Drought and saving in West Africa: are livestock a buffer
          stock?” Journal of Development Economics, 55, pp. 273- 305.
FAO (2016). AQUASTAT website. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Website
          accessed on May 2, 2017.
Francken, N, Minten, B., and Swinnen, J. F. M. (2009). “The political economy of relief aid allocation:
          evidence from Madagascar.” LICOS Centre for Institutions and Economic Performance Discussion
          Paper No. 237.
Frenken, K. (ed). (2005). “Irrigation in Africa in figures, AQUASTA Survey – 2005”. FAO Water Reports No.
          29. Rome: The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Gilligan, D.O., Hoddinott, J., and Taffesse, A.S. (2008). “The impact of Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net
          Programme and its linkages.” Journal of Development Studies, 45, pp. 1684-1706.
Government of Malawi (GoM). (2015). “Malawi 2015 floods post disaster needs assessment report.”
          Lilongwe: GoM.
Gröger, A., and Zylberberg, Y. (2016). “Internal labor migration as a shock coping strategy: Evidence
          from a typhoon.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8, pp. 123-153.
Hardaker, J. B., Huirne R.B.M., Anderson, J. R., and Lien, G. (eds.) (2004). “Coping with risk in agriculture.”
          Wallingford, UK and Cambridge, MA: CABI Publishing.
Hazell, P.B. (1992). “The appropriate role of agricultural insurance in developing countries.” Journal of
          International Development, 4, pp. 567-581.
Heltberg, R., Oviedo, A.M., and Talukdar, F. (2015). “What do household surveys really tell us about risk,
          shocks, and risk management in the developing world?” Journal of Development Studies, 51, pp.
          209-225.
Hill, R., and Fuje, H. (2017). “What is the impact of drought on prices? Evidence from Ethiopia.” Mimeo.
Hoddinott, J., and Kinsey, B. (2001). “Child growth in the time of drought.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics
          and Statistics, 63, pp. 409-436.
Hurley, T. (2010). “A review of agricultural production risk in the developing world.” IFPRI Harvest Choice
          Working Paper No. 11.
IPCC. (2012). “Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to advance climate change adaptation”.
          Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Janzen, S.A., and Carter, M.R. (2013). “After the drought: The impact of microinsurance on consumption
          smoothing and asset protection.” NBER Working Paper No. 19702.


                                                                                                            20
Jayne, T.S., Strauss, J., Yamano, T., and Molla, D. (2002). “Targeting of food aid in rural Ethiopia: chronic
          need or inertia?” Journal of Development Economics, 68, pp. 247-288.
Kazianga, H., and Udry, C. (2006). “Consumption smoothing? livestock, insurance and drought in rural
          Burkina Faso.” Journal of Development Economics, 79, pp. 413-446.
Kilic, T., Palacios-Lopez, A., and Goldstein, M. (2015). “Caught in a productivity trap: a distributional
          perspective on gender differences in Malawian agriculture.” World Development, 70, pp. 416-463.
Kochar, A. (1995). “Explaining Household Vulnerability to Idiosyncratic income shocks.” American
          Economic Review, 85, pp. 159-164.
Lybbert, T. J. (2004). “Stochastic wealth dynamics and risk management among a poor population.” The
          Economic Journal, 114, pp. 750-777.
McCarthy, N., Brubaker, J., and Kilic, T. (2017). “Analysis of the impacts of the 2015 floods on smallholder
          crop production in Malawi.” Final Report delivered to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
McCarthy, N., and Kilic, T. (2015). “The nexus between gender, collective action for public goods and
          agriculture: Evidence from Malawi.” Agricultural Economics, 46, pp. 375-402.
Merz, B., Thieken, A. H., and Gocht, M. (2007). “Flood risk mapping at the local scale: concepts and
          challenges.” In: Begum, S. et al. (eds.), Flood risk management in Europe, pp. 231–251,
          Netherlands: Springer.
Miura, K., Kanno, H., and Sakurai, T. (2016). “Shock and livestock transactions in rural Zambia: a re-
          examination of the buffer stock hypothesis.” The Japanese Journal of Rural Economics, 14, 20-34.
Michler, J., Baylis, K., Arends-Keunning, M., and Mazvimavi, K. (2016). “Conservation agriculture and
          climate resilience.” Mimeo.
Mueller, V., and Quisumbing, A. (2010). "Short- and long-term effects of the 1998 Bangladesh flood on
          rural wages." IFPRI Discussion Paper No. 956.
Mundlak, Y. (1978). “On the pooling of time series and cross section data.” Econometrica, 46, pp. 69-85.
Mussa, R. (2014). “Externalities of education on efficiency and production uncertainty of maize in rural
          Malawi.” MPRA Paper No. 54628.
Narayan, D., Pritchett, L., and Kapoor, S. (2009). Moving out of poverty: volume 2 success from the bottom
          up. Washington, DC: The World Bank
National Resource Council (2015). “Tying flood insurance to flood risk for low-lying structures in the
          floodplain.” In Methods for assessing risk, pp. 23-34, Washington, DC: The National Academies
          Press.
Premand, P., and Vakis, R. (2010). “Do shocks affect poverty persistence? evidence using welfare
          trajectories from Nicaragua". Well-Being and Social Policy, 6, pp. 95-129.
Reardon, T., Matlon, P., and Delgado, C. (1988). “Coping with household-level food insecurity in the
          drought-affected areas of Burkina Faso.” World Development, 16, pp. 1065-1074.
Reardon, T., and Taylor, J.E. (1996) “Agro-climatic shock, income inequality, and poverty: Evidence from
          Burkina Faso”, World Development, 24, pp. 901-914.
Ricker-Gilbert, J., Jumbe, C., and Chamberlin, J. (2014). “How does population density influence
          agricultural intensification and productivity? evidence from Malawi.” Food Policy, 48, pp. 114-
          128.
Schlenker, W., and Lobell, D. B. (2010). “Robust negative impacts of climate change on African
          agriculture.” Environmental Research Letters, 5.

                                                                                                          21
Ummenhofer, C.C., and Meehl, G.A. (2017). “Extreme weather and climate events with ecological
      relevance: a review.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 372, pp. 20160135.
Ummenhofer, C.C., Xu, H., Twine, T.E., Girvetz, E.H., McCarthy, H.R., Chhetri, N., and Nicholas, K.A. (2015).
      “How climate change affects extremes in maize and wheat yield I two cropping regions.” Journal
      of Climate, 28. pp. 4653-4687.
United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination (UNDAC) (2015). “UNDAC assessment report,
      floods: Malawi”. Mimeo.
Venalainen, A., Pilli-Sihvola, K., Tuomenvirta, H., Ruuhela, R., Kululanga, E., Mtilatila, L., Kanyanga, J., and
        Nkomoki, J. (2016). “Analysis of the meteorological capacity for early warnings in Malawi and
        Zambia.” Climate and Development, 8, pp. 190-196.
Weismann, D., Basset, L., Benson, T., and Hoddinott, J. (2009). “Validation of the World Food Programme’s
        food consumption score and alternative indicators of household food security.” IFPRI Discussion
        Paper No. 870.
Wineman, A., Mason, N., Ochieng, J., and Kirimi, L. (2017). “Weather extremes and household welfare in
        rural Kenya.” Food Security, 9, pp. 281-300.
World Bank (2016). “Republic of Malawi poverty assessment.” Washington, DC: World Bank. Retrieved on
        August 18, 2017 from https://goo.gl/aXhBCX.
World Bank (2010). Natural hazards, unnatural disasters: the economics of effective prevention.
        Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Food Programme (2008). “Technical guidance sheet - food consumption analysis: calculation and
        use of the food consumption score in food security analysis.” Retrieved on August 18, 2017 from
        https://goo.gl/UE9Nv1.
Yamano, T., Alderman, H., and Christiaensen, L. (2005). “Child growth, shocks, and food aid in rural
        Ethiopia.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 87, pp. 273-288.




                                                                                                             22
                                                       TABLES


                                Table 1: Principal Component Factor Analysis Scores
                                    for Flood Affectedness Index Computation
                               Mean Flood Intensity                  -0.775
                               Distance to Any River (km)            0.544
                               Elevation (m)                         0.679


              Table 2. Maize Yields (Kgs/Ha), by Maize Type, Year and Flood Affectedness Category
                                                                                           Test of
                                                                      Test of Mean
    Flood Affectedness    Maize                                                        Distributional
                                          2013            2015         Differences
    Category (2015)       Type                                                           Differences
                                                                        (P-Value)
                                                                                          (P-Value)
                          Local           1231             974            (.061)            (.002)
    Low                     Hybrid         1677            1069             (.001)            (.063)
                            Overall        1532            1070             (.000)            (.002)
                            Local          1108             766             (.000)            (.000)
    Medium                  Hybrid         1379             652             (.000)            (.000)
                            Overall        1245             734             (.000)            (.000)
                            Local          876              574             (.008)            (.001)
    High                    Hybrid         1063             503             (.000)            (.001)
                            Overall        971              531             (.000)            (.000)



  Table 3: Real Caloric Unit Values, Daily Calories Per Capita, Real Annual Expenditures Per Capita, by Food Group
                                            2013                                           2015
                          Real Caloric       Daily      Real Annual      Real Caloric       Daily      Real Annual
                          Unit Value       Calories     Expenditures     Unit Value       Calories     Expenditures
                         (2015 MWK)       Per Capita     Per Capita     (2015 MWK)       Per Capita     Per Capita
Food Group                                              (2015 MWK)                                     (2015 MWK)
Unrefined maize flour         57            942           18,859             51           1,277          20,087
Refined maize flour          69             478          11,615             49             328           5,684
Other grains                 177            206          11,050             144            251           10,340
Roots & Tubers               217            100          6,110              185            68            3,755
Nuts & Pulses                167            235          12,110             160            212           10,344
Fruit & Veg                  762            58           13,961             413            133           15,988
Meat, Fish & Dairy           963            83           27,708             475            113           18,792
Fat & Oil                    200            74           4,953              146            107           4,297
Sugar                        303            118          7,252              189            89            5,419
Miscellaneous                500            84           11,448             424            85            9,892
Total                        143           2,379         125,134            109           2,662         104,635




                                                                                                                  23
                                                      Table 4: Descriptive Statistics
                                                                          2013                             2015
                                                                                            Low          Medium           High
                                                                         n=558            (n=154)        (n=256)        (n=148)
                                                                              Std.              Std.           Std.            Std.
                                                                      Mean              Mean           Mean           Mean
                                                                             Dev.               Dev.           Dev.            Dev.
Dependent Variables
  Household annual food consumption value per capita
                                                                       116      94.7    116     91.1    89     70.7    91          73.9
  (2015 MWK/1000)
  Household annual calorie consumption per capita                     866      527.2    1026    558    938     607    964          577
  Food Consumption Score                                              54.3     17.8     48.4    20.2   44.5    18.1   41.8         19.0
  Value of household crop production per capita
                                                                       202      217     134     97.4    92     78.1    62          62
  (2015 MWK/1000)
Biophysical, Climate and Weather Patterns
 2015 medium flood affected †                                           0         0       0       0      1       0      0            0
 2015 high flood affected †                                             0         0       0       0      0       0      1            0
 | December-January % Difference from Historical Mean Rainfall |      0.15      0.09    0.54    0.15   0.53    0.13   0.60         0.11
Household Demographics
 Adult equivalents                                                    4.24      1.83    4.17    1.86   4.32    1.91   4.50         1.99
 Dependency ratio                                                     1.34      1.00    1.35    1.07   1.41    1.13   1.47         1.09
 Household highest years of education                                 8.72      3.85    9.19    4.15   8.83    3.84   8.91         3.58
 ln(Age of household head (years))                                    3.70      0.39    3.73    0.35   3.76    0.38   3.77         0.37
 Household head is female †                                           0.32      0.47    0.32    0.47   0.38    0.49   0.28         0.45
Wealth
 Household wealth index (PCA)                                          0.21     0.18     0.25   0.19   0.21    0.18   0.19         0.15
 Household number of ag implements                                     5.03     3.09     4.66   3.21   4.23    3.14   4.72         3.40
 ln (HH land holdings per capita)                                     -1.28     2.00    -1.15   1.67   -1.14   1.72   -0.77        1.78
Risk Management Techniques
 Any household plot w/ terraces or drainage ditches †                 0.07      0.25    0.18    0.38   0.18    0.39   0.13         0.34
 Any household plot w/ bunds to control erosion †                     0.37      0.48    0.38    0.49   0.22    0.42   0.24         0.43
 Any household plot w/ bunds to harvest rainwater †                   0.05      0.22    0.08    0.27   0.05    0.21   0.05         0.23
 Any household plot intercropped with legumes †                       0.60      0.49    0.55    0.50   0.47    0.50   0.41         0.49
Risk Coping Strategies
 Any household member has a financial account †                       0.27      0.44    0.37    0.48   0.30    0.46   0.28         0.45
 Any household member, self-employed †                                0.30      0.46    0.42    0.49   0.39    0.49   0.43         0.50
 Any household member, received wages †                               0.22      0.41    0.29    0.46   0.22    0.41   0.15         0.36
 # of household member days in ganyu labor                            0.38      0.62    0.45    0.78   0.54    0.89   0.49         0.77
 # of adult children living away from home                            1.11      1.90    1.01    1.78   1.04    1.76   1.05         1.87
Social Safety Net
 Household received food assistance †                                 0.28      0.64    0.05    0.21   0.21    0.54   0.36         0.64
 Children received school feeding †                                   0.23      0.43    0.29    0.45   0.32    0.47   0.34         0.49
 Household received MASAF assistance †                                0.15      0.36    0.11    0.31   0.10    0.30   0.12         0.33
Community/Location Characteristics
 Enumeration area access index                                        0.83      0.52    1.06    0.82   0.91    0.87   0.55         0.48
 Population density (100 persons / km2)                               2.01      0.83    2.98    3.88   2.38    2.75   1.65         0.61
 Total deliveries of fertilizer                                       7.01      2.31    7.90    1.87   6.88    2.06   5.06         2.53
 % of households in district receiving extension                      0.56      0.13    0.66    0.09   0.66    0.10   0.68         0.15
 EA Mean Price of Maize Ufa Mgaiwa / 100                              1.95      0.36    1.73    0.25   1.74    0.34   1.73         0.24

      	                                      	




                                                                                                                              24
                      Table 5: Selected Correlated Random Effects Regression Results
                                                                               Dependent Variable
                                                               Ln Household
                                                                   Food
                                                                                  Ln Household         Food
                                                               Consumption
                                                                                  Caloric Intake    Consumption
                                                               Expenditures
                                                                                    Per Capita         Score
                                                                 Per Capita
                                                               (2015 MWK)

  Time                                                          0.148    *          0.537    ***     1.006
 Biophysical, Climate and Weather Patterns
  2015 medium flood affected †                                  -0.232   ***       -0.152            -5.067   *
  2015 high flood affected †                                    0.018               0.118            -7.004   **
    | Dec.-Jan. % Difference from Historical Mean Rainfall |    -0.654   ***       -1.177    ***    -16.264   ***
 Risk Coping Strategies
  Any household member has a financial account †                0.078                0.04            2.642
  Any household member, self-employed †                         0.137    ***        0.036              1.87
  Any household member, received wages †                        0.083               0.059            3.053
  # of household member days in ganyu labor                      0.05               0.031             -0.16
  # of adult children living away from home                     -0.005              0.001            -0.076
 Flood Affectedness * Risk Coping Strategies                       Yes                 Yes              Yes
 Social Safety Nets
  Household received food assistance †                          0.056              -0.006            -1.898
  Children received school feeding †                            -0.148   **        -0.104            -3.212
  Household received MASAF assistance †                         0.135    **         0.104            3.386
 Flood Affectedness * Social Safety Nets
  Medium * food assistance †                                    0.075               0.147            7.228    *
  High * food assistance †                                      0.117                0.13            5.693    **
  Medium * school feeding †                                     0.251    ***         0.26    ***     8.992    ***
  High * school feeding †                                       0.019              -0.032            3.314
  Medium * MASAF assistance †                                   0.237    ***        0.288    ***     1.372
  High * MASAF assistance †                                     -0.031              -0.01            -4.403
 EA Mean Price of Maize Ufa Mgaiwa                               0.11    **        -0.003            1.649
 Household Demographics & Wealth                                   Yes                 Yes              Yes
 Risk Management Practices                                         Yes                 Yes              Yes
 Community/Location Characteristics                                Yes                 Yes              Yes
 Mean Across Time Correlated Random Effects Model                  Yes                 Yes              Yes
Constant                                                       12.138    ***      13.879 ***        77.325 ***
Number of Observations                                           1116                1116              1116
R-squared (overall)                                              0.533              0.339             0.43
Notes: † denotes dichotomous variables. ***/**/* denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively.




                                                                                                                    25
                          Table 6: Selected Instrumental Variable Regression Results
                                                         First Stage                     Second Stage
                                                        Log Value of        Log
                                                         Household       Household
                                                            Crop           Food         Log Household        Food
                                                         Production     Consumption      Caloric Intake   Consumption
                                                         Per Capita     Expenditures      Per Capita         Score
                                                        (2015 MWK)       Per Capita
                                                                        (2015 MWK)
Instrumental Variables
 Flood-affectedness index (PCA)                        -0.207
 December-January long-term rainfall CoVǂ              -6.736     *
 Any household plot intercropped with legumes †         1.401    ***
Instrumented Variable
 Log value of household crop production per capita                      0.07      **          0.014             1.655 *
Observations                                            1072            1072                  1072               1072
R-Squared (Overall)                                                     0.45                  0.298              0.347
Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F-Statistic                                     9.88                  9.38               9.93
Hansen's J P-Value                                                      0.240                 0.408              0.897
Notes: ***/**/* denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. † denotes dichotomous
variables. ǂ CoV stands for coefficient of variation.




                                                                                                                   26
                          FIGURES

Figure 1. Kernel Density of Rainfall Deviation, 2013 and 2015.




Figure 2: Food Expenditures over Time by Flood-Affectedness




                                                                 27
  Figure 3. Calories Per Capita over Time by Flood Affectedness




Figure 4. Food Consumption Score over Time by Flood Affectedness




                                                                   28
                                                        APPENDIX

                                 Table A1: Full Correlated Random Effects Regression Results
                                                                                         Dependent Variable
                                                                        Log Household
                                                                              Food
                                                                                          Log Household            Food
                                                                         Consumption
                                                                                           Caloric Intake       Consumption
                                                                         Expenditures
                                                                                             Per Capita            Score
                                                                           Per Capita
                                                                         (2015 MWK)
 Time                                                                      0.148       *   0.537          ***   1.006
Biophysical, Climate and Weather Patterns
 2015 medium flood affected †                                             -0.232      *** -0.152                 -5.067        *
 2015 high flood affected †                                                0.018           0.118                 -7.004       **
 | December-January % Difference from Historical Mean Rainfall |          -0.654      *** -1.177          ***   -16.264       ***
Household Demographics
 Adult equivalents                                                        -0.171      *** -0.142          ***   -0.519
 Dependency ratio                                                         -0.057       * -0.023                 -0.847
 Household highest years of education                                      0.005           0.005                 0.432        ***
 ln(age of household head (years))                                         0.015           0.082                -4.373        **
 Household head is female †                                               -0.009          -0.003                 0.735
Wealth
 HH wealth index (HH + Dwelling)                                           0.707      ** 0.174                  21.535        **
 HH Number of Ag Hand Tools                                                0.03       *** 0.019            *    1.158         ***
 ln(Land Holdings per Person)                                              0.01           -0.002                -0.669         *
Risk Management Practices
 Any household plot w/ terraces or drainage ditches †                      0.012          -0.053                2.107
 Any household plot w/ bunds to control erosion †                         -0.089       * -0.095            *    -1.826
 Any household plot w/ bunds to harvest rainwater †                        0.017           0.077                -3.165
 Any household plot intercropped with legumes †                            0.158      *** 0.097            *    2.731         **
Risk Coping Strategies
 Any household member has a financial account †                            0.078           0.04                  2.642
 Any household member, self-employed †                                     0.137      *** 0.036                   1.87
 Any household member, received wages †                                    0.083           0.059                 3.053
 # of household member days in ganyu labor                                 0.05            0.031                 -0.16
 # of adult children living away from home                                -0.005           0.001                -0.076
Flood Affectedness * Risk Coping Strategies
 Medium * Financial Account                                                0.123           0.041                 0.537
 High * Financial Account                                                 -0.054          -0.047                 2.052
 Medium * Self-Employed                                                   -0.043           0.013                -1.774
 High * Self-Employed                                                     -0.081           0.012                 0.295
 Medium * Receiving Wages                                                 -0.059          -0.032                -4.088
 High * Receiving Wages                                                    0.262      ** 0.162                   3.738
 Medium * Days Ganyu Labor                                                -0.012          -0.027                -0.227
 High* Days Ganyu Labor                                                   -0.048           0.002                 0.42
 Medium * Children Living Away from Home                                   0.002             0                  -0.109
 High * Children Living Away from Home
                                                                         -0.027           -0.029                0.051




                                                                                                                               29
                                            Table A1 (Cont’d)
                                                                       Dependent Variable
                                                               Log
                                                                               Log
                                                            Household
                                                                           Household        Food
                                                              Food
                                                                             Caloric     Consumption
                                                           Consumption
                                                                           Intake Per       Score
                                                           Expenditures
                                                                             Capita
                                                            Per Capita
 Social Safety Nets
  HH Received Food Assistance †                             0.056           -0.006           -1.898
  HH Received Child Feeding Program †                      -0.148    **     -0.104           -3.212
  HH Received MASAF Assistance †                            0.135    **      0.104            3.386
 Flood Affectedness * Social Safety Nets
  Medium * Food Assistance †                                0.075            0.147            7.228     *
  High * Food Assistance †                                  0.117             0.13            5.693    **
  Medium * Child Feeding Program †                          0.251    ***      0.26     ***   8.992    ***
  High * Child Feeding Program †                            0.019           -0.032            3.314
  Medium * MASAF Assistance †                               0.237    ***     0.288     ***   1.372
  High * MASAF Assistance †                                -0.031            -0.01           -4.403
 Community/Location Characteristics
  EA Access Index                                           0.007           -0.061    * 1.362
  Population Density (100 persons / km2)                   -0.039 ***       -0.013      -1.002 ***
  Total deliveries of fertilizer / 1000                     -0.07     ***    -0.03      -1.793    **
  Proportion of HH in District that Received Extension     -0.163           -0.014      -9.805     *
  EA Mean Price of Maize Ufa Mgaiwa / 100                    0.11     **    -0.003       1.649
 District Fixed Effects                                          Yes              Yes        Yes
 Mean Across Time Correlated Random Effects Model                Yes              Yes        Yes
Constant                                                   12.138 ***       13.879 ***  77.325 ***
Observations                                                    1116             1116       1116
R-squared (Overall)                                             0.533           0.339        0.43
Goodness of Fit (corr(Y,Yhat))                                  0.554           0.380       0.424
Notes: ***/**/* denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. † denotes
dichotomous variables.




                       Table A2: Results from Tests of Joint Significance of
              Inter-Annual Household Averages for Control Variables (Mundlak Test)
         Welfare Outcome                                                 Chi2  P-Value
         Log Household Food Consumption Expenditures Per Capita                 0.33         (.568)
         Log Household Caloric Intake Per Capita                                0.65         (.420)
         Food Consumption Score                                                 0.74         (.389)




                                                                                                             30
                                Table A3: Full Fixed Effects Regression Results
                                                                           Dependent Variable
                                                            Log Household
                                                                  Food       Log Household        Food
                                                             Consumption      Caloric Intake  Consumption
                                                             Expenditures        Per Capita       Score
                                                               Per Capita
 Time                                                          0.216 **          0.629 ***       2.34
Biophysical, Climate and Weather Patterns
 2015 Medium Flood Affected                                   -0.188 *          -0.147         -5.989 *
 2015 High Flood Affected                                      0.163             0.193         -4.728
 Dec-Jan |% Diff. from Hist. Mean Rain|                       -0.827 ***          -1.38 ***   -18.799 ***
Household Demographics
 Adult equivalents                                            -0.214 ***        -0.207 ***      0.036
 Dependency ratio                                             -0.047            -0.014         -1.055
 Household highest years of education                          0.008             0.005          0.193
 ln(age of household head (years))                            -0.066             0.066         -4.757
 Household head is female †                                   -0.052            -0.055          0.383
Wealth
 HH wealth index (HH + Dwelling)                               0.621 *           0.157         19.141 **
 HH Number of Ag Hand Tools                                    0.032 ***         0.021 **       1.079 ***
 ln(Land Holdings per Person)                                  0.008            -0.008         -0.659
Risk Management Practices
 HH Plot had terraces or drainage ditches                      0.009            -0.067          1.885
 HH Plot had bunds to control erosion                         -0.085            -0.085          -1.46
 HH Plot had bunds to harvest rainwater                        0.008             0.063         -2.857
 HH Crop was intercropped with legumes                         0.143 ***         0.074          2.313 *
Risk Coping Strategies
 Any HH Member, Financial Account                              0.086             0.054          2.827
 Any HH Member, Self-Employed                                  0.146 **          0.041          1.868
 Any HH Member, Receiving Wages                                0.021            -0.035          5.099 *
 N of HH member days in ganyu labor / 100                      0.073 *           0.038          0.379
 N of adult children living away from home                    -0.008            -0.004         -0.263
Flood Affectedness * Risk Coping Strategies
 Medium * Financial Account                                    0.143             0.065         -0.355
 High * Financial Account                                      0.032             0.018          6.657
 Medium * Self-Employed                                       -0.058            -0.042           0.34
 High * Self-Employed                                         -0.194            -0.018         -1.147
 Medium * Receiving Wages                                       -0.04            0.062          -3.93
 High * Receiving Wages                                        0.079             0.108         -5.786
 Medium * Days Ganyu Labor                                    -0.066            -0.052         -0.934
 High* Days Ganyu Labor                                       -0.087             0.021          0.057
 Medium * Children Living Away from Home                       0.013             0.004          1.055 **
 High * Children Living Away from Home                        -0.066 ***        -0.066 **      -0.432




                                                                                                            31
                                              Table A3 (Cont’d)
                                                            Log Household
                                                                 Food       Log Household        Food
                                                             Consumption     Caloric Intake   Consumption
                                                             Expenditures     Per Capita         Score
                                                              Per Capita
 Social Safety Net s
  HH Received Food Assistance                                 0.069           -0.002           -1.424
  HH Received Child Feeding Program                          -0.119           -0.091           -2.073
  HH Received MASAF Assistance                                0.145   *        0.116            3.873
 Flood Affectedness * Social Safety Nets
  Medium * Food Assistance                                     0.11             0.15            6.726
  High * Food Assistance                                      0.059             0.14            3.156
  Medium * Child Feeding Program                              0.194   *        0.283   **       8.562   ***
  High * Child Feeding Program                                0.036           -0.067           -1.903
  Medium * MASAF Assistance                                   0.118            0.183           -1.554
  High * MASAF Assistance                                    -0.089            -0.07            -3.35
 Community/Location Characteristics
  EA Access Index                                            -0.02           -0.125 ***        0.926
  Population Density (100 persons / km2)                    -0.028 **        -0.013            -0.55
  Total deliveries of fertilizer / 1000                     -0.027           -0.011           -1.538
  Proportion of HH in District that Received Extension      -0.205           -0.079           -9.464
  EA Mean Price of Maize Ufa Mgaiwa / 100                    0.109 *          0.032            2.078
 Location Dummies                                               Yes              Yes              Yes
Constant                                                    12.341 ***       14.154 ***       77.712 ***
Number of Observations                                         1116             1116             1116
R-squared (overall)                                            0.31             0.148            0.194
Goodness of Fit (corr(Y,Yhat))                                 0.557            0.385            0.440
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                                                              32
