                                                      WPS8175


Policy Research Working Paper                        8175




           Longevity and Lifetime Education
                 Global Evidence from 919 Surveys

                            Mohammad Mainul Hoque
                               Elizabeth M. King
                             Claudio E. Montenegro
                                Peter F. Orazem




Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group
August 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8175


  Abstract
 Data from 919 household surveys conducted between                                   of the surveys, with significant negative effects found in
 1960 and 2012, spanning 147 economies, are used to                                  only 2.3 percent. Rising life expectancy at birth for a birth
 evaluate the relationship between rising life expectancy at                         cohort has intergenerational benefits in that the cohort’s
 birth and lifetime years of schooling for successive birth                          children’s schooling also increases. Rising life expectancy
 cohorts between 1905 and 1988. The study finds signif-                              at birth since 1905 can explain 70 percent of the rising
 icant positive effects of increased life expectancy at birth                        completed years of schooling for those birth cohorts.
 on lifetime completed years of schooling in 95 percent




  This paper is a product of the Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at cmontenegro@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
     Longevity and Lifetime Education: Global Evidence from 919 Surveys
                                  Mohammad Mainul Hoque
                          Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies

                                       Elizabeth M. King
                                      Brookings Institution

                                 Claudio E. Montenegro
Department of Economics, University of Chile; The World Bank, and the German Development
                                         Institute.

                                       Peter F. Orazem
                        Department of Economics, Iowa State University




Key Words: life expectancy, lifetime education, cohort, human capital, Ben-Porath,
identification

JEL: J10; I15; O15;


________________________
Corresponding author: Peter F. Orazem, 267 Heady Hall, Department of Economics, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA 50011-1070. Email: pfo@iastate.edu Phone: (515) 294-8656/ FAX:
(515) 294-0221. Responsibility for the contents of this article is entirely ours and should not be
attributed to our affiliated institutions.
           Longevity and Lifetime Education: Global Evidence from 919 Surveys

1. Introduction


       By 2015, world life expectancy at birth was 73.8 years for women and 69.6 years for

men, more than double the average life expectancy in 1900 (UN 2017, Kinsella and Velkoff,

2001). A long-held theoretical model in economics explains why greater longevity would also

increase lifetime human capital investment (Ben-Porath, 1967; Heckman, 1976; Becker, 1993).

An increase in the human life span brings economic benefits to individuals and economies:

lifetime earnings would rise because better health allows people to work more years and more

hours per year, raises productivity per hour of work, and induces higher savings and more

investments in physical and human capital. Analyses of cross-economy and individual-level data

generally find that increases in life expectancy raise lifetime earnings, but their impact on

schooling levels has been mixed.

       The contrasting results from these studies motivate us to reexamine the relationship

afresh using a different identification strategy applied to cohort-specific data from a large

number of surveys in developing economies. This paper aims to establish a causal relationship

between increases in life expectancy at birth and the completed years of schooling of cohorts

born between 1905 and 1988 in 147 economies.

       Unlike other cross-economy studies which we review below, our study uses data on

completed years of schooling from 919 household surveys rather than estimates of schooling

levels based on school enrollment data from population censuses. We adopt a birth-cohort

approach that matches cohort-specific completed years of schooling with cohort-specific life

expectancy at birth, allowing us to exploit between-cohort, within-economy variations in life

expectancy at birth and schooling. In this approach, we incorporate data on parents’ life

                                                                                                2
expectancy to control for the intergenerational link, and use individual-level data on schooling

attainment to examine the causal link. Finally, we undertake regional and economy-specific

analyses to compare the effect of life-expectancy at birth on schooling across income regions and

economies.

        In 95% of the surveys, we find positive and statistically significant effects of life

expectancy at birth on lifetime years of schooling. In only 2.3% of the surveys is the relationship

negative and statistically significant. The effects are important economically. We find that an

additional year of life expectancy at birth increases years of schooling for that birth cohort by

0.11 to 0.15 year. In addition, that one-year increase in life expectancy will increase the years of

schooling of the children of that birth cohort by 0.025 year. Applying these estimates to changes

in life expectancy since 1905, we conclude that rising life expectancy at birth accounts for about

70% of the rising years of schooling worldwide.

        The next section reviews the recent studies that link life expectancy to schooling,

followed by a section on the theoretical framework that guides our empirical approach. Section

4 describes the survey data we use and defines the variables. Sections 5 and 6 report the findings

from our basic empirical model and from the extensions of that model, respectively. The final

section compares our results with those of other studies and draws implications for policy.


2. Relevant Literature

        Recent studies have provided conflicting evidence regarding the Ben-Porath prediction

that greater life expectancy increases human capital investment.1 The principal challenge for

these studies has been to establish causality, not just correlation. Studies have addressed this


1
  Earlier studies, such as Kalemli-Ozcan, Ryder and Weil (2000), have been cited and reviewed thoroughly by recent
studies included here (e.g., Bleakley, 2010b; Cutler et al., 2010; Cervellati and Sunde, 2009). Here we focus on
studies undertaken in the last decade.

                                                                                                                3
challenge using a variety of approaches. Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) used the dates of

international health interventions and public health improvements in the 1940s and the variation

across 47 economies in pre-intervention disease mortality rates to estimate economy-specific

measures of the decline in mortality to define an instrumental variable for changes in life

expectancy in an economy. The authors do not find a significant effect of the predicted mortality

reduction on per-capita economic growth or on years of schooling. One reason given for this

finding is that increased life expectancy also boosted population growth, exerting pressure on

resources for human capital investments.2 Bloom, Canning, and Fink (2014) argued that the

Acemoglu-Johnson finding was due to omitted variable bias, the result of excluding an initial life

expectancy measure for each economy. Without controlling for this initial health variable,

changes in life expectancy at birth, which were largest in the poorest economies, appeared to

produce lower economic growth in those economies.

         Other studies have also used the timing of health interventions and geographic variation

in pre-intervention health measures as the source of exogenous change in estimating a causal

relationship between life expectancy and schooling using individual-level data rather than

economy-level data. Bleakley (2010a) applied this quasi-experimental approach to data on

malaria prevalence rates in the US, Brazil, Colombia and Mexico. He compared the cohorts

based on the pre-eradication malaria burden in their place of birth and their year of birth relative

to the malaria-eradication campaigns. Cohorts born after the campaign and in areas with high

pre-campaign malaria burden would have had more exposure to the benefits of the eradication

programs, compared with those cohorts born before the eradication campaign. Early-life malaria


2
  Unexpectedly large cohorts will face depressed earnings from a crowding of more individuals into the market,
particularly if different birth cohorts are not perfect substitutes in production. To the extent that the potential for
crowding in is expected, individuals in cohorts with rising life expectancy will moderate their human capital
investment decisions to reflect anticipated depreciated earnings per unit of human capital.

                                                                                                                          4
infection is expected to affect schooling levels because the disease stunts fetal development,

impairs cognitive ability, and raises school absenteeism. The author found significant positive

effects on adult earnings and literacy in all three economies, but years of schooling only rose

significantly in Colombia.

        In a similar study that focused on India, Cutler et al. (2010) compared outcomes across

pre- and post-eradication-campaign cohorts in areas with varying pre-campaign prevalence.

Their differences-in-differences estimates revealed no relative gains in either literacy levels or

primary school completion in areas that experienced the largest reductions in malaria. Only when

the authors distinguished between the most and least malarious areas did they find a positive

effect of the campaign on primary completion and literacy. Lucas’s (2010) study of women born

before and after a malaria eradication campaign in Sri Lanka and Paraguay found that women

born after the malaria intervention gained more years of schooling and improved their literacy.3

        Other studies have examined how information regarding life expectancy affects human

capital. For example, Oster, Shoulson and Dorsey (2013) used knowledge of Huntington’s

Disease, a life-shortening genetic illness, to show that individuals who test positive for the

disease were 30 percentage points less likely to complete college. There were no differences in

high school completion since testing occurred later in life after high school completion. The

estimated elasticity of demand for education with respect to life expectancy was around 1.0.4


3
  Miguel and Kremer (2004) found that deworming drugs raised completed schooling primarily by reducing student
absence rates. Benefits also extended to the surrounding community because there was lower transmission of
infections. Unclear was how much of the increased schooling was due to the physiological effect of reducing
helminth infections and how much was due to the Ben-Porath effect.
4
  This study provides a clearer test of the Ben-Porath hypothesis than those studies that have used weather
conditions (Maccini and Yang, 2009) or randomized nutrition programs (Maluccio et al., 2009) to measure changes
in health status. For example, Maccini and Yang (2009) found that the amount of rainfall around the time of birth
was linked to the health, education, and socioeconomic outcomes of Indonesian adults born between 1953 and 1974.
The effect could be due to better nutrition and health from improved harvests, but it could be also due to better
incomes from greater agricultural productivity.

                                                                                                               5
       Several reasons have been proposed to explain why the cross-economy and individual-

level studies have not shown a consistently positive causal relationship between life expectancy

and years of schooling, despite the positive results for lifetime earnings. One reason is that better

child health signaled by increased life expectancy at birth raises the productivity of child labor as

well as later adult labor, even without more years of schooling. This is consistent with the

positive impact on literacy that Bleakley (2010a), Cutler et al. (2010) and Lucas (2009) find.

Another possible reason is suggested by Pitt et al. (2012): In economies where returns to

schooling are limited, the positive effect of better health on ability to perform physical labor

(“brawn”) is enough to increase lifetime earnings without raising time in school.

       Lorentzen, McMillan and Wacziarg (2008) use changes in adult mortality rates rather

than in infant and child mortality or life expectancy at birth to measure an economy’s health

status. They argue that premature death of an adult destroys that person’s accumulated human

capital, incurring a more immediate and significant economic loss than would an infant death. In

both their OLS and structural models, the authors find a significant effect of adult mortality on

human capital investment, measured as enrollment rates at the secondary level, but the higher

enrollment rates do not translate into faster economic growth. To deal with the problem of

endogeneity, they use three sets of exogenous variables (malaria ecology, climate variables and

geographic features) and a 3SLS methodology which uses excluded variables as instruments.

       In contrast, Hazan (2012) found a significant relationship between life expectancy at birth

and years of schooling but not between life expectancy at age 5 and years of schooling. In cross-

economy studies, life expectancy at birth is the preferred measure both because mortality rates

are higher for newborns and infants than for older children and because declines in infant and

child mortality are thought to result more from exogenous health interventions than from



                                                                                                    6
parental investments in their children’s health. Cohen and Leker (2014) found that life

expectancy at birth was a decisive factor for schooling decisions related to younger cohorts but

not for those cohorts who had already completed their schooling.

        Hazan (2009) argued that the relevant measure of life expectancy was the expected total

working hours over a person’s lifetime, not life expectancy at birth or adult mortality. He argued

that the Ben-Porath model would require a positive correlation between longevity and expected

lifetime work hours. He did not find evidence of that positive correlation in data on U.S. men

born between 1840 and 1970 and all American individuals born between 1890 and 1970. In

response, Cervellati and Sunde (2013) argued that an increase in expected lifetime labor supply

is neither a necessary nor sufficient condition for higher life expectancy to induce an increase in

schooling. They documented that the observed fall in labor supply in the US was due to cohorts

spending more time in school, delaying entry into the labor market, and consuming more leisure

made affordable by the higher earnings.

        Our strategy makes several departures from past studies. First, we base our analysis on

919 household surveys containing information on completed schooling rather than estimates of

schooling based on enrollment data. Our strategy is to relate life expectancy at birth for an

economy-birth-year cohort to the average education that cohort will ultimately attain. This level

of detail will allow us to exploit between-cohort, within-economy variations in life expectancy at

birth and schooling. In addition to examining how own life expectancy affects schooling, we also

examine intergenerational effects of life expectancy gains by incorporating the effect of changing

life expectancy at birth of the parental cohort on the lifetime schooling of their children.5 Our

contribution will be to assess how common are violations of the Ben-Porath hypothesis across


5
 We see this as a plausible reason for the Lorentzen, McMillan and Wacziarg (2008) finding that adult mortality
affects the schooling of younger cohorts.

                                                                                                                  7
this large set of tests and to demonstrate the distribution of estimated schooling effects of life

expectancy around the world. In the next section, we lay out our empirical strategy.

3. Theoretical Motivation

         The theoretical motivation of this paper comes from Ben-Porath’s model (1967) as most

recently expostulated by Bleakley’s “horizon triangle” (2017). Our empirical framework is built

on the hypothesis that individuals use the expected length of life at birth as a measure of future

health to plan their future human capital investments. Here we illustrate the various ways that an

improvement in health can affect lifetime years of schooling.

         Let the expected health at the time of birth for individual i be summarized by life

expectancy at birth (li0). Improved health at the time of birth will alter the expected length of

productive life, which increases potential lifetime earnings. If health and time in school (Sit) are

complementary inputs in the production of health, improved health will also increase the human

capital that can be produced per year of schooling. The expected lifetime benefits from

additional time in school at age t can be summarized by the marginal benefit equation

 (   ,    ,   , ,   ) where Pit is a vector of parental inputs and q an index of school quality that

are inputs into the human capital production process. The unobserved term                represents

individual-specific productivity in producing human capital that is uncorrelated with health,

parental or schooling inputs. The function B can be viewed as the impact of an additional year of

schooling at time t on lifetime earnings or utility.

         It is optimal to continue investing time in school until B = C, the marginal cost of an

additional year of schooling. The cost of education depends on monetary costs of schooling (pit),

and the opportunity cost of time spent in school equal to the wage the child could earn given past

investments in human capital      (   ,   _   ,   _   ,   )	where the notation _t reflects parental and


                                                                                                          8
school time investments before age t. The index Yit reflects the state of the labor market for

workers with skills that are close substitutes for i with larger values indicating stronger demand

for similarly skilled workers. The opportunity cost of schooling is rising in all past

accumulations of human capital, so the marginal cost of schooling

 (   ,    (   ,   _   ,   _   ,   ))	is rising in both direct and opportunity cost of schooling. We

further assume that the marginal benefit from schooling is subject to diminishing returns (           <


0). Because the opportunity cost of schooling is rising in years of schooling,             > 0.
                                                                                       _


         We can illustrate how changes in expected health at the time of birth will alter expected

time spent in formal schooling using Figure 1. Consider two health states, one with a good draw

and the other with a bad draw on life expectancy at birth. Note that at the time of birth, all

planned parental inputs are conditioned on the parents’ endowment at the time of birth, Pi0, and

all subsequent parental inputs will be endogenous. Similarly, all planned trajectories for the

direct and opportunity costs of schooling will be based on information at the time of birth.

Therefore, all other factors affecting the marginal benefit and marginal cost of schooling are the

same across the two health states. The parents will plan for the child to remain in school as long

as the marginal benefit exceeds the cost. The good health state raises the marginal benefit per

year of schooling because of the complementarity between health and productivity in school, but

also because the child will have a longer potential time to productively exploit human capital. At

the same time, the good health state has a higher opportunity cost of an additional year of

schooling because of the faster accumulation of human capital. The present value of lifetime

earnings, given by the area under the marginal benefit curve, rises as a result of the increase in

life expectancy at birth. However, the greater share of the benefits from improved child health

will come from greater efficiency in the production of human capital per year of schooling

                                                                                                          9
(illustrated by the change in the height of the marginal benefit curves shaded by diagonal lines),

and only a modest share of the increased lifetime income will come from the induced increase in

years of schooling (illustrated by the cross-hatched area between S* and S**).6 Consequently,

any response of years of schooling to increased life expectancy at birth will understate the

induced increase in human capital resulting from the improved health.

           The case we illustrate in Figure 1 shows expected time in school increasing as life

expectancy rose, but that requires that the induced increase in marginal benefit from schooling is

greater than the induced increase in the marginal opportunity cost from schooling. The opposite

could have happened, in which case the child would spend less time in school in the good health

state. Ultimately, which effect dominates is an empirical question we plan to resolve with

evidence from 147 economies.

4. Empirical Framework

           Our empirical specification will focus on the schooling response to life expectancy at

birth. To show why, note that equating the marginal benefit and marginal cost of schooling

yields the relationship

                                       = (      , ,   ,       ,       _   ,   _   ,       ,   ),

but as suggested by our previous discussion,              ,       ,       _   ,       _   	and	    will all be endogenously

determined by information obtained as the child ages. Some of the reduced form effect of life

expectancy at birth will be found through these other factors whose values will depend in part on

life expectancy at birth and in part on new information revealed over time.

           To make this point more precise, consider the projection of the cost of schooling at time t

on information available at the time of birth.


6
    This point was made by Bleakley (2007, 2010b).

                                                                                                                              10
                                                  = ( |Ω ) +

Innovations in the cost of schooling after time 0 will be uncorrelated with information known at

the time of birth. This will be true for the other factors            ,       _   ,   _   	and	   as well. For this

reason, we propose to measure the effect of life expectancy on completed schooling using only

information known at the time of birth. Note that even later innovations in life expectancy can

endogenously reflect investments by the parents and will generate biased inference regarding the

effect of life expectancy on schooling.

         We limit our samples to individuals who are of sufficient age that they have completed

their schooling. For individual i in cohort j and economy c, consider the specification

              =            +            +           +           +         +           +     +     +      .             (1)

The dependent variable in the above equation,                 is the completed years of schooling for

individual i in birth cohort j and economy c. The key exogenous variable                              is the average

life expectancy at birth for individuals in cohort j and economy c. The coefficient                          will provide

the change in completed years of schooling for every one-year increase in life expectancy. The

other key independent variable is              , taken as the life expectancy at birth for the parents of

individuals in cohort j and economy c. We use the life expectancy for birth cohorts 25 years

prior as the parents’ life expectancy at birth.7 We know that increases in the parents’ life

expectancy at birth will increase their lifetime earnings, whether from more schooling, more

human capital accumulated per year of schooling, or more years of productive work, and so we

should find that some of that increased parental wealth is transferred to their children in the form

of greater human capital investments (           >0).8 We also control for the fraction of the birth


7
  We also experimented with life expectancy at birth 20 and 30 years prior as our measure of the parents’ health
endowment. In practice, life expectancy at birth 20, 25, and 30 years prior were highly correlated.
8
  See Becker and Tomes (1979, 1986).

                                                                                                                       11
cohort that is male in the survey and the fraction that reside in urban areas to capture differences

in reward to schooling across genders and across urban and rural regions.

       The error terms include      , an economy-specific fixed effect that holds constant the level

of economic development and other political, social and economic attributes that are common

across birth cohorts;    , a fixed effect for the year of the survey that controls for any economic,

political or health shocks that are common across states; and      , a fixed effect for the year of

birth that controls for health innovations and pandemics as well as other factors that would affect

a birth cohort across economies. The error term          represents the purely random factors that

affect years of completed schooling.

       The remaining variation that we use to identify our life expectancy effects is due to

variation across cohorts within an economy. The possible bias in our estimate is due to          ,a

shock to completed schooling that is specific to birth cohort j within the economy. Our estimate

of   will be biased if this shock is correlated with changes in life expectancy for the cohort, as

might be the case if an economy always introduces improvements in public health with

improvements in school quality.

       We apply this model to two units of observation. Our most comprehensive data set

aggregates completed schooling decisions to the birth cohort level within an economy. For a

subset of these economies, we also have data on individual completed years of schooling. The

latter data set allows us additional controls for the possible bias related to the economy-cohort

specific fixed effect    we discussed above. As we will show, our conclusions are not sensitive

to the inclusion or exclusion of the controls for this potential bias.

       We cluster the standard error,      , at the survey level to correct for correlated errors

across birth cohorts j within economy c. We weight the observations to reflect the cell share of


                                                                                                      12
the total population in the economy. We further weighted the data by the square root of the cell-

size to correct for differences in measurement error variance between thin and thick cell samples.


5.      Data

     This study uses the World Bank’s International Income Distribution Database, a

harmonized collection of 919 household surveys from 147 economies. A list of the economies

and total number of surveys from each economy is presented in table A1 in the Appendix. The

surveys were conducted between 1960 and 2012 with 78% of the surveys collected on or after

2000. The database includes economies from all regions and income groups. Of the 147

economies, 32 are from industrialized nations, 16 from Asia and the Pacific, 20 from Central

Asia and Eastern Europe, 23 from Latin America, 10 from the Middle East and North Africa, 8

from South Asia, and 38 from Sub-Saharan Africa. From each survey, we include individuals in

the age range 25 to 65 so that they are likely to have completed their schooling. The upper bound

of age 65 is chosen to avoid the selection issues related to mortality.

        Our observations are aggregated to birth-year cohorts from each survey in each economy.

This approach allows us to access the full set of data, as many of the data sets are privileged and

not open to use by non-Bank researchers. The 919 surveys totaling 44.6 million individuals in

the age range 25-65 are placed in one of 3,583 economy survey-birth year cohorts. There are up

to 87 birth-year groups per economy with birth years ranging from 1901 to 1987. We further

subdivide the birth cohorts by urban versus rural residence and by gender. Our analysis requires

information on each birth-cohort’s average completed years of schooling, proportion living in

urban or rural residence, and gender. 9 All of these variables are harmonized to be measured

consistently across surveys, economies, cohorts, genders, and regions of the economy. We also

9
 We will not know where an individual was at the time of birth and so we will have some mismatch between urban
and rural residence during the survey versus birth-place.

                                                                                                            13
compile information on the surveyed population versus the total population for each birth cohort

in order to construct the sample weights in our regression analysis.

         Our key independent variable “Life Expectancy at Birth” is compiled from the United

Nation’s Population database and “Gap Minder”.10 “Gap Minder” constructs a measure of life

expectancy at birth for almost 200 economies back to 1900 by compiling pre-1950 data on

mortality rates from the Human Mortality Database and the United Nations Population

Division’s World Population Prospects.11

         For robustness checks, we also compile life expectancy at ages 5 and 10. Because life

expectancy at older ages will reflect parental investments in their children’s health and human

capital in response to updated information on the cohort’s health, these measures are

endogenous, but are used to compare our findings to previously published studies. Life

expectancy at ages 5 and 10 are published by the Population Division of the United Nations

Department of Economic and Social Affairs.12

         Figure 2 illustrates how life expectancy evolves globally across cohorts in our sample.

Both life expectancy and years of schooling decreased through the first 35 years of the century

and then both series reversed and rose for the rest of the century. The regional scatterplots in

Figure 3 indicate that all regions experienced similar rising trends in life expectancy at birth

across cohorts, so the apparent decline in life expectancy for the first third of the century in

Figure 2 was due to the inclusion of economies with lower average life expectancy and schooling

and was not a true decrease in life expectancy. In Latin America and the Caribbean, life

10
   The UN maintains a rich database on various socio-economic indicators http://data.un.org/Default.aspx.
11
   In the case where no estimates are available, they rely on simple model of interpolation and extrapolation to reach
an approximate measure. Although “Gap Minder” admits that quality of life expectancy at birth data would vary
across economies for the period before 1950, our extensive search suggests that this is the best available information
covering such a wide set of economies for a long period before 1950.
12
   Various region, gender and age specific life expectancy data are available at http://esa.un.org/wpp/Excel-
Data/mortality.htm. The data are reported for 5-year birth cohorts rather than specific birth cohorts, and so we used
the nearest age match.

                                                                                                                   14
expectancy at birth was only 68.6% of that in the developed economies, but this rose to 90.5% by

the 1990s. Sub-Saharan Africa has had a more modest success in narrowing the gap in life

expectancy. The gap narrowed by only 24% due to reversals in life expectancy attributable to

the AIDS epidemic.

         In the survey specific analysis, we utilize all 919 surveys. That means that the same

cohort may show up multiple times across surveys. Since cohort-specific schooling does not

change within an economy, the repeated cohort observations are redundant and would

overweight repeated cohorts. To correct this, we include only one observation for each

economy-birth cohort in our cross-economy analysis. We use information from the oldest survey

from each economy. If multiple surveys are available in an economy, we use the most recent

survey to add in the birth cohorts that are not included in the earlier economy survey(s).13


6        Results

      In this section, first we report the survey specific estimates. In a following subsection we

analyze the results from pooling the surveys in a cross-economy analysis.


6.1 Survey by survey estimates

         Table 1 summarizes the results of the regressions of specification (1) performed on each

of the 919 surveys across 147 economies. The identification comes from within survey, across

cohort variation in life expectancy at birth.14

         The impact of life expectancy at birth on completed years in school is quite consistent

across surveys and regions. Life expectancy at birth had a positive and statistically significant

13
   For example, Germany has two surveys in our survey-pool, one in 2005 and the other in 2012. The youngest
cohort in the former survey was born in 1980 while in the later survey the youngest was born in 1987. Since the
cohorts who were born between 1980 and 1987 were under 25 during the survey of 2005, we only include these new
cohorts from the second survey for Germany in our sample.
14
   Not all regressions included the controls for urban/rural differences either because only urban data were collected
or because regional information was not collected.

                                                                                                                   15
impact on years of schooling in 95% of the surveys. Only in 2.3% of the surveys was there a

negative estimated effect of life expectancy on schooling, and in only 3 of the 919 regressions

was the coefficient negative and statistically significant.

         A simple average of life expectancy coefficients across these 919 surveys shows that for

each additional year of gain in life expectancy at birth, individuals spent approximately 0.155

year more in school. Figure 4 presents region specific kernel distributions of the coefficients of

life expectancy at birth obtained from survey-specific regressions. The region-specific median

value of the coefficient, as indicated in the graph, reveals that the highest median life expectancy

effect is observed in Latin America, while the lowest in Central Asia and Eastern Europe.15 Over

97% of the estimates are positive and the median estimates for the regions vary from a low of

7.3% in Eastern Europe and Central Asia to 17.4% in South America.


6.2 Estimates from the regression on pooled surveys

         As reported in table 2, life expectancy at birth is positively associated with schooling.

The coefficients of life expectancy at birth,          , imply that a one-year increase in life expectancy

at birth increases years in school in the range of 0.13 to 0.15 years. Reflecting our discussion in

section 4, we acknowledge that cohort-specific fixed factors could bias the estimates. We control

for such cohort-specific fixed effects in two different ways. In specification IV, dummy variables

defining five-year birth cohorts are incorporated into the estimation. 16 In specification V, birth

year cohort fixed effects are introduced. All the estimates suggest that an additional year of

schooling results from about 7.5 years greater life expectancy at birth. We also see some modest

evidence of a small positive effect of parent’s life expectancy on their children’s schooling.

15
  For comparison, the distribution of all survey-specific estimates shows a median life expectancy effect of 0.148.
16
  While constructing the five-year birth cohorts, we collapse all individuals aged 25-65 into 13 different five-year
birth cohorts. Since the number of observations before 1930 is small, they are grouped into a cohort spanning more
than five years. Similarly, all individuals, who were born during 1985-87, were collapsed to form the last cohort
spanning only 3 years.

                                                                                                                  16
6.3 Heterogeneity across groups

        The effect of life expectancy at birth might differ across groups. We investigate this

separately by male, female, urban and rural groups. Table 3 presents the group-specific results.

The estimates are similar to those from the pooled sample. An additional year of life expectancy

at birth adds 0.15 year of schooling for women, 0.11 year of schooling for men, and 0.13

additional year for both urban and rural residents. An additional year of parental life expectancy

translates to a small increase in schooling for daughters and for children in both urban and rural

markets.

        Life expectancy at birth might affect the schooling decision of birth-cohorts differently

across regions. Therefore, we extend the empirical exercise by seven regions based on the World

Bank classification of economies based on income and region.17 The results in table 4 reveal that

although life expectancy effects are consistently positive and statistically significant, they vary in

magnitude across regions. The coefficient of life expectancy at birth shrinks for all regions once

we control for birth-cohort fixed effects. The estimates suggest that, compared to other regions,

cohorts in the Middle East and North Africa spent more time in school in response to a rise in

life expectancy at birth. Consistent with what we observe in survey specific estimates, the life

expectancy effect is smaller for Eastern Europe and Central Asia. However, the life expectancy

effect for South Asia is not significant after including birth-year specific fixed effect. The effect

of parents’ life expectancy generally remains positive but the estimates lose significance in the

smaller samples.




17
  The World Bank classifies the developing economies into six regions: “East Asia and Pacific”, Eastern Europe
and Central Asia”, “Latin America and Caribbean”, “Middle East and North Africa”, “South Asia” and “Sub-
Saharan Africa”. We added to this the pool of industrialized economies into “High Income Economies”. For the
World Bank classification please see http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-and-lending-groups.

                                                                                                                 17
6.4 Life expectancy at older ages


   Hazan (2012) argues that life expectancy at birth exhibits more variation across economies

and cohorts due to high infant and child mortality. He suggests that life expectancy at age five

will be more appropriate to capture true effect of health on human capital investment decisions.

Although the model laid out in section 4 shows that life expectancy at age 5 or 10 is endogenous

because it will reflect parental decisions on health investments, it is still useful to examine the

sensitivity of our estimates to alternative estimates of life expectancy. As life expectancy at

exact ages is not available before 1950 for many economies, we use samples of birth cohorts

beginning in 1945 and 1940. The life expectancies are only available for birth cohorts in 5-year

age ranges.

   Table 5 reports that the effect of life expectancy at higher ages on time spent in school is

consistently positive and statistically significant, unlike Hazan’s (2012) finding of no

relationship. A one-year gain in life expectancy at age 5, 10, and 15 increases time in school by

0.185 year, 0.17 year, and 0.129 year, respectively. Parents’ life expectancy turns out to be

positive and statistically significant in specifications with life expectancy at birth, but not

consistently for life expectancy at higher ages. Note that the value of parental life expectancy

falls, at least in precision, as we measure life expectancy at higher ages, which probably indicates

that parents’ endowment is not as crucial as it is in early childhood.


6.5 Robustness checks

    This section incorporates several economy-cohort specific measures to check the robustness

of the effects of life expectancy at birth on completed years of schooling. To investigate the

quality of institutions and political regimes at the time of one’s birth, we utilize a polity measure

that ranks economies by their strength of democratic institutions. We use Polity IV data, which

                                                                                                      18
assign a polity score to 167 economies, which as of 2013 have a population of more than

500,000.18 Although the data go back to 1800 for some economies, for many economies the

polity constructs start after their independence. For a few economies, we impute the missing

polity information by the polity score of their origin economy prior to the split, for example, all

of the Post-Soviet states and states formed after the dissolution of former Yugoslavia and

Czechoslovakia.19

     It is also possible that birth year is correlated with unusually good or bad weather that may

affect the cohort’s availability of food or income. We add time series data on economy averages

of yearly temperature and precipitation produced and maintained by the Climate Research Unit

(CRU) at the University of East Anglia, UK.20 Table 6 reports the results. Specification I

incorporates two weather measures while specifications II and III include the quality of

governance measure. Since the polity variable is missing for many birth cohorts, specification II

includes only the observations with polity scores while specification III includes all the

observations with a dummy variable indicating the presence or absence of a polity score. The

addition of weather or polity measures does not alter our conclusion that increased life

expectancy at birth increases lifetime completed years of schooling.



18
   The data and documentation are available at http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscrdata.html (accessed on October
8th, 2014). The polity scale varies from “strongly autocratic” coded as -10 to “strongly democratic” coded as 10.
19
   Belize, though included in our sample does not have any polity data. In some cases, we could not use the available
polity data since two economies have been consolidated into one, and the surveys do not identify respondents by the
origin. For example, in surveys from Germany, we could not utilize cohorts born after 1945 since the surveys do not
identify individuals born between 1946 and 1987 by place of birth, i.e., whether one was born in West Germany or
the Eastern part. We exclude cohorts born before 1976 in Vietnam, and all cohorts born in the Republic of Yemen
for similar reason.
20
    The original weather data (CRU TS 3.21) reports values for each month and each box on a 0.5 degree
latitude/longitude grid. CRU assigned each box to a single country. For each country CRU calculated the weighted
mean of the values from its constituent grid boxes for each month in turn. Each grid box was weighted by surface
area, using the cosine of the latitude. The seasonal and annual values are the means of their constituent months. The
CRU TS data set prioritizes completeness, and has no missing data over land. Where observations are unavailable,
the 1961-90 monthly climatic mean is used as a substitute. In data sparse regions of the world, this can lead to
repeated values, and this can show up in derived products such as CRU CY.

                                                                                                                 19
     As an additional robustness check, we use individual level observations from 173 of the

original surveys to control for possible endogeneity in life expectancy at birth. While we cannot

observe individual life expectancy at birth, we do know the average cohort life expectancy at

                 ∑
birth,       =            	, for N individuals in cohort j and economy c. This average is exogenous

to the individuals i in that cohort. Consequently, the group mean life expectancy can be used as

an instrumental variable for actual life expectancy.21 We report the equivalent specifications of

equation 1 using this endogeneity correction in table 7. The estimates confirm that an additional

year of life expectancy at birth increases schooling by 0.11 year and that the effect is positive and

statistically significant for males and females and for rural and urban residents. It also confirms

that increases in life expectancy at birth of the parents further increases the schooling of their

children across all these groups.


7        Discussion & Conclusion

     This study covers a wide group of economies, extensive time range, and exploits the cross-

cohort variation within an economy to identify the impact of life expectancy at birth on human

capital accumulation. We find that a one-year increase in life expectancy at birth increases

completed years of schooling over the lifetime by between 0.11 and 0.15 years. This is

comparable to the estimates of 0.11 year in Sri Lanka (Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney 2009),

and 0.17 year in a cross-section of economies (Hansen, 2013).

     In our sample, life expectancy at birth and completed years of schooling increase by 31 years

and 5 years, respectively, for the youngest cohorts compared to the oldest birth cohorts. Our
21
  In the above specifications,        =       + , which states that individual i’s life expectancy at birth in the
country c deviates from cohort j’s mean life expectancy by , which is by construction orthogonal to mean. Since
    will be contained in the error term, the condition,         ,     = 0, must hold. Royalty (2000) has used state
tax rate as an instrument for marginal tax rate in explaining employees’ health insurance eligibility. Similarly, a
series of studies following Ruhm (2000) exploited variation in state or county level unemployment rate while
explaining individual health behavior during a recession.

                                                                                                                 20
estimates imply that gain in life expectancy at birth explains at least 70% of this rise in schooling

years. Alternatively, Goldin and Katz (2009) have characterized the 100 years ending in 1980 as

a time when the U.S. led the world in human capital investments. Life expectancy at birth in the

U.S. rose by 28 years from 1880 to 1980 and years of schooling for the 1980 birth cohort was

about 6.5 years greater than that of the 1880 birth cohort. Our estimates suggest that rising life

expectancy at birth in the U.S. explains 4 of the 6.5 years of increased schooling or 62% of the

education century.


   We have argued that life expectancy at birth is the appropriate indicator of life-time health

endowment and that the proper method to test the effect of health on lifetime human capital is to

use information available at the start of life. As the child ages, parents will adjust investments in

the child’s schooling and health jointly as new information on the economy, the environment,

technology, public policy and any number of other confounding factors becomes known.

Although our estimates using life expectancy at ages 5 or 10 do not alter our conclusions, the

coefficients on life expectancy at the higher ages must reflect the correlation of these health

investments with other decisions that affect the parent’s income, time allocation, and other inputs

into the child’s schooling.


   As an example of this point, Halla and Zweimuller (2013) found that Austrian parents

responded to the Chernobyl Accident by lowering fertility and reducing labor force participation

in order to compensate for possible health concerns faced by their children. The changes in

numbers of children and time allocation will affect their children’s education and their children’s

life expectancy at ages 5, 10, and so on. It would not be correct to attribute changes in education

to the changes in life expectancy as both are responding to a common external shock rather than

being causally related.

                                                                                                     21
8.     References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson. 2007. “Disease and Development: The Effect of
Life Expectancy on Economic Growth.” Journal of Political Economy 115(6): 925–985.

Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1967. “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings.”
Journal of Political Economy 75: 352–365.

Becker, Gary S. 1993 Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special
Reference to Education, 3rd Edition. University of Chicago Press.

Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes.1979. “An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of Income
and Intergenerational Mobility.” Journal of Political Economy 87(1979):1153-1189.

Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. 1986. “Human capital and the rise and fall of families.”
Journal of Labor Economics 4(1986): S1-S39.

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2017. “Longevity, Education, and Income: How Large is the Triangle?”
Available at http://www-personal.umich.edu/~hoytb/Bleakley_Horizon_Triangle.pdf (last
accessed on August 12th, 2017).

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication
in the American South.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1): 73–11.

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2010a. “Malaria eradication in the Americas: a retrospective analysis of
childhood exposure.” American Economic Journal: Applied. Economics 2:1–45.

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2010b. “Health, Human Capital, and Development.” Annual Reviews of
Economics 2:283-310.

Bleakley, Hoyt, Dora Costa, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2014. “Health, Education and Income
in the United States, 1820-2000.” In Leah P. Boustan, Carola Frydman, and Robert A. Margo,
eds. Human Capital in History: The American Record. University of Chicago Press.

Bloom, David, David Canning, and Günther Fink. 2014. “Disease and development revisited.”
Journal of Political Economy 122(6):1355–66.

Clark, Damon, and Heather Royer. 2013. "The Effect of Education on Adult Mortality and
Health: Evidence from Britain." American Economic Review 103(6): 2087-2120.

Cervellati, Matteo, and Uwe Sunde. 2013. “Life expectancy, schooling, and lifetime labor
supply: Theory and evidence revisited.” Econometrica.81: 2055–2086.

Cervellati, Matteo, and Sunde, Uwe. 2009. “Life expectancy and economic growth: the role of
the demographic transition, IZA discussion papers, No. 4160, http://nbn-
resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:101:1-20090605176.

                                                                                              22
Costa, Dora. 2015. “Health and the Economy in the United States, from 1750 to the Present.”
Journal of Economic Literature 53 (3): 503-570.

Cohen, Daniel, and Laura Leker. 2014. “Health and Education: Another Look with the Proper
Data.” Available at http://www.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/docs/cohen-daniel/cohen-leker-
health-and-education-2014.pdf (last accessed on July 17th, 2015).

Cutler, David, Winnie Fung, Michael Kremer, Monica Singhal, and Tom Vogl. 2010. “Early-life
malaria exposure and adult outcomes: evidence from malaria eradication in India.” American
Economic Journal: Applied. Economics 2:72–94.

Goldin, Claudia D., and Lawrence F. Katz. 2009. The race between education and technology.
Harvard University Press.

Halla, Martin, and Martina Zweimüller. 2014. “Parental Response to Early Human Capital
Shocks: Evidence from the Chernobyl Accident.” Discussion Paper 7968, Institute for the Study
of Labor (IZA).

Hansen, Casper W. 2013. “Life expectancy and human capital: evidence from the international
epidemiological transition.” Journal of Health Economics 32 (6):1142–1152.

Hazan. Moshe. 2009. “Longevity and lifetime labor supply: evidence and implications.”
Econometrica 77(6):1829–1863.

Hazan. Moshe. 2012. "Life Expectancy and Schooling: New Insights from Cross-Country Data."
Journal of Population Economics 25 (4):1237-1248.

Heckman, James J. 1976. “A life-cycle model of earnings, learning, and consumption.” Journal
of Political Economy 84: S9–S44.

Jayachandran, Seema, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2009. “Life expectancy and human capital
investments: evidence from maternal mortality declines.” Quarterly Journal Economics
124(1):349–398.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Harl E. Ryder, and David N. Weil. 2000. "Mortality decline, human
capital investment, and economic growth." Journal of Development Economics 62(1): 1-23.

Kinsella, Kevin, and Victoria A. Velkoff 2001. "Life Expectancy and Changing Mortality,"
Chapter 3, An Aging World, 2001. International Population Reports, US Census Bureau, Series
P95/01-1.

Lorentzen, Peter, John McMillan, and Romain Wacziarg. 2008. “Death and development.”
Journal of Economic Growth 13(1): 81–124.




                                                                                              23
Lucas, Adrienne M. "Malaria eradication and educational attainment: evidence from Paraguay
and Sri Lanka." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2, no. 2 (2010): 46-71.

Maccini, Sharon, and Dean Yang. 2009. "Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and Economic
Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall." American Economic Review 99(3): 1006-26.

Maluccio, John A., John Hoddinott, Jere R. Behrman, Reynaldo Martorell, Agnes R.
Quisumbing, and Aryeh D. Stein. 2009. "The impact of improving nutrition during early
childhood on education among Guatemalan adults." The Economic Journal 119(537): 734-763.

Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. 2004. "Worms: identifying impacts on education and
health in the presence of treatment externalities." Econometrica 72(1): 159-217.

Nunn, Nathan, and Diego Puga. 2012. “Ruggedness: the blessing of bad geography in Africa”,
Review of Economics and Statistics 94(1):20–36.

Oster, Emily, Ira Shoulson, and E. Ray Dorsey. 2013. “Limited life expectancy, human capital
and health investments.” American Economic Review 103(5):1977–2002.

Pitt, Mark M., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Nazmul Hassan. 2012. "Human Capital investment and
the gender division of labor in a brawn-based economy." American Economic Review 102(7):
3531-60.

Royalty, A.B. 2000. “Tax Preferences for Fringe Benefits and the Health Insurance Offered by
Employers.” Journal of Public Economics 75(2):209-227.

Ruhm, Christopher J. 2000. "Are recessions good for your health?." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 115(2): 617-650.

United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. 2017. World
Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision, DVD Edition.

University of East Anglia Climatic Research Unit (CRU); [Ian Harris]. Climatic Research Unit
(CRU) Year-by-Year Variation of Selected Climate Variables by Country (CY), [Internet].
NCAS British Atmospheric Data Centre, 2013, 25th August, 2014. Available at
http://badc.nerc.ac.uk/view/badc.nerc.ac.uk__ATOM__DE_56531370-2613-11e3-9fca-
00163e251233




                                                                                               24
   Present Value of Lifetime
   Earnings, Costs                                       C, high



                                                       C, low




           B**


             B*
                                                                             B, high

                                                                    B, low
                                 S* S**                               Years of Schooling


Figure 1: Benefits and Costs of Schooling in the Presence of Health Improvement.         represents
life expectancy at birth, B and C are respectively the marginal cost and benefit of schooling, and
S is years of schooling.




                                                                                                25
                           80                                                     14

                                GobalLifeExp        SchoolYears
                           70                                                     12

                           60
                                                                                  10




                                                                                       Average Years in School
Life Expectancy at Birth




                           50
                                                                                  8
                           40
                                                                                  6
                           30

                                                                                  4
                           20


                           10                                                     2


                            0                                                     0


                                               Year of Birth



 Figure 2: How Life Expectancy at Birth and Average Years in School Evolves Overtime




                                                                                                  26
          100                                                                               20
                             LifeExp
                             SchoolYears
 life expectancy at




                                                                                                 Years in School
              50                                                                            10
        Birth




                                                                High Income Economies
                  0                                                                         0




80                                                   15   80                                       15

60                                                        60
                                                     10                                            10

40                                                        40
                                                                                                   5
                                                     5    20
20
                                                                 Eastern Europe & Central Asia
                               East Asia & Pacific         0                                       0
  0                                                  0


80                                                   15   80                                      15

60                                                        60
                                                     10                                           10
40                                                        40
                                                     5                                            5
20                                                        20
                      Latin America & Caribbean                Middle East & North Africa
 0                                                   0    0                                       0


70                                                   8    60                                     10
60                                                   7
                                                          50                                     8
                                                     6
50
                                                          40
                                                     5                                           6
40
                                                     4    30
30
                                                     3                                           4
                                                          20
20
                                                     2
                                                          10                                     2
10                                   South Asia      1
                                                                     Sub-Saharan Africa
0                                                    0    0                                      0



Figure 3: Life Expectancy at Birth and Average Years in School across Region and Time


                                                                                                                   27
                                          pooled sample                                                                                 Industrialized Countries

          60




                                                                                                           25
                                                                                                           20
          40




                                                                                                       15
Percent




                                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                                           10
          20




                                                                                                           5
                                              48                                                                                                    45
                                           0.1                                                                                                  0.1
          0




                                                                                                           0
                 -.15    -.06   .03    .12      .21    .3    .39    .48    .57    .66    .75                     -.15    -.06    .03     .12      .21    .3     .39      .48   .57   .66   .75
                                      li fe ex pectancy coefficient                                                                      life ex pectancy coefficient




                                       East Asia & Pacific                                                                              Europe & Central Asia
          50




                                                                                                           25
          40




                                                                                                           20
      30




                                                                                                       15
Percent




                                                                                                 Percent
          20




                                                                                                           10
          10




                                           16                                                              5                               73
                                        0.1                                                                                             0.0
          0




                                                                                                           0

                -.15    -.06    .03    .12     .21    .3     .39     .48    .57    .66     .75                   -.15    -.06    .03     .12       .21    .3     .39     .48   .57   .66   .75
                                      life ex pectancy coefficient                                                                        life ex pectancy coefficient




                                           Latin America                                                                               Middle East & North Africa
          80




                                                                                                            40
          60




                                                                                                            30
Percent




                                                                                                    Percent
 40




                                                                                                     20
          20




                                                                                                            10




                                                74                                                                                                    67
                                             0.1                                                                                                  0.1
          0




                                                                                                            0




                 -.15    -.06   .03    .12     .21    .3    .39    .48     .57    .66    .75                      -.15    -.06    .03     .12     .21    .3     .39      .48   .57   .66   .75
                                      life ex pectancy coefficient                                                                        life expectancy coefficient




                                             South Asia                                                                                   Sub-Saharan Africa
          40




                                                                                                           30
          30




                                                                                                           20
Percent




                                                                                                 Percent
 20




                                                                                                           10
          10




                                            32                                                                                                     49
                                         0.1                                                                                                    0.1
          0




                                                                                                           0




               -.15     -.06    .03   .12      .21    .3     .39     .48    .57    .66     .75                   -.15    -.06    .03     .12      .21    .3     .39      .48   .57   .66   .75
                                      life ex pectancy coefficient                                                                       life ex pectancy coefficient




                                                     Note: Median effect is indicated by the vertical line.
               Figure 4: Kernel Density of Life Expectancy Effects on Years in School across Regions

                                                                                                                                                                                                 28
               Table 1: Survey Specific Estimates of Life Expectancy at Birth Effect on Schooling


  Region       Number              Positive                     Negative                 Life expectancy Effects on
                 of                                                                              Schooling
               Surveys
                          Significant   insignificant   significant   insignificant   Mean    Std. Dev.    Min     Max

High Income      239         226              8             0              5          0.154    0.092      -0.017   0.420
 Economies
  Asia &         78           71              3             1              3          0.132    0.076      -0.022   0.413
   Pacific
Central Asia     93           82              6             0              5          0.076    0.054      -0.041   0.218
 & Eastern
  Europe
    Latin        292         290              2             0              0          0.187    0.074      0.010    0.777
  America
Middle East      33           33              0             0              0          0.172    0.055      0.077    0.348
 and North
   Africa
 South Asia      49           49              0             0              0          0.128    0.062      0.034    0.27

   Africa        135         123              5             2              5          0.16     0.093      -0.14    0.36

   Total         919        874             24              3             18
    %                      95.1%           2.6%           0.3%           2.0%




                                                                                                                           29
                        Table 2: Life Expectancy at Birth and Education
                                 I                II              III                 IV           V
% Urban                                       5.671***         5.655***            5.668***    5.671***
                                               [1.965]          [1.727]             [1.066]     [1.021]

% Male                                         1.671*           1.575**              1.269     1.323*
                                               [0.919]          [0.755]             [0.839]    [0.785]

Life Expectancy at          0.153***          0.140***         0.138***            0.133***    0.134***
Birth                        [0.008]           [0.007]          [0.010]             [0.025]     [0.026]
Parents Life                                                      0.003              0.028     0.030*
Expectancy                                                       [0.025]            [0.017]    [0.018]
Cohort FE                                                                            YES
Birth-Year FE                                                                                    YES
Survey FE                     YES               YES               YES                YES         YES
Constant                      0.237           -3.211**          -3.162*            -3.635**    -3.821**
                             [0.436]           [1.573]          [1.672]             [1.445]     [1.643]

N                             6959              6143              5688               5688       5688
adj. R-square                 0.985             0.984             0.984              0.985      0.985
                     Note: Significance level can be read as * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                          30
                                    Table 3: Life Expectancy and Schooling across Male, Female, Urban, and Rural Group
                               I                         II                         III                         IV                         V                         VI
                    URBAN          RURAL      URBAN           RURAL      URBAN            RURAL      MALE            FEMALE     MALE           FEMALE     MALE            FEMALE

Life Expectancy     0.146***       0.140***   0.127***        0.129***   0.127***         0.130***   0.119***        0.159***   0.109***       0.154***   0.111***        0.154***
at Birth             [0.010]        [0.009]    [0.021]         [0.021]    [0.022]          [0.023]    [0.009]         [0.011]    [0.024]        [0.026]    [0.026]         [0.028]
% Urban                                                                                              5.771***        4.308***   5.609***       4.197***   5.599***        4.187***
                                                                                                      [1.643]         [1.155]    [1.137]        [0.735]    [1.022]         [0.739]
                    3.611***       3.067***   3.900***        3.299***   3.929***         3.246***
% Male               [0.568]        [0.700]    [0.948]         [0.955]    [0.965]          [0.931]
Parents Life          0.00          0.030*     0.024*         0.036**     0.027*          0.039**     -0.01           0.02        0.02         0.037*       0.02          0.039*
Expectancy           [0.020]        [0.016]    [0.014]         [0.017]    [0.015]          [0.018]   [0.026]         [0.024]     [0.016]       [0.019]     [0.017]        [0.020]
Cohort FE                                       YES             YES                                                               YES           YES
Birth Year FE                                                               YES             YES                                                              YES            YES
Survey FE              YES           YES         YES            YES         YES             YES        YES             YES         YES           YES         YES            YES
                      -0.575       -2.79***     -0.431        -2.520**     -0.583         -2.624*     -0.317         -3.99***     -0.764       -4.267**     -0.932        -4.343**
Constant             [0.953]        [0.760]    [1.243]         [1.256]    [1.335]         [1.377]    [1.555]          [1.274]    [1.536]        [1.835]    [1.678]         [1.931]
N                      6377          6286        6377           6286        6377           6286        5681            5685        5681          5685        5681           5685
adjusted
R-square             0.985        0.99         0.986       0.991       0.986        0.991        0.975        0.985         0.978        0.986           0.978         0.986
     Note: Significance level can be read as * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. We estimate each specification for each group separately. An estimation on the appended
     male and female sample with an interaction of male-female indicator and life expectancy at birth shows that life expectancy coefficient statistically differs across
     male and female group. No such difference is found for the urban-rural sample.




                                                                                                                                                                           31
                                         Table 4: Region Specific Life Expectancy Effects on Schooling
                                                  I                                                                       II
                   High     Asia &    Central    Latin    Middle    South      Sub-      High      Asia &     Central    Latin    Middle     South      Sub-
                  Income    Pacific   Asia &    America     East    Asia      Saharan   Income     Pacific    Asia &    Americ      East     Asia      Saharan
                   Group              Eastern               and                Africa    Group                Eastern     a          and                Africa
                                      Europe               North                                              Europe               North
                                                           Africa                                                                  Africa
   % Urban         -2.97    12.4***   7.5***    4.88***   11.7**    19.0***   6.57***    -6.2***   10.5***    6.73***   4.71***   9.97***   17.14***   5.76***
                  [1.872]   [2.266]   [1.846]   [1.101]   [4.547]    [2.99]   [1.021]    [2.242]    [1.509]   [1.680]   [1.102]   [3.655]    [3.392]   [1.018]
    % Male        -2.2***   3.63***    1.108      0.22    3.59**     0.029    3.1***    -3.2***    3.05***     0.477     0.456     4.6***     -0.07     3.6***
                  [0.751]   [1.268]   [0.919]   [0.611]   [1.778]   [0.626]   [0.575]   [0.973]    [0.769]    [1.152]   [0.545]   [1.633]    [1.008]   [0.597]
      Life
  Expectancy      0.10***   0.11***   0.08***   0.13***   0.20***   0.08***   0.14***   0.07***    0.07***    0.04**    0.08***   0.15***    0.028     0.07***
    at Birth      [0.029]   [0.010]   [0.024]   [0.009]   [0.022]   [0.025]   [0.013]   [0.024]    [0.013]    [0.023]   [0.018]   [0.023]   [0.035]    [0.024]
  Parent's Life
  Expectancy      -0.002     0.021    0.03***   0.04***   0.041**   0.07***   0.034**   -0.06**     0.012      0.012     0.027     0.028     0.039      0.018
                  [0.009]   [0.024]   [0.012]   [0.013]   [0.018]   [0.023]   [0.016]   [0.024]    [0.023]    [0.014]   [0.019]   [0.021]   [0.027]    [0.020]
  Birth-Year                                                                             YES        YES        YES       YES       YES       YES        YES
      FE
  Survey FE       YES        YES      YES        YES       YES       YES       YES       YES        YES        YES       YES       YES       YES        YES
      N           5688       5688     5688       5688      5688      5688      5688      5688       5688       5688      5688      5688      5688       5688
Note: Significance level can be read as * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.The region specific analysis adopted the World Bank classification based
on income and region. We estimate each specification with an interaction of each of the control with region dummies to extract region specific
estimates of life expectancy at birth. In specification II we control for birth-year specific fixed effect to control for differences in environment
across birth cohorts.




                                                                                                                                                               32
                               Table 5: Life Expectancy at Higher Ages
                               I            II           III          IV            V            VI
                         LE at Birth     LE at 5    LE at Birth    LE at 10    LE at Birth    LE at 15
      % Urban             5.865***      4.613***     5.875***      4.452***     5.805***      4.550***
                           [1.214]       [1.536]      [1.131]       [1.494]      [1.095]       [1.495]
       % Male                1.38         0.723         1.33         0.347        1.349         0.082
                           [1.015]       [1.122]      [0.954]       [1.280]      [0.885]       [1.383]
 Life Expectancy at       0.160***                   0.146***                   0.138***
       Birth               [0.026]                    [0.026]                    [0.026]
Life Expectancy at 5                    0.185**
                                        [0.075]
Life Expectancy at10                                               0.170***
                                                                    [0.062]
Life Expectancy at 15                                                                         0.129**
                                                                                              [0.052]
    Parents life          0.040***       0.052*       0.035**        0.044       0.029*        0.037
    Expectancy             [0.015]       [0.029]      [0.015]       [0.029]      [0.017]      [0.031]
(25 years lag of Life
Expectancy at Birth)
     Constant             -5.67***        -7.50      -4.714***        -5.56       -4.05**        -2.48
                           [1.662]       [4.799]      [1.600]       [3.457]       [1.575]       [2.645]
       Cohort FE             YES          YES           YES           YES           YES          YES
      Survey FE              YES          YES           YES           YES           YES          YES
           N                 4453         4453          4982          4982         5302          5302
     adj. R-square          0.987         0.981        0.985         0.979         0.985         0.978
Note: To facilitate comparison, we estimate life expectancy at birth effect in the sample for which data
on life expectancy at higher ages are available. Standard errors are in brackets. Significance level can be
read as * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                          33
    Table 6: Effect of Life Expectancy at Birth in the Presence of Weather and Polity Scores

                                                             (I)           (II)            (III)
                                                           Weather        Polity      Incorporating
                                                                          Data       Sample without
                                                                                       Polity Data
            % Urban                                        5.679***     4.941***        5.496***
                                                            [1.058]      [1.257]         [1.096]
            % Male                                           1.237        0.363          1.537**
                                                            [0.831]      [0.870]         [0.759]
            Life Expectancy at Birth                       0.132***     0.150***
                                                            [0.024]      [0.021]
            Have Polity Data                                                             0.882**
                                                                                          [0.410]
            (Do not have polity Data)* Life                                              0.145***
            Expectancy at Birth                                                           [0.026]
            (Have polity Data)*                                                            -0.013
            Life Expectancy at Birth                                                      [0.008]
            (Have polity Data)*Polity Score                                -0.029          -0.019
                                                                          [0.036]         [0.031]
            (Have polity Data)* Life Expectancy at                         0.001            0.000
            Birth*Polity Score                                            [0.001]         [0.001]
            Parents Life Expectancy                          0.028        0.036*         0.033**
                                                            [0.017]       [0.020]         [0.016]
            Average Precipitation                          -0.08           -0.076          -0.076
                                                                                          [0.050]
                                                          [0.052]         [0.047]
            Average Temperature                           0.049***         0.021         0.041**
                                                                                         [0.018]
                                                           [0.019]        [0.021]
            Average Temperature*Average                    0.001           0.001           0.001
            Precipitation                                                                 [0.001]
                                                          [0.001]         [0.001]
            Constant                                       -2.930*       -3.294*         -4.085**
                                                           [1.648]       [1.810]          [1.680]
            N                                                5602          3960            5602
            Adjusted R Square                               0.985         0.987            0.985
Note: All specifications incorporate cohort and survey fixed effects. Standard errors are in brackets. Significance
level can be read as * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Excluding weather variables and utilizing only polity score
increase our sample size by around 700 observations, however, this does not change the estimates that we observe in
specification II.




                                                                                                                34
   Table 7: Life Expectancy at Birth Effects on Schooling, Individual Level analysis

                                 POOLED         FEMALE            MALE         RURAL         URBAN
            Urban                -2.141***      -2.247***       -2.007***
                                   [0.099]       [0.098]         [0.100]
           Gender                 0.486***                                     0.715***      0.337***
                                   [0.054]                                      [0.060]       [0.048]
 Life Expectancy at Birth        0.114***        0.090***       0.138***       0.117***      0.097***
                                   [0.009]        [0.009]        [0.010]        [0.009]       [0.009]
  Parents Life Expectancy         0.029***       0.028***       0.028***       0.026***      0.033***
                                   [0.007]        [0.007]        [0.007]        [0.007]       [0.007]
          Constant                2.259***       4.290***         0.698          -0.463      3.346***
                                   [0.606]        [0.598]        [0.663]        [0.568]       [0.640]
  Birth Year Fixed Effect           YES            YES            YES             YES          YES
   Survey Fixed Effect              YES            YES            YES             YES          YES
             N                    3953161        1901176        2051985        1512968       2440193
     adjusted R-square               0.54          0.482          0.604           0.623        0.406
             F                     55.882         42.613         64.098         50.979          41.7
Note: Standard errors are in brackets. Significance level can be read as * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
Standard errors are clustered at the survey-cohort (survey specific birth-year) level.




                                                                                                           35
APPENDIX
       Table A1: List of Economies and Number of Surveys from Each Economy
     Economy          Number of   Percent        Economy          Number     Percent
                       Surveys                                      of
                                                                  Surveys
    Afghanistan           2         0.22          Lebanon            2        0.22
       Angola             2         0.22           Liberia           1        0.11
       Albania            4         0.44          Sri Lanka         16        1.74
      Argentina          20         2.18           Lesotho           1        0.11
       Armenia           1          0.11          Lithuania          8        0.87
      Australia          10         1.09        Luxembourg           9        0.98
       Austria            9         0.98            Latvia           9        0.98
     Azerbaijan           1         0.11          Morocco            2        0.22
       Burundi            1         0.11          Moldavia           2        0.22
       Belgium            8         0.87        Madagascar           5        0.54
        Benin             1         0.11          Maldives           2        0.22
    Burkina Faso         5          0.54           Mexico           13        1.41
     Bangladesh           3         0.33         Macedonia           3        0.33
       Bulgaria           9         0.98             Mali            2        0.22
    The Bahamas           1         0.11            Malta            4        0.44
 Bosnia-Herzegovina       2         0.22          Myanmar            2        0.22
       Belarus            1         0.11          Mongolia           7        0.76
        Belize            6         0.65       Mozambique            2        0.22
       Bolivia           14         1.52         Mauritania          3        0.33
        Brazil           28         3.05          Mauritius         12        1.31
       Bhutan            2          0.22           Malawi            2        0.22
      Botswana            1         0.11          Namibia            1        0.11
       Canada             3         0.33            Niger            4        0.44
     Switzerland          2         0.22           Nigeria           4        0.44
        Chile            11          1.2         Nicaragua           5        0.54
        China             1         0.11           Holland           8        0.87
    Côte d'Ivoire        2          0.22           Norway            9        0.98
      Cameroon            2         0.22            Nepal            5        0.54
      Colombia           12         1.31          Pakistan          11         1.2
      Comoros             1         0.11           Panama           19        2.07
     Cabo Verde           2         0.22             Peru           16        1.74
     Costa Rica          21         2.29         Philippines        10        1.09
       Cyprus             7         0.76     Papua New Guinea        3        0.33
   Czech Republic        8          0.87           Poland            8        0.87
      Germany             8         0.87        Puerto Rico          5        0.54
       Djibouti           1         0.11          Portugal           9        0.98
      Denmark             9         0.98          Paraguay          15        1.63
 Dominican Republic      14         1.52          Romania            7        0.76
       Ecuador           18         1.96     Russian Federation     14        1.52
        Spain             9         0.98           Rwanda            4        0.44
       Estonia            9         0.98           Senegal           4        0.44
       Ethiopia           9         0.98      Solomon Islands        2        0.22


                                                                                       36
                                    Table A1 Continued

     Economy            Number Of      Percent           Economy       Number    Percent
                         Surveys                                         Of
                                                                       Surveys
      Finland                9           0.98        Sierra Leone         2       0.22
        Fiji                 1           0.11        El Salvador         15       1.63
      France                 9           0.98            Serbia           2       0.22
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.        1           0.11       São Tomé and          2       0.22
                                                        Príncipe
       Gabon                  1           0.11         Surinam             1      0.11
  United Kingdom              8           0.87     Slovak Republic         9      0.98
      Georgia                 1           0.11         Slovenia            8      0.87
       Ghana                  4           0.44          Sweden             9      0.98
       Guinea                 2           0.22        Swaziland            2      0.22
    Gambia, The               1           0.11           Syria             2      0.22
       Greece                 9           0.98           Chad             1       0.11
     Guatemala                6           0.65           Togo              2      0.22
       Guyana                 1           0.11         Thailand           19      2.07
     Honduras                20           2.18         Tajikistan          1      0.11
       Croatia                3           0.33      Turkmenistan           1      0.11
        Haiti                 1           0.11       Timor-Leste           2      0.22
      Hungary                 9           0.98           Tonga             1      0.11
     Indonesia               13           1.41          Tunisia            3      0.33
        India                 8           0.87          Turkey            20      2.18
       Ireland                6           0.65         Tanzania           10      1.09
 Iran, Islamic Rep.           1           0.11          Uganda             4      0.44
         Iraq                 1           0.11          Ukraine            5      0.54
       Iceland                9           0.98         Uruguay            19      2.07
         Italy                9           0.98      United States          7      0.76
      Jamaica                 5           0.54      Venezuela, RB         12      1.31
       Jordan                 8           0.87         Vietnam             7      0.76
    Kazakhstan                1           0.11    West Bank and Gaza      12      1.31
       Kenya                  2           0.22       Yemen, Rep.           1      0.11
    Kyrgyzstan                1           0.11       South Africa         26      2.83
     Cambodia                 5           0.54           Zaire             1      0.11
       Kiribati               1           0.11          Zambia             4      0.44
     Lao PDR                  3           0.33
                Total Number of Economies 147;   Total Number of Surveys 919




                                                                                           37
