                                                    WPS8073


Policy Research Working Paper                      8073




                         Societal Poverty
                 A Relative and Relevant Measure

                                Dean Jolliffe
                              Espen Beer Prydz




Development Data Group
  &
Development Research Group
Poverty and Inequality Team
May 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8073


  Abstract
  Poverty lines are typically higher in richer countries, and                       proposed societal poverty line is derived from 699 harmo-
  lower in poorer ones, reflecting the relative nature of                           nized national poverty lines, and has an intercept of $1
  national assessments of who is considered poor. In many                           per day and a relative gradient of 50 percent of median
  high-income countries, poverty lines are explicitly rela-                         national income or consumption. The societal poverty
  tive, set as a share of mean or median income. Despite                            line is more closely aligned with national definitions of
  systematic variation in how countries define poverty, global                      poverty than other proposed relative lines. By this relative
  poverty counts are based on fixed-value lines. To reflect                         measure, societal poverty has fallen steadily since 1990,
  national assessments of poverty in a global headcount of                          but at a much slower pace than absolute extreme poverty.
  poverty, this paper proposes a societal poverty line. The




  This paper is a joint product of the Development Data Group and the Poverty and Inequality Team, Development Research
  Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to
  development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://
  econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at djolliffe@worldbank.org or eprydz@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                      Societal Poverty: A Relative and Relevant Measure



                                Dean Jolliffe & Espen Beer Prydz*




Keywords: Relative poverty, global poverty, poverty measurement, inequality.
JEL Codes: I3, O1, D63




* Jolliffe (djolliffe@worldbank.org) and Prydz (eprydz@worldbank.org) are with the World
Bank Group, Development Economics Vice Presidency (DEC), in the research and data groups.
Authors listed alphabetically. Jolliffe is also a Research Fellow with the Institute for the Study of
Labor (IZA) in Bonn and a Research Affiliate with the National Poverty Center at the Ford
School of Public Policy, University of Michigan.
Acknowledgements: This paper builds on recommendations from the Global Poverty
Commission’s report on measuring poverty. The authors wish to thank members of the Global
Poverty Working Group on alternative measures of poverty, which includes staff from the
Poverty Global Practice, Data, and Research Groups of the World Bank. We thank Francois
Bourguignon, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Stefan Dercon, Francisco H.G. Ferreira, Stephan Klasen,
Aart Kraay, Ana Revenga and participants at a World Bank Policy Research Talk for their
feedback and advice. Support for this work came in part from the World Bank’s Knowledge for
Change Program for the study “National Account vs Survey Based Welfare (TF018077-KCP
II)”. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions of this paper are those of the authors and
should not be attributed to the World Bank Group or its member countries.
I. Introduction
Most low- and middle-income countries define poverty as an inability to meet basic needs,

typically defined by nutritional norms with an allowance for nonfood basic needs (Ravallion,

2010). National poverty lines based on basic needs are meant to be sufficient to attain some fixed

level of material wellbeing in society, but this need not be defined as a bare minimum threshold

of survival.1 What defines basic needs varies across countries, but when the value of these basic

needs is fixed, it is considered an absolute poverty line. This is in contrast to relative poverty

lines, used in many high-income countries, which are explicitly linked to the overall level of

income in the country, and increase with economic growth.

        Viewing absolute lines as reflecting a fixed level of material wellbeing, while relative

lines increase in value as a country grows is a useful conceptual distinction. But, as Ravallion

(2010) shows, when considering absolute national poverty lines across countries, the distinction

blurs. He finds that these absolute, basic-needs poverty lines range in value from $0.63 per day

to more than $9 per day (in 2005 PPP terms), with higher poverty lines corresponding to

relatively better off nations. As he suggests, the absolute national lines behave like relative

poverty lines in that they are increasingly higher for richer countries.

        What is also observed is that even for a specific country, as the country gets richer, its

evaluation of what defines poverty as measured by basic needs occasionally increases. Ravallion

(1998) asserts “[i]t can be agreed that a sustained increase in average living standards is likely to

lead eventually to more generous perceptions of what ‘poverty’ means in a given society.” (p.

29). For example, Niño-Zarazúa and Addison (2012) document that in 2011, the Government of




1
  Ravallion (1994, p. 30) “…doubt[s] if any poverty line found in practice, even in the poorest countries,
is no more than needed for survival.”

                                                     2
India increased the real value of their urban poverty lines by more than 40 percent, while China

increased the real value of the rural poverty line by more than 75 percent.2 Over time, many

countries have increased the real value of their national poverty lines, in recognition that their

economies had grown so significantly that the concept of basic needs in their societies had

fundamentally changed.3 In these cases, the national absolute lines again behave like relative

lines in that (over longer periods of time) they increase with economic growth.

        Townsend (1979) recognized well this point that basic-needs lines are not necessarily

fixed over time, because “…the necessities of life are not fixed. They are continuously being

adapted and augmented as changes take place in society and its products” (p. 915). Sen (1983)

expressed this differently by arguing that a concept of poverty fixed in terms of functioning at

some minimum level in a society may not be fixed in terms of the expenditures required to

perform this function. For example, participating in the labor market may be viewed as a

minimal social functioning; the cost of this functioning though may require only clothing and

food in a poor society, while in a richer society it may require internet access, vehicle, cellphone

in addition to clothing and food. Paraphrasing Sen, Atkinson states that “…a standard that is

constant in the space of functionings … would imply a standard in terms of consumption that

varies over time and across countries” (World Bank, 2017, p. 139). To reflect this concern,

Atkinson recommends that the “World Bank should introduce a societal headcount ratio measure




2
  In India, the 2011 value of the poverty line in urban areas increased from 33 rupees per person per day
to 47 rupees. The change in rural poverty lines was significantly less, about 19 percent, increasing from
27 to 32 rupees. China also increased the real value of its poverty line several times in the late 1970s.
3
  After 15 years of keeping the real value of its national poverty line constant, the Government of Nepal
increased the line in 2011 (Government of Nepal, 2012). Similarly, the Government of Jordan increased
the real value of the poverty line by about 10 percent in 2011 (World Bank, 2009, Jolliffe and Serajuddin,
2017). For more examples of countries that changed the value of their national poverty lines, see the
appendix in Jolliffe and Prydz (2016).

                                                    3
of global consumption poverty” (World Bank, 2017, p. 144). The purpose of this paper is to

propose such a measure. Borrowing language from Atkinson, we offer a “societal poverty line”

(SPL) that builds on the work of Atkinson and Bourguignon (2001) and Ravallion and Chen

(2011, 2013), but one that we argue is better aligned with national assessments of poverty in low-

, middle-, and high-income countries. Our approach is informed, but not completely determined,

by countries’ assessments of basic needs as exhibited in their national poverty lines.

        We offer two parameterizations of the SPL. Our preferred parameterization is one that

has an intercept of $1 (in 2011 PPPs) and a gradient of 50 percent of median consumption or

income. We also consider a variant of this line that includes a lower bound set at the international

poverty line of $1.90. The intercept, or the $1.90 lower bound in the variant case, provides a

fixed, absolute element to the SPL. The slope of 50 percent adds a relative element to the SPL,

rising in value as median consumption levels increase. This economic gradient of the SPL

corresponds with a view of relative poverty that is well accepted in much of the rich world and

coincides with SDG indicator 10.2.1 on inequality, which tracks the proportion of people living

on less than 50 percent of median income.4

        The remainder of the paper is laid out as follows. In the next section, we describe existing

conceptualizations of global relative poverty and then describe the data used in support of our

proposed our SPLs. Section III assesses the fit of the data and our proposed SPLs, and section IV

discusses the geographic and temporal profiles of societal poverty.




4
 For details, including metadata and indicators, on each of the 17 SDGs, see
http://unstats.un.org/sdgs/iaeg-sdgs/metadata-compilation/ .

                                                    4
II. Global Poverty, Concepts and Data

Conceptual Framework

When counting the total number of poor people in the world, the World Bank uses an

international poverty line that is constructed to reflect a constant real value across countries

(World Bank, 1990, Chen and Ravallion, 2001, Ravallion, Chen and Sangraula, 2009, Ferreira et

al., 2016). Many other institutions, including the United Nations as expressed in the Millennium

Development Goals (MDGs) and now the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), have also

adopted the use of this absolute international poverty line.5 In addition to maintaining the real

value across countries, Ferreira et al. (2016) further make the case that the latest value of the

international poverty line of $1.90 (in 2011 PPP terms) maintains, on average, the real value of

the previously defined international poverty line of $1.25 (in 2005 PPP terms) among the world’s

poorest countries.

        The Final Report of the Atkinson Commission on Global Poverty (World Bank, 2017)

recommends that for the purposes of assessing the goal of eradicating extreme poverty by 2030,

the value of the international poverty line should remain fixed in real terms up to that point in

time.6 Using the $1.90 measuring stick, 767 million people in 2013 are estimated to be in

extreme poverty (World Bank, 2016). Despite this large count of people who live in extreme

poverty, the proportion of the population that is living in extreme poverty has fallen from more




5
  Millennium Development Goal 1.A was stated as cutting poverty in half as defined by the proportion of
people living on less than the World Bank international poverty line of $1.25 (in 2005 PPP values).
Similarly, target 1.1 of the SDGs is to eradicate extreme poverty, again as defined by the international
poverty line. For more details on the SDGs, see: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300.
6
  More specifically, Atkinson (2016) recommends updating the value of the international poverty line in
each and every country only by their national measure of inflation (in most all cases, as measured by the
consumer price index).

                                                    5
than 34 percent in 1990, to less than 11 percent in 2013. The estimated poverty rates in 2013 are

less than 5 percent in one-fourth of the 131 countries for which the World Bank monitors

extreme poverty. As the global proportion of people in extreme poverty declines further, this

assessment of global poverty may become increasingly less socially relevant as societies across

the world define the cost of basic needs at levels much greater than the international poverty line.

        A global poverty line that allows for the poverty threshold to vary across countries,

essentially allowing for the cost of meeting basic needs or functionings to be increasing with the

economic development of societies, would result in a definition of poverty that is more closely

aligned with each country’s own assessment of needs. A few important proposals for such lines

are detailed in Atkinson and Bourguignon (2001), Ravallion and Chen (2011), Chen and

Ravallion (2013) and Garroway and de Laiglesia (2012), and summarized in Figure 1 and Table 1.

        Borrowing notation from Ravallion and Chen (2011), all of these proposed global relative

poverty lines, (   ,   ), follow a similar form that can be summarized as max(Z*, α+kM i,t ). Z*

defines a floor, α is a fixed intercept, kM i,t defines for country i in year t the relativist portion of

the schedule which is upward sloping (k>0) in the level of economic development, typically

measured by the national average (or median) value of per capita expenditure, consumption or

income (M). The Atkinson-Bourguignon and Ravallion-Chen proposals define Z* to be equal to

the international poverty line (set at $1 in 1985 PPPs or $1.25 in 2005 PPPs). More specifically,

Atkinson and Bourguignon (2001) propose a global relative poverty line that sets Z* at a dollar a

day (in 1985 PPP terms), α=0, k=0.37 and M = mean per capita private consumption expenditure

from national accounts. The resulting global relative poverty line, (      ,   ), takes the value of $1

for all countries with average per capita expenditure of less than $2.70 per day and then increases




                                                    6
at a rate of 37 percent of mean expenditure as the country grows richer.7 Atkinson and

Bourguignon suggest that this line has greater relevance for poorer countries than a relative line

like 50 percent of median income or consumption (as used in much of the European Union and

proposed for global poverty measurement by Garroway and de Laiglesia, 2012) because the floor

set at $1 prevents the poverty line from taking values that are much lower than observed for poor

countries of the world. And, it is also the case that their line has greater relevance than the

absolute international poverty line for richer countries.

        Ravallion and Chen (2011) offer a relative poverty line, similar to Atkinson and

Bourguignon, that sets Z* =$1.25 in 2005 PPP terms, α=$0.60, k=0.33 and M = mean per capita

expenditure from national accounts. Chen and Ravallion (2013) propose a variant of this defining

M in terms of mean consumption (or income) from household survey data, and setting α=$0.625

and k=0.5. The key distinction of both of these proposals from the Atkinson and Bourguignon

line (and the relative line used by EU/OECD and Garroway and de Laiglesia) is that the elasticity

of the poverty line to growth in mean expenditure or consumption is less than one. The

importance of this distinction is that it implies that if everyone gets better off by some fixed

proportion, then the aggregate measure of poverty must fall. Ravallion and Chen (2011) refer to

global poverty lines that respect this property as being weakly-relative poverty lines. This

attribute is in contrast to a strongly-relative poverty line such as that used by the European Union

where α=0 and k is frequently equal to a half.8




7
  They base this parameterization on examining the 33 national poverty lines reported in Ravallion, Datt
and van de Walle (1991).
8
  Ravallion and Chen (2011) note that the Atkinson and Bourguignon relative poverty line will also not
satisfy their weakly relative axiom.

                                                    7
        A common motivation of the proposals discussed above is that the decisions made by

countries in setting their national poverty lines should be viewed as the guiding social

assessments of how needs change as countries become richer.9 To this end, parameterizations of

the global relative poverty line are often informed by assessing the relationship between national

poverty lines and mean expenditure or consumption levels for a sample of countries. The

Atkinson and Bourguignon line is informed by a bivariate fit based on 33 estimated national

poverty lines (described in Ravallion, Datt and van de Walle, 1991), while the Ravallion and

Chen line is supported by a sample of 74 national poverty lines (described in Ravallion, Chen

and Sangraula, hereafter referred to as RCS, 2009).

        Gentilini and Sumner (2012) take the idea of viewing national poverty lines as a guide for

assessing global poverty a step further and propose a global measure of poverty that is simply the

sum of all poor people in the world as identified by their national poverty line. There is an

elegance to the simplicity of this proposal and since the global count of the poor is completely

determined by national poverty lines, it fully respects each country’s social assessment of

poverty. But, implicit in this approach is an underlying international poverty line (or schedule)

that is neither fixed in value across countries, as in the international poverty line of $1.90, nor is

the implicit line strictly increasing in economic development. In fact, there are many countries at

the same level of economic development that have vastly different assessments of basic needs,

and similarly there are many cases where richer countries have lower poverty lines relative to

poorer countries.10 An awkward implication of this approach is that the global aggregation of



9
  This idea of viewing national poverty lines as reflecting social assessments of minimum needs has been
a motivating argument for international poverty lines for many years. World Bank (1990) and RDV
(1991) interpreted national poverty lines from some of the poorest countries in the world as reflecting
absolute minimum needs and used them to establish the “dollar-a-day” international poverty line.
10
   Figures 2 and 3 both provide evidence of this.

                                                   8
national headcounts makes the counter-intuitive social judgement that someone who is poor in a

poor country may not be poor if their wellbeing were assessed in a richer country.



Database of National Poverty Lines

        The most recent expressions of global relative poverty lines (Ravallion and Chen, 2011;

Chen and Ravallion, 2013), and similarly the $1.90 international poverty line (Ferreira et al.

2016), are estimated from a set of national poverty lines compiled by RCS (2009). The

compilation of these national poverty lines by RCS, and previously by Ravallion, Datt and van

de Walle (1991), has been foundational to the work on measuring global absolute and relative

poverty. More recently, Jolliffe and Prydz (2016) offer a compilation of national poverty lines

with significantly better temporal and geographic coverage and improved harmonization (and

thus improved comparability), compared with previous data sets.

        In this paper, we draw from the Jolliffe-Prydz data and use a sample of 699 national

poverty lines covering 107 countries.11 The sample of national poverty lines is compiled by

taking officially reported poverty headcount (HC) rates at national poverty lines and identifying

the unique value on the harmonized wellbeing vector in PovcalNet for the same year that

corresponds to the reported national poverty headcount.12 In other words, if F(·) is the




11
   The sample of 699 poverty lines is the same as the non-OECD country sample in Jolliffe and Prydz
(2016). The 104 countries in our sub-sample of lines close to 2011 drops three countries for which the
closest line is prior to 2000.
12
   The national poverty headcount rates come from the World Development Indicators (WDI,
http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators) database. The WDI is the primary
World Bank collection of development indicators, compiled from officially-recognized international
sources. PovcalNet is a research tool for poverty measurement that allows analysts to specify parameter
values such as the global poverty line, and then estimate the number of poor people in the world based on
their assumptions. For more details, see: http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/index.htm.

                                                    9
cumulative density function of the wellbeing vector in PovcalNet, we identify the poverty line

(z) for each country i in year t, such that zit = F-1(HCit).13 We argue that this approach offers

several advantages over other available data sets of national poverty thresholds, such as the one

documented in RCS (2009), which are particularly relevant for analysis meant to compare values

of national poverty lines across countries.

        One advantage of the lines used in this paper is that they are all expressed in terms of per

capita income or consumption. This is in contrast to RCS, which includes a mix of poverty lines,

some expressed in terms of minimum-needs per capita, and others, per adult equivalent.14

Typically in low-income countries, the same level of minimum needs is greater in value when

expressed in terms of adult-equivalents than when expressed in per capita terms. This is largely a

function of the age composition of the country – in poorer countries where the average person is

an adolescent, per capita needs will be substantially lower than per adult needs.15 In itself, the

mix of per capita and per adult-equivalent lines creates an inherent issue of non-comparability,

and this concern is exacerbated by the empirical tendency for average age to be correlated with

level of economic development. By harmonizing all national poverty lines in per capita units, our

analysis of the relationship between overall national wellbeing and the value of national poverty

lines is not contaminated from the usage of differing units of analysis.16




13
   The online appendix to Jolliffe and Prydz (2016) discusses the precision of this methodology and
contrasts the estimation error from this approach with the error associated with approaches that build up a
database of national poverty lines from national poverty assessment reports. Appendix available at:
https://static-content.springer.com/esm/art%3A10.1007%2Fs10888-016-9327-
5/MediaObjects/10888_2016_9327_MOESM1_ESM.pdf.
14
   For a description of adult-equivalence adjustments, see James and Schofield (1990).
15
   Van de Boom, Halsema, and Molini (2015) note that per-capita based food poverty lines are on average
seven-tenths the value of the corresponding adult-equivalent version of this line.
16
   Another advantage of the Jolliffe-Prydz lines for this analysis is due to the construction of these lines.
Since they are derived from national poverty headcount rates, they correspond directly to the level of
poverty as assessed nationally. This is a relevant issue for countries that do not have a national poverty

                                                     10
        The set of national poverty lines used in this paper also have both greater temporal and

spatial coverage. They cover approximately 25 percent more countries than those used by

Ravallion and Chen and three-fold more than Atkinson and Bourguignon. Similarly, the temporal

coverage of the Jolliffe-Prydz poverty lines is much greater. Previous analysis has been based on

data that cover only one point in time for each country represented. But as already noted in this

paper, over time, countries adjust their evaluation of basic needs. For our analysis, we draw on

an average of more than six observations of national lines for each of the 107 countries we

consider. We refer to this sample of 699 national poverty lines as our full sample.

        In order to support our claim that the analysis in this paper continues to be relevant to

more recent assessments of basic needs in different countries, we also examine a subsample of

recent poverty lines. We select the poverty line from each of 104 countries that is closest in time

to 2011 (and later than year 2000),17 and refer to this as our circa-2011 sample. We focus on

2011 primarily because this is the year for which the most recent PPP conversion factors exist. In

order to examine national poverty lines expressed in local currency units across countries, we use

PPP conversion factors to convert all local currency units into a common currency – as with

others in this literature, we use US dollars. In addition to being more recent than the RCS

sample, the 2011 subsample also allows us to check whether the findings from the full sample

are sensitive to the quality of inflation data.18 The poverty lines in the 2011 subsample require on




line, but rather have sub-national lines (e.g. rural and urban lines). For countries with subnational lines,
RCS for example, estimate a national poverty line by using a weighted average, but in most cases, they do
not use population weights and therefore their estimated national line will generally not correspond with
poverty headcounts.
17
   Three countries have no poverty line after 2000, and we drop these countries from the circa-2011
sample.
18
   For discussion of the importance of inflation data in aligning national poverty lines to a common
comparison year, see Jolliffe and Prydz (2016) and Ferreira et al. (2016). For a general discussion on data
quality in low-income countries, see Jerven (2013).

                                                    11
average one year of CPI data to align them with 2011. This is in contrast to the RCS lines, which

required on average 12 years of inflation data to create comparable 2011 currency values.

        Figure 2 plots the national poverty lines used in our analysis on national median

consumption or income level (as used for poverty analysis). The lighter, hollow dots in both

panels reflect the full sample of 699 poverty lines dating from 1984 through 2013. The darker,

filled dots are the 104 lines that are the closest to 2011 for each country. Panel A plots the lines

and median wellbeing in level-level space, while Panel B is the same plot except the axes have

been log-transformed. The plots reveal a few noteworthy points. First, there is a strong positive

relationship between a country’s assessments of basic needs and their level of wellbeing, similar

to that noted by Ravallion and Chen (2011). Also, the sub-sample of 104 from circa 2011,

overlaps well with the complete scatter of lines, suggesting some stability in this positive

relationship over time.19

        Panel B also includes predicted lines at the 90th and 10th quantiles from the bi-variate

(quantile) regression of the poverty line on median consumption. These predicted lines have

similar slopes and the ratio of these lines (in levels) is approximately 2 over the entire range.

This suggests that at any given level of national wellbeing, the range in values of national

poverty lines is large, with the most generous line consistently being about twice as large as the

least generous line. It is this latter result that we view as an argument against a global count of

the poor that treats each country’s own line as the relevant threshold, such as proposed by

Gentilini and Sumner (2012). Allowing for such significant differences in the definition of basic




19
  The circa-2011 lines have shifted up and to the right, simply reflecting that over time, median
consumption (or income) and poverty lines have been increasing across the globe.

                                                    12
needs for countries measured to be at the same level of wellbeing strikes us as an undesirable

attribute of a societal poverty measure.

        Figure 3 compares the national poverty lines used in this paper with the RCS lines used

by Ravallion and Chen for their weakly relative poverty line and by Ferreira et al. for the $1.90

international poverty line used to assess progress towards the MDGs and SDGs. Our primary

interest in presenting these two samples together is simply to visually show that the national lines

that we are using in our analysis align reasonably well with the national lines used in previous

analysis. But, the sample of lines used in this analysis will provide greater estimation power due

to increased sample size, more scope to support external validity due to improved country

coverage, and enhanced relevance due to more recent data. An indication of this is that bivariate

regressions of national poverty lines from both samples on a measure of wellbeing show that the

intercepts and slopes are similar, but the standard errors associated with the RCS estimates are

four-fold larger than the ones based on the poverty lines used in this paper.20



III. Setting and Assessing the Societal Poverty Line
This paper continues in the same tradition as Ravallion and Chen (2011) and Atkinson and

Bourguignon (2001) of using the relationship between national poverty lines and a measure of

overall wellbeing of the country to derive a schedule of relative poverty lines. We examine a set

of austere linear regressions of national poverty lines on median and mean consumption (and




20
  The figure illustrates this, but evidence of the similarities can also be observed in a bi-variate regression
of the national poverty lines on household final consumption and expenditure (HFCE). Ordinary least
squares estimates produce a slope coefficient from RCS of 0.30 (with a standard error of 0.03) which is
not significantly different from that estimated from the lines used in this paper of 0.27 (with a standard
error of 0.007). The intercepts similarly indicate no significant differences.

                                                      13
income)21 over both our full sample of 699 national poverty lines and on our sample of 104

poverty lines from circa 2011. Throughout this paper, the regression analysis weights countries

equally. For the circa-2011 sample, where there is only one line per country, this means the

weight for each observation is one. For the full sample, where countries have varying number of

observed poverty lines in our sample, the observation weight is the inverse of the number of

poverty lines for each country. This prevents our analysis from assigning greater weight to

countries simply because they have more household surveys available.

        Our preferred sample is the full sample primarily because this offers greater estimation

power. The full sample allows us to observe both variation in poverty lines across countries of

differing wealth and changes in poverty lines over time as a country grows richer. Leveraging

both sources of variation allows us to improve the precision of our estimates, which is

particularly useful to assess whether the relationship varies significantly for low-income

countries. The analysis based on the smaller sample of lines from circa 2011 provides evidence

of the stability of the relationship over time and also helps address concerns of relevance with

more recent data.



Setting the SPL Parameters

        Panel A of Table 2 presents the findings from regressing the value of the poverty lines (in

levels) on national wellbeing. Columns 1 and 2 (and columns 4 and 5) contrast the fit of the




21
  For most countries in our sample of national poverty lines, consumption is the underlying measure of
wellbeing. For about one-third, wellbeing is assessed by income and in these cases, we use median and
mean income values. See Ferreira et al (2016) for more discussion on the underlying measures of
wellbeing used for global poverty estimation. In all cases, the analysis in this paper matches the national
poverty line with the measure of wellbeing that is used to assess poverty status.

                                                     14
model from using median consumption compared to using mean consumption. For both the full

sample and the 2011 sample, the fit as assessed by the r-squared statistic is better for the median

specification. Or, alternatively, the root mean square error (RMSE) of the observed values from

the predictions is about 10 percent less when the median is used rather than the mean.22 Panel B

indicates that the median also provides a better fit than the mean when considering log-log

specification of the model.

       We also examine log-log specifications of this bivariate model because they minimize

proportionate differences (and not level differences) in national poverty lines. While the levels

specification equally weights a dollar deviation between the fitted line and the observed national

poverty line regardless of the wellbeing level of a country, the log-log specification will weight

this deviation more heavily for a poorer country where a dollar deviation is a substantially larger

percentage difference from the national poverty line. For this reason, we find the log-log fit as

meriting more emphasis in evaluating differences across specifications.

       Furthermore, in columns 3 and 6, when we include both the mean and the median in the

specification, for both samples the mean is statistically insignificant while the median remains

largely unchanged from the value it takes when included alone. We interpret this as suggesting

that the median has a stronger signal in explaining national poverty lines relative to mean

consumption. Our findings align with the view of Birdsall and Meyer (2015) and Stiglitz et al.

(2010) who both argue that median household consumption (or income) is a better measure of

material wellbeing in a country than mean household consumption (or income). A candidate

explanation for preferring the median is that because consumption and income distributions




22
 The RMSE is 1.1 on the full sample when using the median, and this increases to 1.25 when using the
mean on the full sample.

                                                 15
typically exhibit positive skewness, means tend to reflect the wellbeing of those well above the

median and are less informative of the cost of basic needs in a society.23 Moreover, the mean will

be more sensitive to surveys missing top incomes, and as such the median is a more robust

measure of ‘typical’ incomes. For these reasons, our preferred specification is based on median

and not mean consumption level of the country.

       The regression of national poverty lines on the median level of a country’s consumption

for our full sample has an intercept of 0.98 and for the 2011 sample, this value is 1.01. These

values are not statistically significantly different from each other. The slope coefficient for the

full sample is 0.53 and that for the 2011 sample is 0.50, and these are similarly not different from

each other. That the more recent subsample of lines from circa 2011 results in estimates that are

not different from the full sample suggests that the relationship uncovered by the full sample is

both relatively stable over time and continues to be reflective of the relationship for some of the

most recent poverty lines in our sample.



Attributes of the proposed SPLs

       The underlying motivation for using national poverty lines to construct an estimate of an

international relative poverty line is based on the notion that this relative line should reflect

typical assessments made at the country level on how basic needs change as countries get richer.

That the parameter estimates from both samples round to a line that has an intercept of one dollar

and increases at a rate of 50 percent of the median, offers the additional attribute of simplicity in




23
  Our preference for the median also corresponds with the theoretical analysis of Aaberge and Atkinson
(2013) who use the median as a “watershed” point of reference on the consumption (or income or wealth)
distribution for identifying the rich and the poor.

                                                  16
communication. Global poverty lines (both absolute and relative) are statistical products, but

their acceptance by policy makers and advocates is affected by how easy they are for non-

technicians to understand and communicate. Stating that the SPL is a dollar a day plus 50 percent

of median daily consumption is a relatively simple construct.

        In addition to simplicity, the intercept and slope also have links to the poverty and

inequality literature and to measures used by many countries. The slope coefficient of half the

median is widely used by many countries as measures of relative poverty and inclusion. The

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) uses 50 percent of median

household income as their headline poverty indicator for country poverty rates.24 Similarly,

Vecchi (2015, pp. 4-5) notes that European countries typically set their national poverty

thresholds at 50 or 60 percent of median disposable household income. For rich countries, the

intercept of $1 proposed by our line will make relatively small difference. And, 50 percent of

household median income or consumption is being used as an indicator of SDG 10.2 on

inclusion. The intercept of one US dollar (per person, per day in 2011 PPP terms) has a couple of

interesting links with existing research on consumption floors and measures of the cost of

survival. Ravallion (2016) estimates an empirical lower bound on consumption, a consumption

floor as he refers to it, as essentially a measure of the lower bound of support for a distribution of

consumption. In one specification from his analysis, he identifies the value of this floor at $0.67

in 2005 PPP terms. This value expressed in 2011 PPP terms is approximately one dollar.25




24
   OECD (2017), Poverty rate (indicator). doi: 10.1787/0fe1315d-en (Accessed on 26 January 2017).
25
   See Ferreira et al. (2016) for discussion on inflating 2005 PPP values into 2011 PPP values. Ferreira et
al. assert that, on average, $1.90 in 2011 PPPs maintains the same purchasing power as $1.25 in 2005
PPPs for the set of 15 poor countries that determine the international poverty line. They also demonstrate
that this inflation rate of about 52 percent maintains on average purchasing power for essentially all
countries in the PovcalNet database for which they estimate poverty (and have measures of PPP in both

                                                    17
Ravallion also notes that the value of this consumption floor is essentially the same as a

biological floor estimated by Lindgren (2015), who aims to estimate a “barebones basket” of

food items with a minimal allowance for nonfood needs. Using different data and methods, Allen

(2016, Table 12) similarly constructs a near-survival line and estimates an average cost in non-

OECD countries of $1.02 (in 2011 PPP terms) to consume 1,700 calories per person per day.

While the survival lines estimated by Lindgren and Allen are conceptually different from the

consumption floor estimated by Ravallion, each suggests a minimum value that corresponds to

the intercept of a dollar a day (in 2011 PPP terms).

        Our finding that national poverty lines are increasing in economic development over the

entire range is in contrast to Ravallion and Chen, and Atkinson and Bourguignon, who proposed

relative poverty lines that had floors set at the international poverty line. The motivating reason

for a floor, as articulated by Ravallion and Chen and RCS (2009) is that for the poorest of

countries, there was no correlation between national poverty lines and measures of national

wellbeing (mean consumption or income). They asserted that the relationship between poverty

lines and national income was non-increasing for the poorest of countries, and therefore the

national poverty lines for these countries reflected absolute minimum needs.26

        Panel B of Figure 3 plots both the RCS and Jolliffe-Prydz national poverty lines on a

measure of national income (i.e. household final consumption expenditure). A fitted line from a

locally weighted scatterplot smoothing (lowess) estimator reveals that both sets of national

poverty lines are upward sloping in national income, indicating that the definition of basic needs




years). Inflating $0.67 by 52 percent results in $1.01. Further, direct re-estimation of Ravallion’s
consumption floor using 2011 PPPs gives a value of $1.00 at 2011 PPPs.
26
   This idea of viewing poverty lines from the poorest of countries as reflecting minimum absolute needs
was also proposed in RDV (1991) and World Bank (1990).

                                                   18
is increasing as countries grow richer. But, the lowess line for the RCS poverty lines in Panel B

does potentially indicate a very slight flattening of the fitted lowess line at the tail end of the

RCS data.27 This flattening of the line is the underlying motivation for the minimum at $1.25 (in

2005 PPP terms) of the Ravallion-Chen weakly relatively poverty line, but we argue that the lack

of a statistically significant positive slope coefficient for the bottom quintile of the RCS sample

(the bottom 15 countries) could also simply be an issue of power.

        When we regress our more complete set of national poverty lines on household final

consumption expenditure (HFCE) from national accounts (following RCS), we find no evidence

that the slope of the fitted line goes to zero for poor countries. In our lowess regression (Figure 3,

Panel B), the fitted line is everywhere upward sloping with no appearance of a flattening at the

end of the distribution. Similarly, when we do a spline regression on the full sample of national

poverty lines, both the log-log and the levels specifications indicate that the slopes of the fitted

lines are positive and statistically significant over the first quintile. When the sample is restricted

to the circa-2011 subsample (with reduction in sample size to approximately 1/7th of the full

sample), both estimates are still positive, though only the log-log specification is statistically

significant.28

        One reason for the difference in our results and previous analysis suggesting a non-

increasing relationship between national lines and income for the bottom quintile may simply be

due to differences in country coverage. The sample of national poverty lines used in this paper




27
   Using a Hansen (2000) threshold estimator, RCS identify a break point for the bottom 15 countries (or
about 20 percent of the sample) and flat portion of the schedule to the left of the break point. The lowess
line is a more flexible approach and similarly provides some visual evidence that the correlation weakens.
Klasen et al. (2016) find that the flat segment observed by RCS does not hold at 2011 PPPs when using
the same specification as RCS, but it does hold for a log-log specification.
28
   Spline regression results available from the authors upon request.

                                                    19
cover 40 percent more countries than the sample of poverty lines previously used to assess the

relationship between national poverty lines and national wellbeing. The different sample, and the

harmonization of the lines, results in a different point estimate of the slope coefficient. Another

element of the story is that the slope coefficient for the bottom quintile in our analysis is more

precisely estimated (due to a more than nine-fold increase in the number of poverty lines in the

bottom quintile of our full samples and harmonization)29 than the analysis used to suggest a zero-

slope coefficient at low levels of income.

        The findings from the spline regressions and the observation of the lowess regression

lead us to argue that there is no flat portion or lower bound, Z*, in our preferred parameterization

of the SPL. The interpretation of the intercept α, estimated at $1, as a floor for bare survival also

resonates with existing literature on establishing absolute minimum values for poverty

thresholds. But, as argued above, poverty lines reflect social values and an SPL that can take

values approaching $1 has two unattractive aspects. The first is simply that a value approaching

$1 may simply be too low to be socially acceptable. The near-survival threshold of $1.02

estimated by Allen (noted above) is a candidate example of a socially unacceptable basket

because it only provides 1,700 calories per person per day and these calories all come from one

food item. While our preferred SPL never assigns the value of $1 to a country (because this is the

value of the intercept and it is not possible for a country to have zero median consumption), there

might be a social aversion to expressing the SPL as having its minimum value at $1.

        A second and related argument against $1 as a floor is that the international development

community has largely converged on accepting $1.90 as defining extreme poverty (evidenced by



29
  Without adjusting for weighting and intra-country correlation effects, one expects this difference in
sample size to result in a three-fold increase in the precision of the estimated slope coefficient (i.e.
ignoring design effects, precision increases in proportion to the square root of the change in sample size).

                                                     20
inclusion in the MDGs and SDGs). A reasonable criterion for a socially acceptable relative

poverty line might then be that any person identified as living in extreme poverty must also be

identified as poor by the societal poverty line. In accord with this candidate criterion and past

proposals, we also consider a variant of our preferred SPL which sets a lower bound for the

threshold (Z*) at $1.90. This lower-bound variant of the SPL, expressed as max($1.90, $1 + 50%

of median consumption), is conceptually analogous to the existing Atkinson-Bourguignon and

Ravallion-Chen lines.

       Our preferred parameterization of the SPL is $1 + 50% of median consumption, but we

also view the lower-bound variant of this line as a reasonable alternative parameterization. Our

reason for preferring the SPL of $1 + 50% of median consumption is in part due to its simplicity

and in part due to finding no empirical evidence to support a flat portion in the SPL schedule.

Given this finding, there is then tension in proposing the lower-bound variant as an alternative,

but this tension is more of a conceptual concern than an empirical one. Our analysis indicates

that the measured differences between these lines is relatively small and will continue to

dissipate.

       The RMSE of the lower-bound variant of the SPL (when assessed against the full sample

of national poverty lines) is slightly more than 6 percent greater than the RMSE of the SPL

without the lower bound. The 6 percent difference is substantial though because by construction,

differences in errors will only exist for countries where the lower bound is binding. This means

that the lower-bound variant performs significantly less well for the poorest of countries based

on analysis of the full sample. This unfavorable finding is tempered considerably when

contrasted with findings for the circa-2011 sample. When examining the more recent data, the




                                                 21
RMSE of the lower-bound variant SPL is only about 1 percent greater than the RMSE for our

preferred SPL.

       This improvement in fit of the bounded SPL is simply due to the fact that countries are

richer in the circa-2011 sample (relative to the on average older full sample), and $1.90 is

therefore binding for far fewer countries. For the most recent 2013 estimate, the lower bound of

$1.90 is only binding for 13 countries, which represent less than 3 percent of the global

population in 2013. In contrast, for the 1981 estimate, the lower bound was binding for 37

countries representing 50% of the global population. Moreover, even if binding for some

countries, the lower bound of $1.90 is, on average, not much higher than the societal line without

the lower bound. In 2013, for the 13 countries where the lower bound is binding, the average

societal line (without lower bound) was $1.70, giving an average poverty headcount for those 13

countries of 63%, versus 70% with the lower bound. Because these 13 countries cover only 3

percent of the global population, the 7 percentage-point difference between the SPLs (with and

without lower bound) affects the global count of societal poverty by only 0.21 percentage points.

       Both the SPL and the lower-bound SPL respect the weakly relative poverty property

proposed by Ravallion and Chen, discussed above. Figure 4 plots the point elasticity of the SPL

and lower-bound SPL to changes in median consumption (or income) with markers identifying

typical median consumption values for low-, middle- and high-income countries. The figure

indicates that it is everywhere less than one, satisfying the weakly relative property. The

elasticities of the two proposed lines are the same for all values of median income greater than

$1.80 (the kink in the lower-bound schedule). For countries with median income less than the

value at the kink, the elasticity of the lower-bound SPL drops to zero due to the floor set at the

international poverty line of $1.90.



                                                 22
       An aspect of the point elasticity is that it is increasing with median income and tends

toward one for high-income countries. This relationship is directly linked to the proportion of the

relative component of the SPL (50% of median consumption or income) to its total value. For

rich countries with very high median consumption, the value of the SPL is largely determined by

the relative component and the elasticity approaches one. Among high-income countries in 2013

the average national median income was approximately $40, which corresponds to an SPL with

an elasticity of .95 – a 1 percent increase in median national consumption or income leads to a

0.95 percent increase in the SPL. The intercept of $1 constitutes only 5% of the value of the

societal poverty line, causing the SPL to behave very similarly to a strongly relative line

common in these countries. For poor countries, where the fixed component (either $1 or $1.90

for the lower-bound SPL) is a large proportion of the country’s SPL, the elasticity is lower. For a

typical low-income country in 2013, with median income of approximately $2.1/day, the

elasticity of the SPL is 0.5 and the fixed share of the poverty line is about 50 percent.

       The proportion of the value of the SPL that emanates from the relative component not

only affects the measured elasticity of the SPL to median consumption, but also hints at an

alternative interpretation of the SPL. For countries where the relative component is a relatively

large contributor to the value of the SPL, the SPL is primarily determined by estimated median

consumption. This attribute can serve to mitigate concerns about the potential non-comparability

of the national wellbeing measures. For example, about three-fourths of the wellbeing measures

in PovcalNet are estimates of consumption and the remaining ones are income (Ferreira et al.,

2016). A fixed-value poverty line, such as the international poverty line, implicitly assumes that

the underlying measures are comparable; but income and consumption are, by definition,

different concepts. Even when considering the conceptually same measure such as consumption,



                                                 23
no two countries use the same questionnaire to measure it, and this also affects comparability.

There is a large literature that documents significant variation in estimated consumption resulting

from seemingly innocuous variation in, for example, the number of prompts or questions posed

(Beegle et al., 2012, Browning et al., 2014, Jolliffe, 2001, Pradhan, 2009, and Winter, 2003), the

recall period (Beegle et al., 2012, Deaton and Kozel, 2005), or the time of year of the fieldwork

(Jolliffe and Serajuddin, forthcoming; Khandker, 2012). Because the SPL proposed in this paper

is in part defined by the measure of wellbeing used in a particular country, the societal poverty

threshold assigned to each country is partially harmonized with the measure of wellbeing.



IV. Profile of Societal Poverty
Current global counts of absolute poverty are typically based on data primarily from PovcalNet

(e.g. Ferreira et al, 2016), as are the estimates of societal poverty presented in this paper. For the

global count of absolute poverty, many high-income countries are assumed (not estimated) to

have no extreme poverty, as measured by the international poverty line. While this may be a

reasonable approximation for the percent of people living on less than $1.90 per day in some rich

countries, it is not an acceptable assumption for societal poverty. To address this concern, we

supplement the PovcalNet reference-year distributions for 131 low- and middle-income countries

with data from 24 high-income countries not included in the World Bank’s extreme poverty

counts.30 These 24 high-income countries represent 928 million people in 2013. To estimate the




30
   We produce estimates from 100 surveys based on data from 24 high-income countries, including:
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
United Kingdom, and the United States. These surveys are from PovcalNet, but are not included in the
reference-year aggregations. For details on the regional groupings used in PovcalNet and by this paper,
see: http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/data.aspx.

                                                   24
relative poverty rate for a specific country, we take the median consumption level for that

country, estimate the country-specific SPL for survey and reference years, and pass the value of

the SPL back to PovcalNet to extract the estimated poverty rate.31

        Because the SPL results in a relative poverty line for each country that is directly linked

to the overall wellbeing in that country, we suggest that this can be interpreted as defining

poverty at a level that has social relevance to the country. (This can also be inferred from the fact

that the parameterization of a dollar plus 50% of median consumption or income was selected

because it fits national poverty lines well.) Another way of assessing social relevance is to pose

the question of whether the SPL results in an estimated poverty rate that corresponds with

national poverty headcount rates. The top two graphs in Figure 5 plot the officially reported

poverty rates at national poverty lines and the estimated societal poverty rate for each country

based on our preferred SPL and the SPL with the $1.90 lower bound. In both figures, the societal

poverty rates closely correspond to national poverty rates, as reflected by the relatively tight

scatter of poverty rates around the 45-degree line (indicating perfect correspondence between

national poverty and relative poverty as measured by the various SPLs). While we note above

some differences in the RMSE between the SPL and the lower-bound variant of the SPL, from

visual inspection of Figure 5, these differences appear relatively inconsequential for the resulting

poverty measures. Indeed, Table 3 provides the mean deviation and mean absolute deviation




31
  Estimates are produced from the version of PovcalNet updated October 1, 2016, available at
http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/home.aspx (accessed April, 2017). China, India and Indonesia
have separate rural and urban distributions in PovcalNet and no national median is therefore readily
available. For these countries, the national median is derived by combining the rural and urban population
weighted distributions available in PovcalNet and estimating the median of the joint national distribution.
The resulting national median is used in defining the SPL used for these countries. For high-income
countries, we replicate the alignment of the closest surveys to the reference years using National Accounts
data, as done for countries included in PovcalNet’s reference-year aggregation.

                                                    25
between poverty rates based on national poverty lines and the two SPLs, and both perform

similarly. The mean deviation over all observations for the unbounded SPL is 1.7 compared to

2.3 for the lower-bound variant. The poverty rates derived from both of these lines correspond

closely with the national definitions of poverty and their corresponding headcount rates.

        This is in contrast to the poverty rates derived from our application of the Chen-Ravallion

weakly relative poverty line and the strongly relative line set at 50 percent of median

consumption (or income).32 While the poverty rates derived from the Chen-Ravallion weakly

relative poverty line are positively correlated with the national poverty rates, the vast majority of

national poverty rates are far lower than the poverty rates suggested by the Chen-Ravallion

weakly relative poverty line (Figure 5). The mean deviation between the national and relative

poverty rates is 12.4 (Table 3), more than six times greater than the mean deviation for the SPL

proposed in this paper. This misfit with national poverty is even more striking when examining

the strongly relative poverty line. In this case, for a large majority of countries, their relative

poverty rate is significantly lower than their national poverty rate (Figure 5), and the mean

deviation is more than tenfold greater than that for SPL of one dollar plus 50 percent of median

(Table 3). In both cases, we view the large, systematic difference between the measure of

societal poverty and national poverty rates as an undesirable attribute.

        Using the SPL, aggregating and lining up poverty headcounts for selected reference years

following the same methods as in PovcalNet (but including high-income countries),33 we



32
   Chen and Ravallion parameterize their weakly relative poverty lines in 2005 PPP terms fixing the lower
bound at $1.25. In the figure, we present the 2011 PPP equivalent, fixing the lower bound at $1.90. We
adjust the intercept to be $1.90/2.
33
   The issue is that household survey data do not exist for every country in every year, but all global
poverty estimates are for a specific year. To overcome the data gaps, survey data are projected forward
(and sometimes back-casted) to produce country-level poverty for each year. For an overview of the
methods used, see Jolliffe et al. (2014) or Ferreira et al. (2016).

                                                   26
estimate a societal poverty headcount of 2.16 billion people in 2013 (2.18 billion when based on

the lower-bound variant). This count is almost three times more than the global count of people

living on less than $1.90 per day (estimated at 767 million in 2013). Figure 6 displays the change

over time in both the count and rate of societal poverty, as measured by our proposed SPL, and

the SPL with lower bound; and similarly displays the count and rate of absolute extreme poverty

as measured by the international poverty line of $1.90 per day. Our estimates indicate that the

societal poverty rate has fallen steadily since 1990, but at a slower rate than the decline of

extreme poverty. This divergence in the rate of decline amplifies the distinction between the two

measures. In the early 1980s, societal poverty (46.5%) is estimated to be about 10 percent more

than the extreme poverty rate (42.1%); by 2013, the rate of societal poverty is almost three times

greater than extreme poverty. In a growing global economy, this divergence is an expected

outcome, but the magnitude of the change (in first differences of the rates) over the decades

highlights the distinction in the informational content in both measures.

       Figure 6 also reveals a slight divergence in societal poverty with the $1.90 lower bound

in the 1990s, but this essentially disappears by 2010. Figure 6a shows the trajectories for poverty

rate as measured by the SPLs and the international poverty line, with aggregate societal poverty

falling by about 1/4 from 43 percent in 1990 to 30 percent in 2013, while the absolute extreme

poverty rate fell by more than 2/3, from 35 percent in 1990 to 11 percent in 2013. Figure 6b

reveals that while the rates have been decreasing, the total headcount of societal poverty is

essentially at the same level it was in 1990 due to the increasing global population.

       The levels and trends in poverty headcounts and rates based on our proposed SPLs differ

substantially from those reported by Ravallion and Chen (2013) based on their weakly relative

poverty line. They estimate a weakly relative poverty rate of 49.8 percent in 1990 which drops to



                                                 27
43.6 in 2008.34 Using the SPL, we estimate a global headcount rate of 42.3 in 1990 which drops

to 33.4 in 2008 (or from 43.6 in 1990 to 33.7 in 2008 when using the SPL with a lower bound).

Our societal poverty measure is lower overall and declines at a faster rate. The higher aggregates

from Ravallion and Chen originates from the fact that their preferred specification results in a

higher average poverty line than the SPL. The difference in levels can also be inferred from

comparing the SPL panels in Figure 5 with the panel for the weakly relative poverty line.

        By design, the SPL used in estimation of societal poverty is increasing with growth, and

this is reflected in Figure 7 which shows the values of the line over time. The population-

weighted average SPL over all countries increases from about $5.20 in 1990 to $6.70 in 2013.

Among upper-middle-income countries, the mean SPL almost doubled over the same time

period, increasing from $2.80 in 1990 to $5.50 in 2013. The relative line has increased in all

regions, but faster in fast-growing regions (Table 4). In 1981, the mean SPL in South Asia was

equal to the international poverty line of $1.90 and the SPLs in East Asia and the Pacific, and

Sub-Saharan Africa were just slightly higher. Due to strong economic growth in East Asia and

Pacific, the mean line has more than doubled since then to $5.60 per day in 2013. In contrast,

Sub-Saharan Africa, which has experienced much weaker overall growth, has an estimated mean

societal poverty line of $2.20 per day in 2013, essentially unchanged since 1981.

        The profile of societal poverty by region and income groups and over time is given in

Table 5.35 Similar to regional profiles of absolute poverty, Sub-Saharan Africa stands out as a

region with substantially higher rates of societal poverty. While societal poverty has declined in



34
   Implemented with the latest data and at 2011 PPPs with the poverty line as max(1.9, 1.9/2+0.5*mean)
we the estimate are 49.9% in 1990 to 44.1% in 2008.
35
   We use the World Bank’s classification of countries in regions and income groupings. For details about
the World Bank income classification, see Fantom and Serajuddin (2016). For regions used by the World
Bank see: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country.

                                                   28
Sub-Saharan Africa over time, it still is almost half the population (48 percent) in 2013. In

contrast, the East Asia and Pacific region has halved societal poverty from 55 percent in 1990 to

26 percent in 2013. All developing regions have seen an overall decline in societal poverty rates

since 1990, especially during the 2000s, while the high-income countries in aggregate have seen

a stable level of societal poverty of about 16 percent, remaining lower than in all the

‘developing’ regions.



V. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a measure of societal poverty that is based on counting the number of

poor people who live on less than a country-specific poverty line that takes the value of $1 plus

50 percent of median consumption (or income) in that country. This relative measure of societal

poverty can be viewed as a complement to the absolute measure of extreme poverty based on the

international poverty line of $1.90 per person per day. The absolute measure monitors progress

in eliminating extreme poverty as assessed by a material standard fixed over time, while the

societal measure monitors progress in reducing poverty in accord with how countries assess

changing standards of minimum needs. By fixing the absolute international poverty line at $1.90,

it serves the useful purpose of providing a fixed target for eliminating extreme poverty. This

advantage of keeping the line fixed also means though that as the world progresses towards

eradicating extreme poverty, the $1.90 poverty line will become increasingly irrelevant to large

portions of the world. In contrast, because the SPL is explicitly a function of the wellbeing of

each country, it is by construction a relevant yardstick for all countries.

       The decision to anchor the SPL in a median measure of wellbeing both fits the data well

(as assessed by regressions of national poverty lines on consumption level of the country) and

corresponds with existing definitions of relative poverty in many countries. Garroway and

                                                  29
Laiglesia (2012) also note that by making the relative poverty line a function of the median and

not the mean, poverty lines will differ across countries with the same level of consumption per

capita if the overall distribution of consumption differs across the countries. The proposed SPL

also has relevance to SDG target 10.2 aimed at “social, economic and political inclusion of all,”

the indicator for which is the proportion of people living below 50 percent of median income.

While the focus of this SDG is on reducing inequality and improving inclusion, and it is useful to

recognize that it overlaps well with the idea of monitoring societal poverty. As countries grow,

societal poverty provides information on the extent to which the poor share in the growth.

       Methodologically, the approach followed in this paper to parameterize a global relative

poverty line is similar to how others have approached this problem. The analysis in this paper

though is based on a much larger data set of national poverty lines and this has allowed us to

more precisely estimate the shape of the fitted relative line. One key finding of our estimates is

that national poverty lines increase in value as countries get richer over the entire observed range

of countries. We do not observe a flat-line relationship for the poorest of countries, in contrast to

much of the limited literature on this point. Our parameterization of the SPL also includes a

positive intercept, which results in our SPL being an example of a weakly relative poverty line.

Another way of interpreting the positive intercept is that it brings a fixed component to the

relative poverty line, ensuring that the elasticity of the poverty line to growth is always less than

one but increasing with income.

       This last point also addresses a recommendation in World Bank (2017, recommendation

16) that the World Bank should monitor a measure of global societal poverty that takes into

account a country’s standard of living and that combines both fixed and relative elements in one

line. The SPL proposed in this paper fills this gap in the effort to monitor global poverty.



                                                 30
References
Aaberge, Rolf, and Anthony B. Atkinson. “The Median as Watershed.” Discussion Papers. Oslo:
   Statistics Norway, Research Department, 2013. http://www.ssb.no/en/forskning/discussion-
   papers/_attachment/130759.

Addison, Tony, and Miguel Niño-Zarazúa. “Redefining Poverty in China and India.” United
   Nations University, UNU-WIDER, 2012.
   https://www.wider.unu.edu/publication/redefining-poverty-china-and-india.

Allen, Robert. “Absolute Poverty: When Necessity Displaces Desire.” Oxford Economic and
    Social History Working Paper Series no. 141. Oxford: Oxford University, March 2016.
    https://www.economics.ox.ac.uk/Oxford-Economic-and-Social-History-Working-
    Papers/absolute-poverty-when-necessity-displaces-desire.

Atkinson, Anthony, and Francois Bourguignon. “Poverty and Inclusion from a World
    Perspective.” In Governance, Equity, and Global Markets, edited by Joseph E. Stiglitz and
    Pierre-Alain Muet. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 2001.

Beegle, Kathleen, Joachim De Weerdt, Jed Friedman, and John Gibson. “Methods of Household
   Consumption Measurement through Surveys: Experimental Results from Tanzania.” Journal
   of Development Economics 98, no. 1 (May 2012): 3–18. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2011.11.001.

Birdsall, Nancy, and Christian J. Meyer. “The Median Is the Message: A Good Enough Measure
    of Material Wellbeing and Shared Development Progress.” Global Policy 6, no. 4
    (November 2015): 343–57. doi:10.1111/1758-5899.12239.

Browning, Martin, Thomas F. Crossley, and Joachim Winter. “The Measurement of Household
   Consumption Expenditures.” Annual Review of Economics 6, no. 1 (August 2014): 475–501.
   doi:10.1146/annurev-economics-080213-041247.

Chen, Shaohua, and Martin Ravallion. “How Did the World’s Poorest Fare in the 1990s?”
   Review of Income and Wealth 47, no. 3 (2001): 283–300.

Chen, Shaohua, and Martin Ravallion. “More Relatively-Poor People in a Less Absolutely-Poor
   World?” Review of Income and Wealth 59, no. 1 (2013): 1–28.

Deaton, Angus, and Valerie Kozel. “Data and Dogma: The Great Indian Poverty Debate.” The
    World Bank Research Observer 20, no. 2 (September 21, 2005): 177–99.
    doi:10.1093/wbro/lki009.

Fantom, Neil Fantom, and Serajuddin, Umar. “The World Bank's classification of countries by
    income”. Policy Research Working Paper. Washington, DC: World Bank Group. 2016.

Ferreira, Francisco H. G., Shaohua Chen, Andrew Dabalen, Yuri Dikhanov, Nada Hamadeh,
    Dean Jolliffe, Ambar Narayan, et al. “A Global Count of the Extreme Poor in 2012: Data



                                              31
    Issues, Methodology and Initial Results.” The Journal of Economic Inequality 14, no. 2
    (June 2016): 141–72. doi:10.1007/s10888-016-9326-6.

Garroway, Christopher, and Juan Ramón de Laiglesia. “On the Relevance of Relative Poverty for
    Developing Countries.” OECD Development Centre Working Papers, September 25, 2012.
    http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/development/on-the-relevance-of-relative-poverty-for-
    developing-countries_5k92n2x6pts3-en.

Gentilini, Ugo, and Andy Sumner. “What Do National Poverty Lines Tell Us About Global
   Poverty?” IDS Working Paper No. 392. University of Sussex: Institute for Development
   Studies, 2012. http://www.ids.ac.uk/publication/what-do-national-poverty-lines-tell-us-
   about-global-poverty.

Government of Nepal, Central Bureau of Statistics. “Poverty in Nepal: 2010-2011.” Kathmandu,
   Nepal: Central Bureau of Statistics, 2012.
   http://cbs.gov.np/sectoral_statistics/poverty/poverty_nepal_2010-11.

Hansen, Bruce E. “Sample Splitting and Threshold Estimation.” Econometrica 68, no. 3 (May
   2000): 575–603. doi:10.1111/1468-0262.00124.

James, W. P. T., and E. C. Schofield. Human Energy Requirements: A Manual for Planners and
   Nutritionists. Oxford Medical Publications. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1990.

Jerven, Morten. Poor Numbers: How We Are Misled by African Development Statistics and
    What to Do about It. Cornell Studies in Political Economy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univ. Press,
    2013.

Jolliffe, Dean. “Measuring Absolute and Relative Poverty: The Sensitivity of Estimated
     Household Consumption to Survey Design.” - Journal of Economic and Social
     Measurement Volume 27, no. Numbers 1-2 (2001): 1–23.

Jolliffe, D., Lanjouw, P., Chen, S., Kraay, A., Meyer, C., Negre, M., Prydz, E., Vakis, R., and
     Wethli, R. A Measured Approach to Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity:
     Concepts, Data, and the Twin Goals. The World Bank, 2014.
     http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/book/10.1596/978-1-4648-0361-1.

Jolliffe, Dean, and Espen Beer Prydz. “Estimating International Poverty Lines from Comparable
     National Thresholds.” The Journal of Economic Inequality, 2016. doi:10.1007/s10888-016-
     9327-5.

Jolliffe, Dean, and Umar Serajuddin. “Noncomparable Poverty Comparisons.” Journal of
     Development Studies, forthcoming, 2017. doi:10.1080/00220388.2016.1274394

Khandker, Shahidur R. “Seasonality of Income and Poverty in Bangladesh.” Journal of
   Development Economics 97, no. 2 (March 2012): 244–56.
   doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2011.05.001.


                                                32
Klasen, Stephan, Tatyana Krivobokova, Friederike Greb, Rahul Lahoti, Syamsul Hidayat
    Pasaribu, and Manuel Wiesenfarth. “International Income Poverty Measurement: Which
    Way Now?” The Journal of Economic Inequality 14, no. 2 (June 2016): 199–225.
    doi:10.1007/s10888-016-9324-8.

Lindgren, Mattias. “The Elusive Quest for the Subsistence Line. How Much Does the Cost of
    Survival Vary between Populations?” Comparative Institutional Analysis Working Paper no.
    2015:1. Lund University, Sweden, 2015. https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/73891/.

Pradhan, Menno. “Welfare Analysis with a Proxy Consumption Measure: Evidence from a
    Repeated Experiment in Indonesia*.” Fiscal Studies 30, no. 3–4 (2009): 391–417.

Ravallion, Martin. “Are the World’s Poorest Being Left Behind?” Journal of Economic Growth
   21, no. 2 (June 2016): 139–64. doi:10.1007/s10887-016-9126-7.

Ravallion, Martin. “Poverty Lines across the World.” Policy Research Working Paper.
   Washington, DC: World Bank Group, April 2010.
   http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-5284.

Ravallion, Martin, and Shaohua Chen. “Weakly Relative Poverty.” Review of Economics and
   Statistics 93, no. 4 (November 2011): 1251–1261. doi:10.1007/s10887-016-9126-7.

Ravallion, Martin, and Shaohua Chen. “A Proposal for Truly Global Poverty Measures.” Global
   Policy, July 2013, 4(3): 258-65. doi:10.1111/1758-5899.12049.

Ravallion, Martin, Shaohua Chen, and Prem Sangraula. “Dollar a Day Revisited.” The World
   Bank Economic Review 23, no. 2 (January 1, 2009): 163–84. doi:10.1093/wber/lhp007.

Ravallion, Martin, Gaurav Datt, and Dominique van de Walle. “Quantifying Absolute Poverty in
   the Developing World.” Review of Income and Wealth 37, no. 4 (December 1, 1991): 345–
   61. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4991.1991.tb00378.x.

Sen, Amartya. “Poor, Relatively Speaking.” Oxford Economic Papers 35, no. 2 (1983): 153–69.

Stiglitz, Joseph, Amartya Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi. “Report by the Commission on the
     Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress.” Washington, D.C.: Council
     on Foreign Relations, 2010.
     http://library.bsl.org.au/jspui/bitstream/1/1267/1/Measurement_of_economic_performance_
     and_social_progress.pdf.

Townsend, Peter. Poverty in the United Kingdom: A Survey of Household Resources and
   Standards of Living. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1979.

Vecchi, Giovanni. “Counting the Poor: New Thinking about European Poverty Measures and
   Lessons for the United States. Edited by D. J.Besharov and K. A.Couch. Oxford University


                                             33
    Press, Oxford. 2012. 440 Pp. £45.00.” Economica 82, no. 327 (July 2015): 586–87.
    doi:10.1111/ecca.12052.

Winter, Joachim. “Response Bias in Survey-Based Measures of Household Consumption.”
   Economics Bulletin 3, no. 9 (2004): 1–12.

World Bank. World Development Report 1990: Poverty. New York: Oxford University Press,
   1990. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/5973.

World Bank. “Jordan - Poverty Update.” Washington, DC: The World Bank Group, November
   1, 2009. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2009/11/11385619/hashemite-kingdom-
   jordan-poverty-update-vol-1-2-main-report.

World Bank. Poverty and Shared Prosperity 2016: Taking on Inequality. Washington, DC:
   World Bank Publications, 2016. http://www.myilibrary.com?id=970771.

World Bank. Monitoring Global Poverty, Report of the Commission on Global Poverty.
   Washington, DC: World Bank Group, 2017.




                                             34
Tables
Table 1: Proposals for International Relative Poverty Lines
                                                   Relative lines
Name of proposal          Atkinson &      Ravallion & Chen         Strongly     Societal
                         Bourguignon      Weakly Relative          Relative   Poverty Line
                            Relative        Poverty Line         Poverty Line    (SPL)
                          Poverty Line      (RC-WRPL)              (SRPL)
                           (AB-RPL)
Reference(s)             Atkinson and Ravallion Chen and          EU, OECD,     (this paper)
                         Bourguignon and Chen Ravallion           Garroway
                         (2001)        (2011)   (2013)            and de
                                                                  Laiglesia
                                                                  (2011)
Number of national       33 (33)       74 (74)      74 (74)       n/a           699 (107)
lines (countries) used
in parameterization
PPPs                     1985          2005         2005          n/a           2011
Economic variable        PCE from      PCE from     Mean          Mean          Median
(M)                      National      National     consumption   consumption   consumption
                         Accounts      Account      from          from          from
                                                    household     household     household
                                                    survey        survey        survey
Parameters
 Gradient (k)            0.37          1/3          1/2           1/2            1/2
 Intercept (α)           0             $0.60        $0.625        0              $1
 Lower bound (Z*)        $1 (IPL)      $1.25        $1.25 (IPL)   0              SPL variant,
                                       (IPL)                                     $1.90 (IPL)
  Kink M* = (Z*-α)/k)      $2.70       $1.95       $1.25         n/a             SPL variant
                                                                                 $1.80
Note: SPL column includes parameters for both the SPL and the SPL variant with lower bound –
α and k are the same, but SPL with lower bound defines parameters for the Z* and the kink. IPL
refers to the absolute international poverty line.




                                               35
Table 2: Economic gradient of national poverty lines
 Panel A: Level-level models
                 (I) Full sample (weighted)                      (II) 2011 sample
                       (1)         (2)       (3)            (4)           (5)        (6)
                        Z           Z         Z              Z             Z          Z
                      b/se        b/se      b/se           b/se          b/se       b/se
 Median             0.53***               0.49***        0.50***                  0.55***
                     (0.02)                (0.10)         (0.02)                   (0.12)
 Mean                          0.42***      0.03                       0.40***     -0.04
                                 (0.03)    (0.08)                       (0.03)     (0.10)
 Constant           0.98***    0.70*** 0.95***           1.01***       0.73***    1.05***
                     (0.13)      (0.18)    (0.14)         (0.15)        (0.23)     (0.15)
 R-squared           0.861       0.821     0.862          0.863         0.809      0.864
 Sample size          699         699       699            104           104        104

Panel B: Log-log models
                       (I) Full sample (weighted)                  (II) 2011 sample
                        (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)         (6)
                     Log(Z)        Log(Z)     Log(Z)       Log(Z)        Log(Z)      Log(Z)
                        b/se         b/se       b/se         b/se          b/se        b/se
 Log(Median)        0.72***                   0.45**      0.69***                    0.60***
                      (0.03)                  (0.18)       (0.03)                     (0.20)
 Log(Mean)                        0.74***       0.28                     0.72***       0.10
                                   (0.03)     (0.20)                      (0.03)      (0.21)
 Constant           0.16***       -0.13**       0.04      0.18***         -0.10*       0.14
                      (0.05)       (0.07)     (0.11)       (0.04)         (0.06)      (0.10)
 R-squared            0.805         0.797      0.810        0.835         0.814       0.836
 Sample size            699          699        699          104           104         104
Notes: Z denotes the national poverty line, and *, **, *** indicate p-values less than 0.10, 0.05,
and 0.01, respectively. Standard errors in columns 1-3 are adjusted for multiple observations for
each country with a sandwich (Huber-White) variance estimator. Standard errors in columns 4-6
are White adjusted to correct for heteroscedasticity of general form.




                                                36
Table 3: Deviation between national and global relative poverty rates
                                                Latest observation        All observations
                                                Mean                      Mean
                                              absolute       Mean        absolute     Mean
 Relative global line                         deviation    deviation deviation deviation
 SPL ($1 + 50% of median)                         8.7          1.7          9.5        -1.9
 SPL w lower bound at $1.90                       9.1           2.3         9.7        -1.3
 Chen and Ravallion (WRPL)                       14.0          12.4        12.5         9.5
 Strongly relative (50% of median)               19.5         -18.1        18.5       -17.4
 Number of observations                          115           115         631         631
Notes: Table shows the mean and mean absolute difference (in percentage points) between
poverty headcount rates at relative lines and national lines. A negative (positive) mean deviation
indicates that, on average, the relative line produces a headcount rate lower (higher) than that
given by the national line. The Chen and Ravallion weakly relative poverty line approximated at
2011 PPPs using max($1.90, $1.90/2+50% of mean).




                                                37
Table 4: Societal Poverty Line
A. By region

                                                                                                         Change
 Region(s)                                        1981       1990      1999 2008          2013         1981-2013
 East Asia & Pacific                                 2.5       3.1       3.5       4.5      5.6               3.1
 Europe & Central Asia                              9.5       10.3      11.2       14      14.3               4.7
 Latin America & Caribbean                             4       3.8         4       5.2         6              1.9
 Middle East & North Africa                         3.4        3.8         4       4.7         5              1.6
 North America                                     18.9       22.7      23.8     25.6      25.1               6.2
 South Asia                                          1.9         2       2.1       2.2      2.5               0.7
 Sub-Saharan Africa                                  2.1         2       1.9       2.1      2.2               0.1
 World                                               4.8       5.2       5.4       6.3      6.7               1.9
 -Excluding 'Other High Income Countries'           2.6        2.6       2.7       3.4         4              1.4
Notes: Table presents (population-weighted) average of the value of country SPLs, evaluated at $1 + 50% * median consumption (or
income).


B. By income group

                                                                                                       Change
 Income group                                     1981      1990     1999     2008       2013        1981-2013
 Low income                                        1.8        1.7      1.8       1.9        2               0.3
 Lower middle income                               2.1        2.2      2.2       2.5      2.8              0.7
 Upper middle income                               2.9        2.8        3       4.4      5.5               2.6
 High income                                      13.7       16.9     18.7      21.2       21               7.3




                                                               38
Table 5: Societal Poverty Headcount Rates
A. By regions

                                                                                                 Change (p.p.)
 Region(s)                                       1981     1990      1999 2008          2013          1981-2013
 East Asia & Pacific                                67     55.1      43.9       33      26.4               -40.6
 Europe & Central Asia                            15.2     16.3     20.1      16.2      15.9                 0.7
 Latin America & Caribbean                        34.9     34.8        34     29.9      28.1                -6.8
 Middle East & North Africa                       30.7     28.4      26.7       24      22.2                -8.5
 North America                                    19.1     19.6     18.6      19.5      19.5                 0.4
 South Asia                                       54.4     49.2      46.6     41.7      34.7               -19.7
 Sub-Saharan Africa                               52.5       55        57     51.1      47.8                -4.8
 World                                            46.5     42.3      39.2     33.4      29.3               -17.2
 -Excluding 'Other High Income Countries'*        53.6     47.8      43.8     36.7      31.7               -21.9
Notes: SPL is $1 + 50% of median consumption (or income). *). Regional grouping previously referred to as ‘Developing World’ for
which PovcalNet monitors poverty.


B. By income group

                                                                                                 Change (p.p.)
 Income group                                     1981       1990      1999    2008     2013       1981-2013
 Low income                                        61.6       62.3        63     55.5    50.7            -10.9
 Lower middle income                               51.5      46.9        45      39.7   34.3             -17.3
 Upper middle income                               56.4      48.2       40.7     30.8    25.5            -30.9
 High income                                       15.5       15.5      15.4     15.6    15.8              0.3
Notes: Income classification for FY15, based on GNI per capita in 2013.




                                                                 39
Figures
                                   Figure 1: Global Relative Poverty Lines, Existing Proposals
                           Relative Poverty Line AB-RPL                    Weakly Relative Poverty Line RC-WRPL
                           Atkinson & Bourguignon (2001)                          Ravallion & Chen (2011)
        poverty line (Z)




                                                                            poverty line (Z)
                                          slope=k                                                                       slope=k




                       Z*                                                               Z*

          α >0                                                               α >0

             α=0                                                                 α=0
                                     M*             mean/median (M)                                                M*         mean/median (M)




   Strongly Relative Poverty Line (SRPL)                                                                   Societal Poverty Line (SPL)
 (OECD, EU, Garroway & de Laiglesia, 2012)                                                                          (this paper)
    poverty line (Z)




                                                                                        poverty line (Z)




                                          slope=k                                                                         slope=k




                Z*                                                                                  Z*

     α >0                                                                                 α >0

         α=0                                                                                   α=0
                                     M*         mean/median (M)                                                      M*           mean/median (M)


Notes: The horizontal axes reflect the overall wellbeing of the society, as measured by either the
mean (M) or median (M’) of consumption or income. Z* reflects the lower bound for the relative
poverty line that is used by Chen and Ravallion (2013) and Atkinson and Bourguignon (2001).




                                                                      40
                       Figure 2: National Poverty Lines and Economic Development


                      Panel A: Level scale                                               Panel B: Log scale
        20




                                                                       20
                                                                       10
        15




                                                                             5
   poverty line




                                                                  poverty line
       10




                                                                 2
        5




                                                                       1
        0




                  0       10                20         30                            1         2           5       10   20     40
                               median cons/inc                                                     median cons/inc

                        Full sample      2011 Sample                             Full sample       2011 Sample           q10/q90




Notes: Both panels plot 699 harmonized national poverty lines compiled by Jolliffe and Prydz
(2016). Dark dots indicate the 104 poverty lines that are closest to 2011 (one unique line for each
country), excluding lines prior to 2000. Both panels plot the same data – Panel A plots the lines
on actual values, Panel B plots these same values but the axis of the plots are log
transformations. Lines in Panel B are predicted 90th and 10th quantile lines.




                                                            41
                              Figure 3: Comparing JP and RCS national poverty lines


                 Panel A: Poverty lines                                                         Panel B: Lowess regression fit
       20




                                                                               20
       10




                                                                                           10
                                                                     poverty line (lowess)
  poverty line
            5




                                                                                 5
       2




                                                                               2
       1




                                                                               1
                 1    2             5        10       20   40                                   1    2            5        10       20     40
                            mean consumption (HFCE)                                                       mean consumption (HFCE)

                          JP - all   JP - 2011    RCS                                                JP - all         JP - 2011          RCS




Notes: These panels compare the Jolliffe-Prydz (JP, 2016) and Ravallion, Chen, Sangraula
(RCS, 2009) datasets of national poverty lines on household final consumption and
expenditure (HFCE) from national accounts. All values are expressed in 2011 PPP US dollars.




                                                                42
                                                                  Figure 4: Elasticity of SPL



                        1
         Elasticity w.r.t median income / Share
            .2         .4
                        0        .6        .8




                                                  1      2              4           8           16     32           64
                                                                        Median income/consumption

                                                      SPL, elasticity         SPL w/LB, elasticity   Fixed share of SPL



Note: Vertical lines indicate the average national median consumption or income in 2013 for
World Bank income classification groupings (from left to right): Low ($2.1/day), Lower Middle
($3.7), Upper Middle ($9.3) and High Income ($40) Countries.




                                                                                43
                                Figure 5: Comparing Relative Poverty and National Poverty Headcount rates

                                            SPL poverty                                                                      SPL (with $1.90 lower bound)
                     100




                                                                                                    100
                     80




                                                                                                                    80
                                                                                     Poverty rate at SPL w/lower bound
        Poverty rate at SPL
                      60




                                                                                                          60
          40




                                                                                               40
                     20




                                                                                    20
                     0




                                                                                                    0
                                 0     20       40           60     80   100                                             0        20     40           60     80   100
                                              Poverty rate at NPL                                                                      Poverty rate at NPL




  Weakly relative poverty (Ravallion & Chen)                                                                                   Strongly relative poverty
               100




                                                                                                    100
                           80




                                                                                                    80
   Poverty rate at RC-WRPL




                                                                                    Poverty rate at SRPL
                    60




                                                                                                    60
         40




                                                                                       40
               20




                                                                                                    20
               0




                                                                                                    0




                                0     20       40           60      80   100                                             0        20     40           60     80   100
                                             Poverty rate at NPL                                                                       Poverty rate at NPL


Notes: The four panels plot poverty rates for various proposal for relative global poverty line
against poverty rates at national lines. The filled (dark) markers represent the latest observation
for each country (115 observations), while the hollow markers represent the full sample (746
observations). The 45-degree line represents the point at which the poverty rate at the relative
lines are equal to the rates at national lines. The national poverty rates come from WDI (series
SI.POV.NAHC.NC), while the relative rates are estimated for this paper using PovcalNet using
the procedure described in Section 3.




                                                                               44
                                         Figure 6: Societal Poverty, Global Estimates 1981-2013

                                                                 (a) Poverty rate


                  50
Poverty headcount ratio (% in poverty)
     20          30
                  10          40




                                         1980   1985     1990       1995          2000   2005   2010          2015
                                                                           Year

                                                   SPL              SPL w/lower bound           IPL ($1.90)




                                                                (b) Number of poor
                  2500 2000
  Number of poor (million)
1000      1500    500




                                         1980   1985     1990       1995          2000   2005   2010          2015
                                                                           Year

                                                   SPL              SPL w/lower bound           IPL ($1.90)




                                                                      45
                                                  Figure 7: Mean Societal Poverty Line 1981-2013



                      8                7
      Mean poverty line (pop. weighted)
      1   2    3      4
                      0    5     6




                                           1980      1985       1990       1995           2000        2005       2010       2015
                                                                                   Year

                                                            SPL - All countries                  SPL w/LB - All countries
                                                            SPL - w/o HICs                       SPL w/LB - w/o HICs




Note: Dashed line represents international poverty line at $1.90 in 2011 PPP terms.




                                                                                  46
