                                                 WPS8087


Policy Research Working Paper                  8087




                       Beyond Dualism
    Agricultural Productivity, Small Towns, and Structural
                    Change in Bangladesh

                              M. Shahe Emran
                               Forhad Shilpi




Development Research Group
Environment and Energy Team
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8087


  Abstract
 This paper uses a framework that goes beyond rural-urban                           higher employment in the town-goods sector. Using rainfall
 dualism and highlights the role of small town economy in                           as an instrument, the empirical analysis finds a significant
 understanding structural change in a developing country.                           positive effect of agricultural productivity on rice yield and
 It provides a theoretical and empirical analysis of the role                       agricultural wages. Productivity shock increases wages more
 of agricultural productivity in structural transformation in                       in the rural sample compared with the small town economy
 the labor market. The empirical work is based on a general                         sample, but structural change in employment is more pro-
 equilibrium model that formalizes the demand and labor                             nounced in the small-town economy. In the rural sample,
 market linkages: the small-town draws labor away from the                          it increases employment only in small-scale manufacturing
 rural areas to produce goods and services whose demand                             and services. In contrast, a positive productivity shock has
 may depend largely on rural income. The theory clarifies                           large and positive impacts on employment in construc-
 the role played by the income elasticity of demand and the                         tion and transport, education, health and other services,
 wage elasticity with respect to productivity increase in agri-                     and manufacturing employment in larger scale enterprises
 culture. For productivity growth to lead to a demand effect,                       located in small towns and cities. Agricultural productivity
 the wage elasticity has to be lower than a threshold. When                         growth induces structural transformation within the services
 the demand for goods and services produced in small towns                          sector in small towns, with employment in skilled services
 comes mainly from the adjacent rural areas, the demand                             growing at a faster pace than that of low skilled services.
 effect can outweigh the negative wage effect, and lead to




  This paper is a product of the Environment and Energy Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at fshilpi@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
           Beyond Dualism: Agricultural Productivity, Small Towns, and Structural

                                   Change in Bangladesh



                                      M. Shahe Emran

                                  IPD, Columbia University

                                       Forhad Shilpi

                                        World Bank




  Key Words: Agricultural Productivity, Small Town Economy, Dualism, Employment in Large
Firms, Employment Growth, Structural Transformation

  JEL Codes: O13, O14, O17, O18
   1. Introduction


   A substantial literature in development economics focuses on structural change where economic de-

velopment is characterized by labor reallocation from a contracting agricultural sector to the expanding

manufacturing and services sectors. In much of the literature, agriculture is equated with the rural econ-

omy, and manufacturing and services with urbanization. Although such dualistic perspectives have been at

the center of a large body of literature starting from Lewis (1954), and Kuznets(1973) the more recent work

emphasizes the need for a broader framework, beyond the binary conceptualization of dualistic models, to

capture the richness of structural change in a developing economy.

   In the context of rural-urban dualism, a growing literature underscores the fact that the “rural” and

“urban” are two polar cases in a broader spectrum, and many geographic and administrative units are

better characterized as partially urbanized. A simple yet useful framework that goes beyond the canonical

rural-urban dualism is where the focus is on areas that contain a small town surrounded by signiﬁcant

rural population and agricultural activities. Contrary to the popular impression of most urban people

being crammed into mega-cities, recent evidence shows that a large share of urban population and rural-

migrants live in the smaller cities and towns (Ferre, Ferreira and Lanjouw (2010);Christiaensen, De Weerdt

and Kanbur (2015)). In the spatial spectrum from metropolitan cities to villages, the small towns occupy

a space in the middle in terms of population and employment density. As suppliers of goods and services

and destinations of rural workers, the small towns have ties with both metropolitan cities and rural areas-

the ties being perhaps closer with the rural areas (Haggblade, Hazell and Reardon (2006)). This paper

aims to analyze structural change in employment in a ‘small-town economy’ with a focus on the role played

by higher agricultural productivity in the surrounding villages.

   The focus on agricultural productivity change as a driver of employment specialization and structural

change is primarily motivated by a longstanding debate about the role of agricultural productivity in

industrialization and structural change. The earliest view in development literature identiﬁed a trade-

oﬀ between poverty reduction through agricultural development and long-run structural change, because


                                                     1
higher agricultural productivity is likely to increase the wages faced by the nonfarm sectors (Lewis (1954),

Foster and Rosenzweig (2004)). The competing view emphasizes the Engel curve eﬀect in consumer demand

reﬂecting inelastic demand for food, and higher income elasticity of manufacturing goods and services. Since

much of the rural population are engaged in agricultural activities, a rise in agricultural productivity can

increase rural income and thus have a positive demand eﬀect on non-farm activities, including those located

in small towns (Mellor (1976), Ranis and Stewart (1973), Haggblade, Hazell and Reardon (2006)). Recent

empirical studies suggest a bigger role of labor market linkages. Foster and Rosenzweig (2004) ﬁnd a

negative relationship between manufacturing employment and agricultural productivity growth providing

support to the contention that there is a trade-oﬀ between agricultural growth and manufacturing growth.

Bustos, Caprettini, Ponticelli (2016) on the other hand ﬁnd that labor saving technical change in soybean

production in Brazil led to industrial growth. In this paper, we provide causal evidence on the impacts of

agricultural productivity shock on employment growth and specialization in a more general context where

both labor market and demand linkages interact with each other, and may lead to contrasting outcomes

across diﬀerent areas within the same country.

    We develop a simple model of a small-town economy that formalizes the dual roles that a town plays in

such an economy: it draws labor away from the rural areas to produce goods and services whose demand

may depend largely on rural income. There are three types of goods produced in this economy: food and

informal good (low quality manufacturing and services) are produced in the villages, and a formal good

(high quality manufacturing or services) is produced in the small town.1 A positive productivity shock to

agriculture, however, does not necessarily increase village income; given a labor endowment, the village

income increases only when the response of the wage (i.e, elasticity of wage with respect to productivity

shock) is lower than a threshold.2 When the elasticity of demand for the town good in the village is low

so that most of the town good is sold outside the local economy, the labor market linkage predominates
   1 The assumption that the town produces only one good is for the sake of simplicity. In the empirical analysis, we consider

disaggregation of the town good, some of which are of relatively lower quality with lower income elasticity.
   2 In a more general model with a positive labor supply curve at the household level, a positive shock to agriculture is

expected to increase village income in general.




                                                              2
and a higher rural wage due to agricultural productivity increase reduces employment in small towns. In

contrast, when demand for goods and services produced in small towns comes mainly from the adjacent

rural areas, the demand eﬀect can more than oﬀset the negative wage eﬀect, and lead to higher labor

allocation to the production of the the town good.

   We test the predictions of the model using panel data compiled from the population and enterprise

censuses from Bangladesh. Our data set covers the period between 2000 and 2010. Between 2000 and

2010, Bangladesh experienced substantial reduction in the incidence of poverty, from 48.9 percent to 31.5

percent. This decade also witnessed substantial expansion in non-farm employment as a result of which

its share in total employment increased from 47 percent to 52 percent. The rice yield, which is taken as a

measure of agricultural productivity, has grown at an annual rate of 3.6 percent.3

   To understand the implications of agricultural productivity, we exploit variations in rainfall across

upazilas and over time, and implement an approach that focuses on the eﬀects of rainfall shocks in reduced

form regressions on the outcome variables (employment in diﬀerent types of non-farm activities) and also on

the measure of agricultural productivity (crop yield). Our approach relies on the fact that rainfall variations

can be interpreted as shifts in the production function, because rainfall is a major determinant of crop

yield in Bangladesh (Sarkar et. al. (2012)). We also provide an instrumental variables interpretation of our

estimates, using rainfall deviations (from long term average) across upazilas and over time as an instrument

for crop yield (rice yield). Empirical estimation issues and strategies to deal with them are discussed in

detail in Section 3. It is worth noting here that while rainfall shocks have been used for identiﬁcation in a

variety of contexts, agricultural productivity is arguably one of the most natural contexts where rainfall can

provide reasonable identifying variations ((Foster and Rosenzweig (2004), Adhvaryu, Chari and Sharma

(2013), Bruckner and Ciccone (2011)).

   The empirical results establish positive and statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects of rainfall on rice yield and

agricultural wages. The positive eﬀect of rainfall shock on agricultural productivity (as measured by rice
  3 Rice   is the predominant crop in Bangladesh.




                                                      3
yield) is similar across village and small-town samples but its eﬀect on wage is larger in the village sample

compared with the small-town sample. A positive rainfall shock increases employment in the production of

informal village good (small-scale manufacturing and services) but has no statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect on

the labor allocated to large-scale manufacturing employment in the rural sample. A positive productivity

shock has large and positive impacts on employment in construction and transport, education, health and

other services, and manufacturing employment in larger scale enterprises located in small towns. When

interpreted as instrumental variables estimates of the eﬀects of productivity increase, the empirical results

suggest that agricultural productivity induces structural transformation within the services sector with

employment in skilled services provided by larger ﬁrms growing at a much faster pace compared with

services provided by smaller ﬁrms/individuals.

   Our analysis brings to focus a methodological point about the sample used in the empirical analysis.

Most of the existing analysis of the eﬀects of agricultural productivity relies on a sample of villages where

all of the households are classiﬁed as rural. Our analysis shows that it is important to use the small towns

in addition to the “village sample”.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a simple general equilibrium model to

highlight the diﬀerent channels of interactions between farm and non-farm sectors located in rural areas

and towns. Section 3 describes the econometric strategy followed by a description of data used in empirical

analysis in section 4.   Section 5 organized in diﬀerent sub-sections presents the main empirical results.

Section 6 concludes the paper.


   2. The Model

   We develop a simple general equilibrium model of a small-town economy (STE, for short) composed of

both rural and urban households. The model is intended to capture the local economy at the upazila level as

our empirical analysis is based on an upazila level panel data set. The representative rural household lives

in a village, is endowed with A amount of agricultural land, and is engaged in the production of food (f ) and

a composite village good (S ) (low quality manufacturing or services produced by small family enterprises).


                                                      4
The representative urban household lives in the small town located in the same upazila adjacent to the

village, and is engaged in the production of a composite town good denoted as T − good, using capital

and labor. The town has no agricultural land and can borrow at interest factor r for capital investment.

The T −good represents relatively high quality manufacturing and services produced by large-scale formal

enterprises. To incorporate the fact that the small town is also connected to the large city, we assume

that part of the demand for T -good comes from the metropolitan city. To model this link in the simplest

form, the income in the metropolitan city Y o is determined outside the model and the representative agent

spends a constant share φ of her income on the T −good. Thus the only mechanism through which the

metropolitan demand for T −good can be aﬀected by agricultural productivity growth is changes in the

price of T −good. There are L
                            ¯ households in the small-town economy, each household supplying 1 unit

                                                                                             ¯ . Labor is
of labor inelastically, implying that the total labor endowment in the small-town economy is L

assumed to be freely mobile between the village and the town at zero migration costs.4 In this model, a

more rural upazila can be understood as a small-town economy with a large endowment of agricultural

land, given the labor endowment.

    We assume food to be internationally traded and take it as the numeraire commodity, setting Pf = 1.

The utility functions for households in the village and small town are:



                                    U v = U v (Cf , Cs , CT );   U T = U T (Cf , CT )


    where superscript v refers to village households and T to town households, and Cf is consumption of

food, Cs is consumption of the composite village good produced and consumed within the village, CT is

the consumption of the town good. An important feature of this formulation is that it allows the village

households to consume high quality goods and skilled services produced by formal ﬁrms in the town, but

the low quality village good S is not consumed in the town. To provide an example, a health service
   4 The zero migration costs assumption is not necessary for the results that follow. However, this is a good approximation

in our context, because we are considering short-distance migration to the small town within a given upazilla.




                                                             5
available within the village (Cs ) could be a traditional healer whereas skilled service in the town could be

a doctor trained in formal medical college. To model the Engel curve eﬀect in a simple way, we assume

that there is a subsistence requirement for food in the village and the utility function is of Stone-Geary

form in food:


                            ( v     )                             ∑
                 U v = υf ln Cf − γf + υs ln (Cs
                                               v             v
                                                 ) + υT ln (CT ),   υi = 1, and i = f, s, T              (1)


   where γf > 0 is the subsistence or minimum level of consumption of food. For simplicity, utility

function in town is assumed to take the log linear form (log linearized Cobb-Douglas) with τk as the share
                                          ∑
of good/service i in town consumption (    k τk   = 1; k = f, T ):


                                                  ( T)        ( T)
                                       U T = τf ln Cf  + τT ln CT                                        (2)



We assume that υf < M in (υs , υT ) and τf < τT . This captures the idea that as income increases, consumers

spend a larger share of the additional income on non-food items. We remain agnostic about the relative

magnitudes of υs and υT , because they might diﬀer across areas depending on the level of household

income. For example, in a more urbanized (and high income) upazila, we would expect that the share of

non-subsistence budget devoted to the better quality T −good is the largest. The budget constraint for the

households can be stated as:



                               Y v = Cf + Ps Cs + PT CT ; Y T = Cf + PT CT


   where Ps and PT are prices of village and town goods respectively, and Pf = 1 parametrically given

from outside the local economy. Y v and Y T are total household incomes in village and town respectively.

Given the assumptions about preference in equations (1) and (2) above, the demand functions in each




                                                       6
location can be expressed as:

                                                                        
                       
                                                                        
                                                                         
                       
                                                                        
                                                                         
                                 Yv            if Y v   ≤ γf                     0          , if Y v ≤ γf
  Village:      Cf =                                            ; Ci =
                       
                                                                        
                                                                          υi [ Y v − γ f ]
                       
                                                                        
                                                                         
                        γf + υf [Y v − γf ] if Y v > γf                                     , if Y v > γf
                                                                                  Pi
                       τk Y T
    Town:       Ck =          , with k = f, T
                        Pk


   Assuming that Y v > γf , the income elasticity of demand for diﬀerent goods in the village can be

expressed as:



                                       υf Y v                       Yv
                       Ef Y =                        < 1; E iY =          > 1, ∀i = s, T
                                υf Y v + (1 − υf )γf             Y v − γf

   For the rural households, demand for food is income inelastic, and demand for village and town goods

are income elastic. The larger is the subsistence requirement (γf ), the higher is the income elasticity of

village good S and town good T in the demand function of the village households.


   2.1 Employment and Income Determination in the Village

   Households in the village produce food using land and labor under CRS technology. The optimization

in food production is as follows:


                                                    (         )
                                                           −α
                                       M axLf Πf = θ Aα L1
                                                         f      − wLf


   where θ ≥ 1 represents total factor productivity in food production, A is the endowment of land, lf is

the labor allocated to food production and w is the wage rate. A larger land endowment as represented

by a higher value of A can be interpreted as a more rural (agricultural) local economy, given the labor

          ¯ . A higher agricultural productivity is captured by an increase in θ. We assume that the
endowment L

locally consumed village good (S ) is produced under a CRS technology using only labor:




                                                         7
                                            M axLs Πs = Ps (ϕLs ) − wLs


   where ϕ is the technology in the production of village good (and service). This speciﬁcation of the

production function for the S good is appealing both in terms of simplicity and realism in the context of

a developing country such as Bangladesh where small-scale family enterprises in villages use little capital

or land.5 Given a wage rate w, the demand for labor in agriculture and village good can be derived as:


                                                  [        ]α
                                                            1
                                               (1 − α)                   υs v
                                     L∗
                                            1
                                      f   =θ A
                                            α                   , Ls =     [Y − γf ]                                  (3)
                                                  w                      w

                                                                                                           w
The equilibrium price of the village non-farm good is pinned down by the wage rate: Ps =                     . Denoting
                                                                                                           ϕ
the return to land by µ, the total income from agriculture (Yf = Qf = wLf + µA) can be solved using the
                                                       wLf
marginal conditions for optimization as Yf =          (1−α) .   The total household income in the village (denoted

as Y v ) thus becomes:



                                                   wLf                       υs γ f
                            Y v == Yf + Ys =              + wLs = ∆1 wLf −                                            (4)
                                                  (1 − α)                  (1 − υs )

                        1
   where ∆1 =      (1−α)(1−υs ) .   Thus village income net of subsistence requirement and the labor allocated

to the village non-farm production can be written as below:




                                        Y v − γf = ∆1 [wLf − (1 − α)γf ]                                              (5)

                                                  ∆1 υs
                                           L∗
                                            s =         [wLf − (1 − α)γf ]                                            (6)
                                                   w




   5 The main implications of the model will hold if we use more general CRS production function using other factors (e.g.

capital) as well.


                                                            8
     2.2 Employment and Income Determination in the Town

                                                                  v                  T
     The demand for town good comes from three sources: village (CT ), town itself (CT ) and outside areas

                                              O 6
(e.g. metropolitan city or other countries) (CT ). The demand generated by the metropolitan city is

 o             φY o
CT =                   where d is the distance (transport cost) to the metropolitan city from the small town,
            PT (1 + d)
and Y 0 is the exogenously given income in the metropolitan city. When all of the demand for town good

comes from outside the local economy so that there is no demand linkage with the village (υT = 0), the

only linkage between the town and the village within an upazila is due to the labor market linkage. On the

                                       o
other hand, if (φ = 0) implying that (CT = 0), then the demand linkage between the town and the village

will be at the maximum.

     The town good CT is produced under CRS technology using labor and capital:


                                                                  −β
                                                      QT = K β L1
                                                                T




     We assume that the urban segment of the economy is populated by a single representative agent who

invests K > 0 amounts of capital in the production of town good at an interest factor r which is determined

outside the model. The optimization of the representative agent in the town is as follows:



                                                               −β
                                       M axK,LT ΠT = PT K β L1
                                                             T    − wLT − rK


                                                                                                         ∗
     It is easy to check that the equilibrium price of the town good is a function of w and r , PT         =
(         ) 1−β ( ) β
     w           r
                      . Since the town borrows the capital from outside, its income equals the labor income,
    1−β          β
i.e., Y T = wLT = (1 − β ) PT QT (w, r) where QT (w, r) is the optimal output chosen in the town facing the

wage rate and interest factor.7 The demand for labor in town can be described as:
    6 For
        simplicity, CTO is assumed to be nominal expenditure on the town good by consumers residing outside the village and

town economies described here.
   7 The outside here means that it is outside of the relevant metropolitan city. This keeps the model simple without losing

any relevant insight. An alternative formulation is where the capital invested in small towns comes from the metropolitan city,
and metropolitan city income in that case responds to agricultural productivity growth when the town income is inﬂuenced.




                                                              9
                                         ∆3                    ∆3 φY o
                                L∗
                                 T   =      [υT (Y v − γf ) +           ]
                                         w                    w (1 + d)
                                         ∆3 ∆1 υT (wLf − (1 − α)γf )       ∆3 φY o
                                     =                                 +                                 (7)
                                                      w                   w (1 + d)


                    1
   where ∆3 =    (1−τT ) .



   2.3 Labor Market Equilibrium

   We assume that labor is perfectly mobile and migration cost is equal to zero, so that equilibrium wage

(w) are the same regardless of location. The labor market equilibrium condition can be written as:


                                                [             ]
                                                    υs + υT ∆3 { ∗             }   ∆3 φY o
               L = L∗    ∗    ∗    ∗
                    f + Ls + LT = Lf + ∆1                       wLf − (1 − α)γf +                        (8)
                                                        w                         w (1 + d)


   2.4 The Eﬀects on Equilibrium Wage and Village Income

   We ﬁrst analyze the eﬀects of higher agricultural productivity as captured by a higher θ. Proposition

(1) below summarizes the results on equilibrium wage w∗ and village income Y v .

   PROPOSITION 1

   (1.1) In the small-town economy described above, a higher agricultural productivity (i.e., a higher θ)

                        ∂w
increases wage, i.e.,   ∂θ   > 0.

   (1.2) A higher agricultural productivity increases (reduces) the village income when elasticity of wage w
                                                             −1
with respect to θ (i.e., Ewθ ) is less (more) than (1 − α)        .

   (1.3) The magnitude of the eﬀects of an increase in agricultural productivity on wage depends on land

endowment. A set of suﬃcient conditions for the eﬀects of productivity on wage to rise with a larger land

endowment are: (a) that the elasticity of wage with respect to θ is low enough at the initial equilibrium to
             {            }
                       −1
satisfy Ewθ < α (1 − α)     , and (b) that the initial land/labor ratio is higher than a threshold.


   Proof: Omitted. Please see the (online) appendix.


                                                        10
   Discussion

   Parts (1.1) and (1.2) show that although we would expect the wage rate to respond positively to a an

increase in agricultural productivity, there is no guarantee that it will result in higher village income. To

understand the uncertainty regarding the eﬀects on village income, ﬁrst note that the aggregate village
      (               )
income Y v = Y f + Y S can increase with a higher agricultural productivity only when agricultural income
                                                                   wL∗
increases as a result, because Y v = ∆1 wL∗
                                                  υ γ                f
                                          f − (1−υs ) , and Y =
                                                s f          f
                                                                       . The ambiguity in the income eﬀect
                                                                   1−α
is the result of the tension that arises from the fact that a higher wage if strong enough may reduce the

L∗
 f so much that agricultural income falls after a positive productivity shock raising the crop yield. When

                                                                            −1
the elasticity of wage with respect to productivity Ewθ is equal to (1 − α)      , the positive eﬀect of a higher

wage is precisely oﬀset by the reduction in labor employed in the food production to keep Y f unchanged.
                            −1
Thus when Ewθ < (1 − α)          , the labor demand does not fall enough to wipe out the positive wage eﬀect,

leading to a higher agricultural income, and hence to a higher total village income. The focus on the

elasticity of wage with respect to productivity change is partly motivated by the fact that in the empirical

analysis, we provide an estimate of the elasticity of wage rate with respect to agricultural productivity (rice

yield), and the theoretical results provide us a way to check if we can expect a positive demand eﬀect from

the observed wage response in the absence of reliable income data in the village. The result regarding the

heterogeneous eﬀects on wage rate (part (1.3) of proposition 1) guides our empirical work in that we split

the sample into two sub-samples where the upazilas with low or no urbanization are put into a group to

represent the purely village sample (large A), and a second sample consists of the upazila’s with relatively

substantial urbanization.


   2.5 The Eﬀects on Intersectoral Labor Allocation

   We can utilize the labor demand functions along with the labor market equilibrium condition to

investigate the impact of agricultural productivity shock on labor allocation among diﬀerent subsectors.

Proposition (2) below collects the results on the response of labor allocation to three diﬀerent economic

activities in the small-town economy.


                                                        11
   PROPOSITION 2:

   (2.1) It is not possible to have structural change in employment that reallocates labor from agriculture

to the S -goods sector in a village when there is no subsistence requirement for food (i.e., γf = 0), and

hence the demand for food is not inelastic. However, if γf = 0 but φ > 0, a higher agricultural productivity
                                                                                              ∂L∗T
results in reverse structural change by lowering labor allocation to the town good, i.e.,          < 0. With
                                                                                               ∂θ
γf > 0, the strength of the reallocation of labor in response to higher agricultural productivity to non-farm

sectors is a negative function of the magnitude of υf .

   (2.2) An increase in agricultural productivity (i.e., a higher θ) leads to structural change in employment

in the small-town economy described above by reducing the labor allocated to agriculture, when the elasticity

of wage with respect to θ is greater than 1, i.e., Ewθ > 1. A necessary condition for Ewθ > 1 is that the

food production technology is such that the elasticity of agricultural output with respect to land is greater

than 0.50, i.e., α > 0.50.

   (2.3) Assume that Ewθ > 1. Then a higher agricultural productivity increases the employment in the
                                                                                            (       )
S −goods sector in the village, if Ewθ is less than a threshold Ewθ
                                                                 S
                                                                    > 1. Assuming that Ewθ ∈ 1, Ewθ
                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                      ,

a higher agricultural productivity increases employment in the S -good sector more when the value of υs is

larger.

   (2.4) Assume that E wθ > 1,and the subsistence requirement is higher than a positive threshold γf >
                                                                                          (       )
                                                    T
γf > 0. Then there exists a cutoﬀ elasticity value Ewθ               T
                                                       such that1 < Ewθ    S
                                                                        < Ewθ . When Ewθ ∈ 1, Ewθ
                                                                                               T
                                                                                                    ,

an increase in agricultural productivity increases labor allocated to town good production.


   Proof: Omitted. Please see the appendix.


   Discussion

   To see that it is not possible to have structural change in employment that reduces employment in

agriculture when γf = 0, consider the labor demand functions in equations (3) and (4). With γf = 0, we
       L∗
        f
have      = ∆1 υs which is not aﬀected by agricultural productivity shock θ directly or indirectly through
       L∗
        S



                                                     12
equilibrium wage w∗ . So without γf > 0, it is not possible for agricultural productivity shock to aﬀect

labor allocation between food and S -good production in an upazila. However, allocation of labor between

agriculture (food) and the town good can still be aﬀected. Using equation (7), setting γf = 0, we can

rewrite the labor allocation between food and T -goods sectors as:


                                         L∗
                                          T               ∆3 φY o
                                          ∗ = ∆ 3 ∆ 1 υT + ∗ ∗                                           (9)
                                         Lf               w Lf


From equation (9), it is clear that labor allocation between food and the town good is aﬀected by θ even

when γf = 0. An intuitive explanation of this eﬀect is that a higher wage caused by a positive productivity

shock increases the price of the town good and given Y o reduces the demand for the town good in the

metropolitan area. This leads to labor reallocation from the town good to food production, resulting in

reverse structural change. We have


                                   ∗
                                                  (         )−β ( )β
                                ∂PT                    w         r   ∂w∗
                                     = (1 − β )                          >0
                                 ∂θ                   1−β        β    ∂θ


It is obvious that when both γf = φ = 0, then the allocation of labor across the three sectors (f, S, T ) is

not altered by a productivity shock in agriculture.

   An important point that comes across from propositions (2.3) and (2.4) is that when part of the demand

for the T -good comes from the metropolitan city, the eﬀects of agricultural productivity on employment

growth in this sector will be limited at best. In contrast, for the goods which are produced exclusively for

local consumption (S -goods), it is more likely that the demand eﬀect generated by productivity growth

helps unleash signiﬁcant employment growth.

   The theoretical analysis brings into focus the role played by the values of Ewθ , α, γf , and φ. In the

empirical analysis, we estimate Ewθ , and available evidence provides us a plausible value for α. It is

important to appreciate that land (A) in our model denotes all non-labor inputs including land, and thus




                                                       13
the value of α is likely to be signiﬁcantly larger than 0.50, a plausible value is 0.70.8 If α = 0.70, then
          −1                           −1
(1 − α)        = 3.333 and α (1 − α)        = 2.333.


    3. Empirical Strategy

    To estimate the eﬀects of agricultural productivity growth on non-farm employment, we use a panel

data model:



                                            Oijt = ρj + ρt + πθjt + ΠZjt + εijt                                             (10)


    where i indexes the outcome variables (e.g. employment, wage etc), and j upazila. Oijt is the outcome

variable i in period t for upazila j . ρj and ρt denote upazila and year ﬁxed eﬀects respectively. θjt is the

measure of agricultural productivity, Zjt is a vector of upazila characteristics and εijt is the error term.

Estimation of the impact of agricultural productivity on non-farm employment however presents challenges.

Unobserved upazila characteristics (e.g., proximity to a river) may attract ﬁrms into an upazila (due to ease

of transport) and also aﬀect agricultural productivity (due to availability of water for irrigation) positively.

In cross-section OLS regressions, one might thus attribute this correlation to agricultural productivity

growth. We use upazila ﬁxed eﬀects ρj remove any time invariant but unobserved regional eﬀects, including

geographic and persistent agro-climatic factors such as soil quality. The year ﬁxed eﬀects (ρt ) control for

any macro economic and international shocks (including commodity price shocks) that may have aﬀected

both agricultural productivity and our outcomes of interest.9

    For the estimation of equation (10), the upazila level unmeasured ﬁxed factors are removed by de-

meaning all variables in the regression. Such de-meaning however may lead to attenuation bias as it

magniﬁes any measurement error in the agricultural productivity variable (rice yield). To remedy this

potential source of bias, we implement an instrumental variable approach. Following a large literature

(Foster and Rosenzweig (2004), Adhvaryu, Chari and Sharma (2013)), agricultural productivity is measured
   8 In green revolution areas, A includes seed, fertilizer etc. in addition to land. The share-cropper usually gets one third of

the output when the landlord bears the costs for seed and fertilizer, thus putting α = 0.6666.
   9 The year ﬁxed eﬀects will control for any general equilibrium eﬀect common to all households (e.g. prices) also.




                                                               14
by rice yield as rice is the predominant subsistence and cash crop in Bangladesh. We use rainfall shock as

an instrument for rice yield. Rainfall is found to aﬀect agricultural yields in both developed and developing

countries and hence it is used widely as an instrument for agricultural yields (Foster and Rosenzweig (2004),

Adhvaryu, Chari and Sharma (2013), Bruckner(2012)). To be precise, we use deviation of current rainfall

from its long term average as an instrument. The long term average rainfall is deﬁned as the average

rainfall over a 30 year period from 1960 to 1990.

    In the empirical analysis, we follow a two step procedure: ﬁrst, we run a reduced form regression of an

outcome variable (for example, formal non-farm employment in T -good production) on the instrument, and

second, a reduced form regression of the productivity measure (yield per acre) on rainfall deviation. This

two-step procedure based on reduced form regressions has some important advantages in our application.

First, given the focus of our analysis is on the eﬀects of productivity increase in agriculture, one can

plausibly interpret the variations in rainfall as variations in the parameter θ in the model. Second, with

crop yield as the measure of agricultural productivity, and rainfall as an instrument, the reduced form

estimates of rainfall on outcome (employment) provide evidence on the existence of a causal eﬀect of

higher crop yield on the relevant outcome which is not subject to weak instrument bias (Chernozhukov

and Hansen(2008)).10 Third, by imposing an exclusion restriction on the rainfall shock, we can derive

instrumental variables estimates of the causal eﬀect as the ratio of the two reduced form estimates.11

    We estimate the following reduced form regressions:



                                       Oijt   = ρj + ρt + π1 Rjt + Π1 Zjt + εijt                                          (11)

                                        Vjt   = ηj + ηt + π2 Rjt + Π2 Zjt + υjt                                           (12)



    where Rjt is the deviation of annual rainfall from its long term average in upazila j and Vjt is the
  10 We emphasize that the main results of this paper do not depend on the exclusion restriction on rainfall; what we need is

that rainfall aﬀects productivity signiﬁcantly.
  11 Moreover, the reduced form estimates of the eﬀects of rainfall on the outcome variables such as non-farm employment

are of interest on their own; for example, they provide us evidence on the potential beneﬁts of increased irrigation investment
on the rural non-farm economy.




                                                              15
measure of productivity. The deviation is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between log of current rainfall from log

of its long term average. Thus our empirical model with upazila and year ﬁxed eﬀects provides estimates

of the impact of rainfall shock on the growth of the outcome variables. A positive coeﬃcient of rainfall

(π2 > 0) for instance in the yield regression means that an increase in rainfall over its long term average

level (a positive rain shock) increases rice yield.

   To ensure that rainfall primarily captures variation in agricultural productivity, we include an appro-

priate set of controls in Zjt . A potential concern in our context is that rainfall may be correlated with

growth in non-farm employment for factors unrelated to agricultural productivity, and hence may not be

reﬂecting the impact of agricultural productivity. For example, upazilas located near large urban centers

are likely to attract large ﬁrms producing manufacturing and services (Fafchamps and Shilpi (2003) and

(2005), Emran and Shilpi (2012), Deichmann et al (2008)). When these areas happen to have higher rain-

fall as well, then we may observe a positive correlation between rainfall and share of non-farm employment

in an upazila which has little to do with agricultural productivity. To address this concern, we take two

steps. First, all upazilas located in the two metropolitan areas (Dhaka and Chittagong) are excluded from

the sample, Second, we provide strong evidence that in our data rice yield is positively aﬀected by rainfall.

In addition, we include travel time from the upazila center to the nearest of the two main metropolitan

cities (Dhaka and Chittagong) as a control in the regressions. Travel distance to the nearest metropoli-

tan city also serves a second purpose; it controls for heterogeneity in the price of T - good, faced by a

metropolitan consumer (denoted as PT (1 + d) in the model). A second concern is that some non-farm

activities may be susceptible to rainfall directly. For instance, construction employment may rise with

higher rainfall if rainfall leads to ﬂooding and destruction of housing and infrastructure. Flooding and

destruction may also lead to a negative correlation between rainfall and non-farm employment growth if it

disrupts production activities of ﬁrms. We include a dummy for ﬂoodplain in the regressions to control for

such possible adverse eﬀects. An important advantage of our empirical approach is that we can use upazila

ﬁxed eﬀects to purge oﬀ the additive eﬀects of all time-invariant confounding variables. Since both travel



                                                      16
time and the ﬂoodplain dummy are time-invariant, their additive eﬀects are taken care of by upazila ﬁxed

eﬀects. We take a conservative approach, and allow for time varying eﬀects of these variables, and include

interactions of these variables with the time trend in the empirical model. As additional control for time

varying heterogeneity across upazilas, we include proportion of household with electricity as a control vari-

able. To capture changes in labor endowment, we control for upazila population, total active labor force,

and proportion of active labor force with secondary or above education (human capital). This makes the

empirical model consistent with the theoretical assumption of a ﬁxed labor endowment (i.e., insigniﬁcant

labor supply response to productivity shock in agriculture), and enables us to focus on structural change in

employment through labor reallocation.12 To account for any agglomeration externalities that may aﬀect

ﬁrm location, we control for upazila population in 1991 interacted with time trend (initial condition) and

the share of urban households in total households in the upazila as an indicator of agglomeration economy.

13
     A ﬁnal issue for the empirical speciﬁcation is that rainfall is expected to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on rice

yield only if a upazila has signiﬁcant agricultural production (i.e., A is not too small in our model). Since

we exclude upazilas located in two main metropolitan areas from our sample, this is not an issue with our

samples. An important insight from the theoretical analysis is that the eﬀects of rainfall on wage is likely

to be stronger when the share of agriculture is higher in the upazila economy. Accordingly we carry out

empirical analysis for two diﬀerent samples: a “rural sample” and a “small town sample” which are deﬁned

in the data section.


     4. Data

     To test the hypotheses regarding the eﬀects of agricultural productivity growth on wage and the struc-

ture of employment, we combine three diﬀerent data sources to construct an upazila (subdistrict) level

panel data set covering the period 2000 to 2009/2010.

     A primary source of employment data in Bangladesh is the population censuses (1990, 2000 and 2010).
  12 In an economy with a growing labor force, a second source of structural change is allocation of new labor to the nonfarm

activities, which is not the focus of this paper.
  13 Our empirical results are robust is we instead use ﬁner controls of agglomeration economies such as area share in total

industry employment in 1991.



                                                             17
The census unit records are publicly available for 10 percent of the population in 1990 and 2000, and for

5 percent in 2010.14 The unit record data contain employment records of all household members.15 We

deﬁne total employment level in each activity from these unit records using appropriate weights. The total

employment deﬁned from census data includes employment in both large and small ﬁrms, with the large

ﬁrms in manufacturing and services producing the T -good and the small ﬁrms producing the S −good in

our model. The population census contains a aggregated industrial classiﬁcation of employment (top level).

Speciﬁcally, the 2010 census distinguishes only between agriculture, manufacturing and services activities,

and large and small ﬁrms cannot be distinguished. We thus use these data to understand the eﬀects of

agricultural productivity on all ﬁrms (farms) without any distinction between large and small ﬁrms.

    Data on employment in large-scale formal non-farm activities (corresponding to T -good in the model)

are drawn from three rounds of economic censuses (2000, 2006 and 2009). The economic census provides

a detailed list of all ﬁrms engaged in industrial and services activities (at 4-digit level) with number of

employees more than 10. These relatively larger ﬁrms are mostly registered, and tend to produce better

quality manufacturing and services to meet demand in larger markets. The larger is the ﬁrm size, the

greater is the possibility that it produces goods and services for a wider geographical area. These data are

useful in two ways. First, we use them to estimate the eﬀects of agricultural productivity on large-scale

manufacturing and services. A comparison of the estimates on all ﬁrms (farms) from the population census

with the estimates for large ﬁrms from the economic census helps us to analyze possible diﬀerential eﬀects

across ﬁrm size. Given that these data are available at the 4-digit level, we rely on them to perform

disaggregated analysis of employment (for example, in construction, education, health etc).

    The productivity growth in agriculture is measured by growth in crop yields. Rice (paddy) is the

predominant crop in Bangladesh, of which three diﬀerent types (Boro, Aman and Aus) are grown.16 The

oﬃcial source of agricultural statistics provides yield data at the district level, but the data are at aggregate
  14 The sample sizes are 10.6, 12.4 and 7.2 million individuals in 1990, 2000 and 2010 censuses respectively.
  15 Total numbers of employment records in census data are 3.1, 3.5 and 2.1 million for 1990, 2000 and 2010 censuses
respectively.
  16 High yielding variety of Boro rice now accounts for more than half of rice production (56%). Aman is the next important

crop accounting for 44% of rice production. Yields of both of these varieties are much higher than Aus.



                                                            18
level with limited coverage.17 Another source of yield data is the community part of the Household Income

and Expenditure Surveys (HIES) (2000, 2005, 2010). We deﬁne rice yield per acre as the average of yields

of boro, aman and aus rice reported in the village/community part of HIES. The upazila (subdistrict) level

rice yield is the average over villages surveyed within an upazila. Since the number of villages within an

upazila is not large, these upazila level estimates of rice yield may involve signiﬁcant measurement error.

However, it is reassuring that the yield growth from the HIES data shows estimates comparable to that

from the oﬃcial estimates during the decade of 2000.

    The rainfall data are taken from Bandyopadhyay and Skouﬁas (2012). The original data on rainfall

come from the Climate Research Unit (CRU) of the University of East Anglia. The CRU reports estimated

monthly rainfall for most of the world at the half degree resolution from 1902 to 2009. The CRU method

combines weather station data with other information to arrive at the estimates.18 To estimate the sub-

district (upazila/thana) level rainfall from the CRU data, Bandyopadhyay and Skouﬁas (2012) uses area

weighted averages.19 Travel times to metropolitan cities were computed using GIS software and road

network from the mid-1990s. Data on agro-ecological zones are drawn from the Bangladesh Water Board

database.

    Over the years, a number of larger upazilas were split to form new upazilas, thus increasing the total

number of upazilas from 486 in 1990 to 507 in 2000 to 543 in 2010. We use upazila maps to identify the

borders of upazilas over time and matched all upazilas in 2000 and 2010 to 1990 upazilas. The upazila

level panel is deﬁned using 1990 upazila boundaries. To deﬁne the estimation sample, we take out the

upazilas that are located in the two main metropolitan cities (Dhaka and Chittagong), leaving us with a

sample of 464 upazilas. We divide the upazilas into two sub-samples on the basis of share of urban in total
  17 These  data are reported at old (and much larger) district level – there are about 20 old districts. With newly created
districts, there are now 64 districts in Bangladesh. These data are drawn from Statistical Yearbooks.
  18 Previous versions of the CRU data were homogenized to reduce variability and provide more accurate estimation of mean

rain at the cost of variability estimation. The version 3.1 data are not homogenized and thus allows for better variability
estimates. The estimates of rainfall near international boundaries are not less reliable as compared with those in the interior
of the country, as the CRU estimation utilizes data from all the weather stations in the region.
  19 For example if an upazila/thana covers two half degree grid cells for which CRU has rainfall estimates, then upzila/thana

rainfall is estimated as the average rainfall of the two grid-cells, where the weights are the proportion of the area of the
upazila/thana in each grid-cell. For details, please see Bandyopadhyay and Skouﬁas(2012).




                                                              19
upazila population in 1991. The median share of urban population in upazila population was 11 percent in

1991. Our “rural sample” consists of 232 upazilas which had less than 11 percent of population classiﬁed

as urban. The STE sample comprises of the other 232 upazilas with urban share higher than 11 percent.

    Table 1 provides the summary statistics for all upazilas in our sample over the years. The popula-

tion censuses indicate strong employment growth in the overall non-farm sector.20 Total employment in

non-farm activities grew at an annual rate of 8.6 percent between 2000 and 2010. Total manufacturing

employment posted an annual growth of 18.5 percent during this period. Services employment grew by 6.8

percent. Between 2000 and 2009, employment in ﬁrms with more than 10 employees grew at an annual

rate of 5.7 percent, according to the economic censuses. Among the large ﬁrms, growth in manufacturing

employment has been quite robust at 5.1 percent compared with a 2 percent growth in services employment.

A comparison of employment composition shows that employment in small ﬁrms (10 or fewer employees)

accounts for more than three-quarters of total employment in non-farm sector. Interestingly, the share

of employment in larger ﬁrms in total non-farm employment declined from 0.22 in 2000 to 0.17 in 2010.

While about 25 percent of all employment is in manufacturing in 2010, the share of manufacturing in total

employment of large ﬁrms is much higher (43 percent in 2009). This is expected as few services enterprises

are large in size. Larger services enterprises appear to be more concentrated in the provision of health

(hospitals, clinics etc) and education (schools) (Table 1). A comparison of summary statistics between our

rural and STE samples conﬁrms that most larger ﬁrms are located in small towns. These ﬁrms tend to

serve larger markets compared with the ﬁrms in rural sample which are smaller and serve mainly local

markets.

    The summary statistics in Table 1 indicate substantial growth in rice yield between 2000 and 2010.

Average rice yield per acre has grown by an annual rate of 3.8 percent. This growth rate is consistent

with about 3.7 percent growth in agricultural GDP during the same time.21 There has been substantial
  20 According to the census data, the share of non-farm employment in total employment increased from 0.475 in 2000 to

0.53 percent in 2010. The total labor force during this period increased by an annual rate of 2.05 percent from 35 million to
42.5 million.
  21 Crop agriculture accounts for 56 percent of agricultural GDP and rice is the single most important crop in Bangladesh

not only as a subsistence but also as a cash crop.



                                                             20
expansion of irrigation during the decade as well -from 61 percent in 2000 to 69 percent in 2010. The

standard deviation estimate (Table 1) shows that there are considerable variations in rice yields across

upazilas. Among other variables, access to electricity by households improved considerably during the

decade (6.5 percent annual growth rate).


   5. Empirical Results

   In this section, the main empirical results are presented sequentially. All outcome variables as well as

rainfall are expressed in logarithms. All regressions include upazila and year ﬁxed eﬀects. All standard

errors are corrected for correlation in the error term within the upazila.


   5.1 Rainfall, Agricultural Productivity, and Agricultural Wage

   We begin by presenting evidence on the impact of rainfall shock on agricultural productivity. Table 2

reports the results from OLS regressions where log of rice yield is regressed on deviation of rainfall after

controlling for upazila and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Column (1) shows the estimate when no other explanatory

variable is included in the regression. The speciﬁcation in column (2) includes the full set of upazila level

controls as discussed in the empirical strategy section (Section 3). The ﬁrst panel reports results for the STE

sample and the second for the rural sample. The evidence from both speciﬁcations shows statistically and

numerically signiﬁcant impact of rainfall shock on rice yield in the rural and STE samples. The estimated

coeﬃcients imply an increase in the yield growth due to a positive shock in rainfall over its mean, with

the impact marginally larger in the rural sample compared with the STEs. This result is consistent with

the ﬁndings from a rich body of evidence accumulated by the agronomists and crop scientists that shows

that rainfall is a major determinant of rice yield growth in Bangladesh over the last few decades (see, for

example, Sarkar et. al. (2012)).

   While a positive rainfall shock increases rice yield, does it increase the wage rate? We utilize HIES

data on agricultural wage to examine the eﬀects of rainfall shocks. Note that the sample size for the

wage regression shown in column (3) of Table 2 is somewhat smaller due to the fact that HIES – though



                                                      21
nationally representative – does not cover all of the upazilas in our upazila level panel data sample used

for columns (1) and (2). The results in column (3) show a statistically signiﬁcant and positive impact of

rainfall on agricultural wage in both samples. Interestingly, the wage response is larger in magnitude in

the rural sample, consistent with the theoretical prediction that the wage response to productivity shocks,

under plausible conditions, is a positive function of the endowment of agricultural land (i.e., a higher

A) (proposition 1). This evidence is reassuring as it conﬁrms that the central channel through which

agricultural productivity works in the theoretical model is in fact operative in the data.

    The eﬀects of rainfall on agricultural income cannot be estimated directly, as reliable data on income

are unavailable. We can, however, estimate the elasticity of wage with respect to productivity (rice yield)

and exploit the theoretical insights to understand if the data supports a positive income eﬀect (a higher

Y v in the model). Using the reduced form estimates from Table 2 (columns (1) and (4)), the implied wage

elasticities with respect to productivity are: Ewθ = 1.47 in small town sample, and Ewθ = 1.82 in the

rural sample. Although we do not have a precise estimate of α , the available evidence in the context of

Bangladesh suggests that it is likely to belong to the interval α ∈ [0.60, 0.70] (Hossain and Bayes (2009)).
               −1                                                                                                  −1
Thus (1 − α)        ∈ [2.5, 3.33], satisfying the condition speciﬁed in proposition 1 [Ewθ < (1 − α)                    ]. Even if

we assume a conservative estimate of 2.33, the estimates for Ewθ in both the rural and STE samples imply

that a positive productivity shock to rice yield would increase rural income, providing a basis for structural

change in employment driven by the Engel curve eﬀect.

    While a positive rainfall shock increases rice yield, for appropriate interpretation of the results, it is

useful to understand whether this reﬂects only the impact of transitory weather shocks on farming. Though

the rainfall variations across upazilas and over time are expected to aﬀect the rice yield directly, they are

likely to aﬀect long-term productivity diﬀerences by inﬂuencing investment in irrigation. In a cross-section

regression, irrigation investment is negatively correlated with rainfall, as they are substitutes.22 But over

time, in the same upazila, irrigation expansion is positively correlated with rainfall, as irrigation investment
  22 It is, however, important to appreciate that rainfall aﬀects productivity even with irrigation. This is because of the simple

fact that the marginal cost of irrigation water is positive, but it is zero for rainfall.




                                                               22
starts in the drought prone areas and expands to the areas with more rainfall over time. Since we use

a panel data model with upazila ﬁxed eﬀect, the rainfall shocks in our case would thus pick up irrigation

expansion over time. The ﬁnal column reports the estimated eﬀect of rainfall variations on the area irrigated

in a speciﬁcation with upazila ﬁxed eﬀects and other controls used in our main regressions. Though the

coeﬃcient estimates lack statistical precision, they are positive in both samples. The estimated coeﬃcient

is large in magnitude in the rural sample. A positive coeﬃcient on the rainfall variable in this regression

provides suggestive evidence that the irrigation expansion over our sample period has happened increasingly

in areas with relatively higher rainfall. We interpret this as evidence that though rainfall variable in our

panel regressions captures mostly transitory shock in agriculture, it may also be capturing to some extent

the diﬀusion of modern technology in farming over time. Note also that modern farming technology such as

irrigation may reduce risk by decreasing variability of yield even without increasing yields. The expansion

of irrigation in Bangladesh allowed adoption of boro rice whose yields are signiﬁcantly higher than other

rice types (aman and aus).

   Another issue in the IV interpretation of rainfall is that it may capture not only agricultural productivity

shocks but also the resulting price changes. In a completely segmented rice market at the upazila level, a

rainfall shock would aﬀect the equilibrium rice price through the income eﬀect. However the rice market is

the most developed and spatially integrated market in Bangladesh (see, for example, Hossain and Verbeke

(2010)). A noted before, we control for the distance from an upazila to the metropolitan city markets,

which captures spatial price dispersion due to transport costs. The theoretical model assumes that the rice

price is pinned down by the international market, and the available evidence on rice markets in Bangladesh

clearly supports this assumption.


   5.2 Rainfall, Agricultural Productivity and Structural Change in Employment

   With the evidence that a positive rainfall shock increases agricultural productivity and wage leading

to positive income eﬀect, we now turn to an analysis of the eﬀects of rainfall shocks on intersectoral

employment. The dependent variables in the employment regressions are all expressed in logarithms. All


                                                     23
regressions include the full set of regressors and upazila and year ﬁxed eﬀects.

   The ﬁrst three columns of Table 3 report the ﬁxed eﬀects regression results for employment by all ﬁrms

(using population census data) and the last three for employment by the large ﬁrms (using data from

economic censuses). In order to facilitate comparison between the economic census data on large ﬁrms and

the population census data on all ﬁrms, the employment categories are kept at a fairly aggregate level,

distinguishing only between manufacturing and services.23 The top panel reports the results for the STE

sample and the bottom for the rural sample. The number of periods in the census panel data is two and

economic census is three. This is because 1990 census data are used to deﬁne the initial characteristics of

upazilas, and the economic census has an additional data point for 2006 which is a non-population census

year.


   Evidence on All Firms (Irrespective of Size)

   The evidence in the ﬁrst three columns on all ﬁrms shows an interesting pattern: the estimated eﬀect of

a positive rainfall shock is positive and statistically signiﬁcant on the manufacturing and services sectors,

while the eﬀect is negative on agricultural employment, although it is not statistically signiﬁcant at the

10 percent level. This pattern of estimates is observed in both the rural and the STE samples, with the

magnitude of the eﬀect larger for manufacturing and smaller for services in the case of the rural sample.

The negative eﬀect on agriculture, although imprecisely estimated, suggests labor reallocation away from

                                                                                  ¯ , a higher agricultural
farming. Note that according to the theoretical analysis, given a labor endowment L

productivity results in labor reallocation away from agriculture when Ewθ > 1. Given that the estimates of

Ewθ in the rural and STE samples are 1.82 and 1.47 respectively, the theory predicts a more robust negative

eﬀect on agricultural employment. One possible explanation is that the controls we use for changes on

labor endowment over time are less than perfect, and thus the negative eﬀect on agricultural employment

is diluted by a growing labor force.

   The evidence from the population census data suggests that agricultural productivity growth leads to
 23 Census   data do not provide employment information at disaggregate level for 2010.




                                                            24
structural change in employment in favor of the manufacturing and services sectors, but we do not know if

this structural change also entails employment growth in large (formal) enterprises. To understand whether

agricultural productivity increase leads to labor reallocation in favor of large-scale (formal) ﬁrms, we take

advantage of the economic census data.


   Evidence on Large Manufacturing and Services Firms (Economic Censuses Data)

   The estimates for manufacturing employment in large ﬁrms are reported in column (5) of Table 3, and

they suggest a statistically signiﬁcant positive eﬀect of rainfall in the STE sample, but no eﬀects in the rural

sample. The fact that there is no signiﬁcant eﬀect on manufacturing in the rural sample is especially striking

when compared to the estimate for all ﬁrms in column (1) where the eﬀect is both statistically signiﬁcant

at the 1 percent level and numerically large. Taken together, the estimates in columns (1) and (5) suggest

that agricultural productivity growth in predominantly rural upazilas reallocate labor from agriculture to

small-scale manufacturing ﬁrms producing locally consumed low-quality S −good. Given the fact that the

wage response to agricultural productivity growth is larger in magnitude in the rural sample, the results

on the rural upazilas are consistent with a scenario where the demand for manufacturing S −goods is much

stronger than that for manufacturing T −goods (i.e., υs > υT ), and the weak demand eﬀect is more than

oﬀset by a strong wage response to productivity growth in the case of T −goods sector.

   In contrast, in the small town sample, a higher agricultural productivity results in a very strong growth

in employment in the large-scale manufacturing. A comparison of the estimated eﬀects of rainfall shock on

all manufacturing ﬁrms and the large manufacturing ﬁrms in the STE sample shows that the employment

growth in large ﬁrms is more than four times of that in all ﬁrms (i.e., large and small ﬁrms combined

together). This implies that the employment growth in small ﬁrms in STE sample is weak at best. The

contrasting eﬀects on large-scale manufacturing in the rural and STE samples suggest that when the wage

response is high enough, it may discourage large ﬁrms in locating production in an upazila, consistent

with the ﬁndings of Rosenzweig and Foster (2004) in the context of India. The negative wage eﬀect can

dominate the choices of large manufacturing ﬁrms when the T −good is eﬀectively a tradable good, but the


                                                      25
evidence that in the STE sample employment response in T −good (manufacturing) sector is strong rejects

the assumption of a tradable T − good.

   For services employment in large ﬁrms, the estimated coeﬃcient is positive and statistically signiﬁcant

in both the rural and STE samples, but the magnitude of the eﬀect in the STE sample is almost twice

that in the rural sample. Thus the eﬀects of agricultural productivity growth seem to be especially potent

in those upazilas where the small towns are located. In the rural sample, the estimate for large-scale

(formal) services is in sharp contrast to that for large-scale manufacturing, when a comparison is made

with the corresponding estimates for all ﬁrms in columns (1) and (2) using population census data. The

estimate for employment in large-scale services ﬁrms in the rural sample is much larger in magnitude (1.50)

compared to the estimate for all ﬁrms in the services sector in column (2), while the relative magnitudes

are reversed in the case of manufacturing. The evidence shows that the growth in large-scale ﬁrms in the

services sector is favorably aﬀected by higher agricultural productivity irrespective of whether there is a

small town in the upazila. This probably reﬂects the fact that formal health and education services are

eﬀectively nontradables and also enjoy more income elastic demand. We explore the eﬀects on large-scale

health and education services in greater depth below.

   Our results are partly consistent with ﬁndings from Foster and Rosenzweig (2004) for India. Using

village level data, Foster and Rosenzweig (2004) ﬁnd that agricultural productivity growth has a negative

eﬀect on the number of factory workers and a positive eﬀect on the employment in services. Our evidence

that there is no signiﬁcant eﬀect of agricultural productivity growth on large manufacturing employment

in the rural sample, but the employment in large-scale services increases substantially is consistent with

their ﬁndings. However, using the STE sample, we ﬁnd that agricultural productivity growth can have

a strong positive eﬀect on the large-scale manufacturing when the villages are located in an upazila with

a small town. Thus the conclusions depend critically on the sample used. In a related contribution,

using district and state level data from India, Adhvaryu, Chari and Sharma (2013) on the other hand

ﬁnd factory employment to be aﬀected negatively by a negative productivity (rainfall) shock which is



                                                    26
consistent with our evidence from the STE sample. The results in Table 3 thus highlight the need for

making a distinction between large and small ﬁrms, and the importance of focusing on geographical areas

beyond the villages. Indeed ignoring the small towns, as is done in most of the current literature, would

lead to a gross underestimation of the positive eﬀects of agricultural productivity growth on structural

change in employment.


   5.3 The Eﬀects on Employment in Large Firms: Disaggregated Analysis

   The results discussed above imply that there are important diﬀerences in the way agricultural pro-

ductivity shocks aﬀect diﬀerent types of economic activities located in diﬀerent areas. In this section, we

explore whether these diﬀerences are also observed at a more disaggregated sectoral levels of employment

of larger ﬁrms for which we have data from the economic censuses. Within the manufacturing sector,

we make a distinction between food processing and beverages, and other manufacturing. Among services

activities, we distinguish between trade, education, health and other services. We also examine employ-

ment in transport, construction and utilities as a separate category. The ﬁxed eﬀects regression results are

reported in Table 4. As before, all regressions include the full set of controls along with upazila and time

ﬁxed eﬀects.

   The results in columns 1 and 2 in Table 4 indicate signiﬁcant and positive eﬀects of rainfall shocks on

both food precessing and other types of manufacturing employment in STEs. The eﬀects on all diﬀerent

types of services are positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level in the STE sample. In terms

of magnitudes, the largest coeﬃcient estimate is found for transport, construction and utilities, followed

by education, other manufacturing, other services and health. The smallest impact is observed for the

trading services.24 The estimates from the rural sample in general show a much weaker impact; only in

two out of seven types of activities listed in Table 4, the estimated eﬀect is statistically signiﬁcant at the 10

percent level. The two exceptions are education, and transport and construction; but even in these cases

the magnitudes of the eﬀects are much smaller in the rural sample when compared to the corresponding
 24 The   weak impact on trading may in part be due to the fact that very few trading enterprises are large in size.



                                                              27
estimates for the STE sample.

   An important ﬁnding from the estimates in Tables 3 and 4 is that an increased agricultural productivity

and the resulting higher rural income leads to employment transformation within the services sector in

both the rural and STE samples: households appear to substitute away from traditional services provided

by smaller enterprises, and into services provided by larger and more skilled enterprises, especially in

education. Similar transformative eﬀects are found for large-scale manufacturing located in the STEs. The

eﬀects on manufacturing in the rural areas are very diﬀerent; a positive agricultural productivity shock

results in a robust growth of small-scale manufacturing employment with no impacts on employment of

relatively large-scale enterprises.


   6. Conclusions

   This paper provides a theoretical and empirical analysis of the role of agricultural productivity in non-

farm employment growth, and structural transformation in the labor market, using a broader framework

that goes beyond rural-urban dualism, and focuses on the rural towns and smaller cities which we term

as small-town economy (STE). We develop a simple model that formalizes the demand and labor market

linkages between the STEs and the surrounding villages. A positive productivity shock to agriculture does

not necessarily increase village income; given a labor endowment, the village income increases only when

the response of wage with respect to productivity shocks (i.e, wage elasticity) is lower than a threshold.25

When the elasticity of demand for the town good in the village is low so that most of the town good

is sold outside the local economy, the labor market linkage predominates and a higher rural wage due to

agricultural productivity increase reduces employment in small towns. In contrast, when demand for goods

and services produced in small towns comes mainly from the adjacent rural areas, the demand eﬀect can

more than oﬀset the negative wage eﬀect, and lead to higher labor allocation to the production of town

good. Another key insight from the model is that when a signiﬁcant part of village income is spent on

goods and services in small towns, ignoring them will lead to serious underestimation of the employment
  25 In a more general model with a positive labor supply curve at the household level, a positive shock to agriculture is

expected to increase village income in general.


                                                           28
reallocation eﬀects of agricultural productivity shocks.

   Following a large literature on the importance of rainfall shocks in agricultural productivity variations

in Bangladesh, we exploit rainfall shocks (relative to the 30-year average level) across upazilas and over

time to understand the eﬀects of productivity increase on employment growth and diversiﬁcation. We use

a two-step empirical approach that focuses on the reduced form regressions of rainfall on the measure of

productivity (rice yield per acre) and on the set of outcome variables noted above. The evidence from the

reduced form regressions shows that a positive rainfall shock increases employment in all diﬀerent types of

non-farm activities in the small towns, but increases only services activities and small-scale manufacturing

in rural areas. The largest impacts are found for construction and transport, education, health and other

services, and manufacturing employment in larger scale enterprises located in the small towns, and for

educational services provided by larger enterprises in the rural areas.

   When interpreted as instrumental variables estimates of the eﬀects of productivity increase, the em-

pirical results suggest that agricultural productivity induces structural transformation within the services

sector with employment in skilled services provided by larger ﬁrms growing at a much faster pace compared

with the services provided by smaller ﬁrms/individuals. We ﬁnd much larger positive eﬀects on non-farm

employment growth and transformation in the small towns. In the rural areas, it increases employment

mostly in small-scale manufacturing and skilled educational services. The estimates conﬁrm the transfor-

mative eﬀect of agricultural productivity increase on nonfarm activities in the small towns. These results

suggest that policies promoting agriculture would be beneﬁcial to employment growth and transformation

in the small towns in Bangladesh.



   References

   Adhvaryu, A., A. V. Chari and S. Sharma. 2013, “Firing Costs and Flexibility: Evidence from Firms’

Employment Responses to Shocks in India,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 95, no.3.

   Bandyopadhyay, Sushenjit & Skouﬁas, Emmanuel, 2012. Rainfall variability, occupational choice, and



                                                     29
welfare in rural Bangladesh,Policy Research Working Paper Series 6134, The World Bank.

   Bhowmik, A, K, and Ana Cristina Costa (2012). A Geostatistical Approach to the Seasonal Pre-

cipitation Eﬀect on Boro Rice Production in Bangladesh, International Journal of Geosciences, 2012, 3,

443-462

     uckner, Markus, 2012. Economic growth, size of the agricultural sector, and urbanization in Africa,
   Br¨

Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 71(1), pages 26-36.

   Bustos, Paula, Bruno Caprettini and Jacopo Ponticelli, 2016. ”Agricultural Productivity and Structural

Transformation: Evidence from Brazil,” American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol.

106(6), pages 1320-65, June.

   Chernozhukov, V and C, Hansen (2008), “The Reduced Form: A Simple Approach to Inference with

Weak Instruments”, Economics Letters, 2008, 100(1), 68-71.

   Christiaensen, Luc & De Weerdt, Joachim & Todo, Yasuyuki, 2013.Urbanization and poverty reduction

– the role of rural diversiﬁcation and secondary towns, Policy Research Working Paper Series 6422, The

World Bank.

   Deichmann, U., F. Shilpi, and R. Vakis. 2009. “Urban Proximity, Agricultural Potential and Rural

Non-farm Employment: Evidence from Bangladesh,” World Development, 37(3), p. 645-660.

   Emran, M. Shahe and Forhad Shilpi, 2012.”The extent of the market and stages of agricultural special-

ization,” Canadian Journal of Economics, Canadian Economics Association, vol. 45(3), pages 1125-1153,

August.

   Fafchamps, M. and F. Shilpi, 2003, “Spatial Division of Labor in Nepal, Journal of Development Studies,

Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 23-66.

   Fafchamps, Marcel, and Forhad Shilpi, 2005. “Cities and Specialization: Evidence from South Asia.”

Economic Journal,Vol. 115, April.

   Ferre, Celine, Francisco H.G. Ferreira and Peter Lanjouw, 2010.”Is there a metropolitan bias? The

inverse relationship between poverty and city size in selected developing countries” Policy Research Working



                                                    30
Paper Series 5508, The World Bank.

     Foster, A. and M. Rosenzweig, 2004, “Agricultural development, industrialization and rural inequality,

mimeographed, Harvard University.

     Haggblade, S., P. Hazell and T. Reardon, 2006, Transforming the Rural Nonfarm Economy, Johns

Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

     Harris, John and Michael Todaro (1970). Migration, Unemployment, and Development: A Two Sector

Analysis, American Economic Review, 40: 126-142.

     Hossain, M. and A. Bayes, 2009, Rural Economy and Livelihoods: Insights from Bangladesh, AH Devel-

opment Publishing House.

     Hossain, Mohammad Ismail, and Wim Verbeke. 2010. “Evaluation of Rice Markets Integration in

Bangladesh.” Lahore Journal of Economics 15 (2): 77–96.

     Hymer, Stephen and Stephen Resnick (1969), “A Model of an Agrarian Economy with Nonagricultural

Activities”, American Economic Review, Vol. 59, No. 4, Part 1 (Sep., 1969), pp. 493-506

     Kuznets, S. (1973) ‘Modern economic growth: ﬁndings and reﬂections’ (Nobel Lecture), American

Economic Review 63, 247–58.

     Lanjouw, Peter and Rinku Murgai, 2009.Poverty decline, agricultural wages, and nonfarm employment

in rural India: 1983-2004, Agricultural Economics, vol. 40(2), pages 243-263, 03.

     Lanjouw J. and P. Lanjouw, 2001, “Rural Non-farm Employment: Issues and Evidence from Developing

Countries,” Agricultural Economics, vol. 26, no. 1, pp.1 –24.

     Lewis, A. (1954) ‘Economic development with unlimited supplies of labor,’ Manchester School 22, 139–

91

     Mellor, J, 1976, The New Economics of Growth: A Strategy for India and the Developing World, Cornell

University press, Ithaca.

     Ranis, G. and F. Stewart, 1973. “Rural Non-Agricultural Activities in Development: Theory and

Application.” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 33, o.7 pp. 1045-1060.



                                                     31
   Renkow, M., 2006, “Cities, towns and the rural nonfarm economy, in Haggblade, S., P. Hazell and T.

Reardon (eds), Transforming the Rural Nonfarm Economy, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

   Rodriguez-Clare, Andres, 1996.The division of labor and economic development, Journal of Develop-

ment Economics, Elsevier, vol. 49(1), pages 3-32, April.

   Sarker, M. A. R., Alam, K., and Gow, J. (2012). Exploring the relationship between climate change

and rice yield in Bangladesh: An analysis of time series data. Agricultural System, pp. 11-16.




 Online Appendix: Not for Publication


PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1

   (1.1) The labor market equilibrium in equation (8) in the text can simpliﬁed as:

                                                                       (          )
                                                                           φY o
                           wL = ∆5 w1− α θ α − ∆4 ∆1 (1 − α) γf + ∆3
                                        1   1
                                                                                                    (13)
                                                                           1+d


                                                1
   where ∆4 = υT ∆3 + υs and ∆5 = A(1 − α) α (1 + ∆4 ∆1 ). The eﬀect of agricultural productivity shock

on wage cane be derived from equation (13) as:


                                                         1−a
                                    ∂w         α ∆5 θ α w
                                       =    1                  1 > 0                                (14)
                                    ∂θ   αw α L + (1 − α) ∆5 θ α

                                                                                              ∂2w
   (1.2) We show that the stated restrictions on land/labor ratio and Ewθ are suﬃcient for        > 0.
                                                                                             ∂θ∂A
   Using equation (14), we get:

          [                                                {                                 ¯ }]
 ∂2w   w              1                                                  1                   L
     =     (θ (1 − α)) (1 + ∆4 ∆1 ) {α − Ewθ (1 − α)} + EwA α (θ (1 − α)) (1 + ∆4 ∆1 ) − Ewθ
                      α                                                  α
∂θ∂A   Dθ                                                                                    A
                                                                                                    (15)

   where D is the denominator in the RHS of equation (14), and EwA is the elasticity of wage with respect



                                                    32
                                                                                  −1
to land endowment A. Now, {α − Ewθ (1 − α)} > 0 if Ewθ < α (1 − α)                     , and the ﬁrst term in [.] in the

RHS of equation (15) is positive. It is easy to check from labor market equilibrium condition (13) that

EwA > 0. A suﬃcient condition for the second term in the RHS of equation (15) to be positive when we
                         −1
set E wθ = α (1 − α)          is that the labor/land ratio is small enough to satisfy the following condition:


                                              ¯
                                              L          1+α  1
                                                < (1 − α) α θ α (1 + ∆4 ∆1)                                        (16)
                                              A


   So when inequality (16) is satisﬁed, it is over-suﬃcient for the RHS of equation (15) to be positive that
                −1
Ewθ < α (1 − α)      .

   (1.3) From equation (4) in the text, the total village income is given by:


                                                                      υs γ f
                                                 Y v = ∆1 wL∗
                                                            f −
                                                                    (1 − υs )

                                                                                                 (    )
                                                                                                ∂ wL∗
                                                                                                    f
Thus a necessary and suﬃcient condition for Y v to increase with a higher θis that                        > 0.
                                                                                                   ∂θ
   Using the solution for L∗
                           f from equation (3) in the text, we have the following:


                                    (    )
                                   ∂ wL∗
                                       f
                                                              1
                                                 [Aθ (1 − α)] α α−1
                                               =               w α {1 − (1 − α) Ewθ }                              (17)
                                       ∂θ              αθ

                                (    )
                               ∂ wL∗
                                   f                               −1
   From equation (17),                      > 0 iﬀ Ewθ < (1 − α)        .
                                  ∂θ

   PROOF OF PROPOSITION 2

   (2.1) From equation (3) in the text, we have:


                                              ∂L∗
                                                                    1
                                                 f   A [θ (1 − α)] α
                                                   =          1      {1 − Ewθ }                                    (18)
                                               ∂θ        αθw α

                                                   ∂L∗f
   From equation (18), it is obvious that               < 0 iﬀ Ewθ > 1.
                                                    ∂θ


                                                             33
   (2.2) See Pp. 12-13 in the text.

   (2.3) Using equation (6) in the text, we have:

                                             [                      1−α           ]
                        ∂L∗
                                                           1
                               ∆1 υs (1 − α)            Aθ α (1 − α) α
                           S
                             =                 γf Ewθ +         1−α     (1 − Ewθ )                           (19)
                         ∂θ         θw                       αw α


                                            ∂L∗S
   It is obvious from equation (19) that         > 0 when Ewθ = 1. By continuity, there exists a threshold
                                             ∂θ
       S                   ∂L∗S
value Ewθ > 1 such that         > 0 remains true.
                            ∂θ
   (2.4) Using equation (7) in the text, we get:

                           [            1−α           ]         [                           ]
    ∂L∗
                               1
           ∆3 ∆1 υT (1 − α) Aθ α (1 − α) α               ∆3 Ewθ                      φY o
       T
         =                          1−α     (1 − Ewθ ) +         ∆1 (1 − α) υT γf −                          (20)
     ∂θ           θw             αw α                     wθ                        (1 + d)


   A comparison of equations (19) and (20) makes it clear that as long as φ > 0, the eﬀect of agricultural

productivity growth on employment growth in the town goods sector is likely to be limited compared

to that in the S -goods sector. If the subsistence requirement γf is large enough to satisfy γf > γf ≡
        φY o
                      , then the last term in equation (20) is positive and there exists a threshold value
∆1 (1 − α) υT (1 + d)
 T
Ewθ > 1 such the RHS of equation (2) is positive. The stronger is the consumer preference for town good

in the village (i.e., higher value of υT ), and the farther away is the metropolitan city (i.e., a higher d) , the

                        T
larger is the value of Ewθ , and the more likely it is that agricultural productivity has a positive eﬀect on

the employment in T -goods sector.
Table 1: Summary Statistics: Sub-district level Employment, Yield and other indicators (Full Sample)

                                                  Mean         SD    Mean       SD     Mean        SD
 Economic Census                                      2000              2006               2009
 Employment (Firm size>=10)                        3128    4161      4256    6537       5158    9487
 Manufacturing                                     1419    2925      2117    5806       2225    6256
 Services                                          1062    1142      1319    1044       1267     991
  of which
     Trade                                           64       178      47      127        40       110
     Education                                      692       672     978      684       951       658
     Health                                         151       208     169      196       162       183
 Other (construction, transport, utility etc.)     1701      2052    2132     2010      2926      5343
 Population Census                                     2000                                2010
 Employment (Total)                               14054      4161                      32214    31322
 Manufacturing                                     1458     10871                       7985    12043
 Services                                         12595      2559                      24229    22137
 Proportion urban                                   0.13      0.13                      0.14     0.11
 Population                                      213274 108269                        276587 153595
 Proportion with Secondary or higher Education      0.11      0.04                      0.13     0.04
 Proportion of households with electricity          0.25      0.23   0.36      0.25     0.46     0.27
 Household Income and Expenditure Survey              2000              2005               2010
 Rice Yield (mt/acre)                              0.94      0.11    1.01    0.13       1.36    0.48
 % of land irrigated                                 61        30      60      33         69      26
 Real Per Capita Expenditure                        749       200     848     206       1098     266
 Real Daily Wage                                     74        29      76      39         94      31
 Annual Rainfall (mm)                              1444       487    1653       410     1472       379
Table 2: Rainfall Shocks and Agricultural Yields

                                             Log (Rice
                                             Yield/acre)         Log(agricultural    % of Area
                                                                     wage)           Irrigated
                                           (1)          (2)            (4)                 (5)
 Small Cities and Towns Sample
 Rainfall Deviation                     0.387***    0.448***         0.567**             14.53
                                         (7.316)     (8.801)         (2.459)            (0.731)

 Observations                              696         696              458               355
 Number of Upazila                         232         232              208               180
 Rural Sample
 Rainfall Deviation                     0.449***    0.498***         0.821***            27.94
                                         (8.472)     (9.845)          (2.792)           (1.154)

 Observations                              696         696              436               386
 Number of Upazila                         232         232              205               195
 Year & Upazila Fixed Effects              Yes         Yes               Yes               Yes
 Area Characteristics                       No         Yes               Yes               Yes
Note: Rainfall Deviation is defined as the difference between log(current rainfall) and log(30 year average rainfall).
The regressions in even numbered columns include a number of controls (log of travel time to Capital and/or Port
cities interacted with time trend, flood prone dummy interacted with time trend, proportion of household with
electricity, log of 1991 population interacted with trend, log of total active labor force, and proportion of labor force
with above secondary education, share of urban households. All regressions include year and upazila fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at upazila level.
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 3: Rainfall Shocks, Agricultural Productivity and Non-farm Employment
                                                              Log (Employment)
                                              All Firms                                  Large Firms
                           Manufac-     Services      Total       Log(Agri.      Manufac- Services          Total
                            turing                 Non-Farm       Employm.)       turing                   Non-farm
                              (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)        (6)            (7)
 Small Towns
 Sample
 Rainfall Deviation        0.656**      0.310***     0.385***        -0.126      2.680***     2.875***     3.113***
                           (2.298)       (3.168)      (4.979)       (-1.064)      (2.812)      (3.080)      (3.098)

 Observations                 464          464          464           464           696          696         696
 Number of Upazilas           232          232          232           232           232          232         232
 Rural Sample
 Rainfall Deviation        1.373***      0.246**     0.337***       -0.0444        0.309       1.501**       1.064
                            (4.087)      (2.138)      (3.135)       (-0.868)      (0.386)      (2.016)      (1.449)

  Observations                 464          464           464           464            696         696         696
  Number of Upazilas           232          232           232           232            232         232         232
  Year & Upazila
  Fixed Effects                Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
  Area Characteristics         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
Note: Rainfall Deviation is defined as the difference between log(current rainfall) and log(30 year average rainfall).
The regressions include a number of controls (log of travel time to Capital and/or Port cities interacted with time
trend, flood prone dummy interacted with time trend, proportion of household with electricity, log of 1991
population interacted with trend, log of total active labor force, and proportion of labor force with above secondary
education, share of urban households. All regressions include year and upazila fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at upazila level.
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 4: Rainfall Shocks, Agricultural Productivity and Employment in large firms
                              Log (employment in manufacturing)                   Log(employment in services)
                             Food &      Other     Transport                                               Other
                                                     Const. &
                             Beverages Manfact.        other            Trade       Education    Health      Services
                                (1)        (2)          (3)              (4)           (5)        (6)          (7)
 Small Cities and
 Towns Sample
 Rainfall Deviation           1.769**       2.306**      2.699***       1.215*      2.436***    2.071***    2.189***
                              (2.151)       (2.486)       (3.043)       (1.691)      (3.150)     (3.005)     (3.048)

 Observations                    696          696           696           696         696         696          696
 Number of Upazilas              232          232           232           232         232         232          232
 Rural Sample
 Rainfall Deviation            -0.249        -0.108       1.382*         0.189      1.430**      0.758        0.590
                              (-0.362)      (-0.133)      (1.970)       (0.394)     (2.307)     (1.224)      (0.944)

 Observations                    696          696           696           696         696         696          696
 Number of Upazilas              232          232           232           232         232         232          232
  Year & Upazila FE              Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
  Area Characteristics           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Note: Rainfall Deviation is defined as the difference between log (current rainfall) and log(30 year average rainfall).
The regressions include a number of controls (log of travel time to Capital and/or Port cities interacted with time
trend, flood prone dummy interacted with time trend, proportion of household with electricity, log of 1991
population interacted with trend, log of total active labor force, and proportion of labor force with above secondary
education, share of urban households. All regressions include year and upazila fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at upazila level.
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
