                                                    WPS8126


Policy Research Working Paper                      8126




      Services Trade and Global Value Chains
                                  Cecilia Heuser
                                  Aaditya Mattoo




Development Research Group
Trade and International Integration Team
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8126


  Abstract
  Services play a role in global value chains in many ways, sim-                     emergence of global value chains, enhances downstream
  ilar to goods. But services deserve special attention because                      manufacturing firms’ productivity, and shifts the pat-
  of how they are transacted, how they affect downstream                             tern of comparative advantage toward sectors intensive
  sectors, how they are regulated, and how international                             in these services. Despite significant unilateral liberaliza-
  cooperation can contribute to integrating national mar-                            tion, service markets in many countries remain protected
  kets. Databases on trade in value added, which cover only                          by restrictions on the entry of foreign services and service
  cross-border transactions in services, reveal a high and                           providers, as well as discretionary and discriminatory reg-
  growing share of services in trade in value added across                           ulatory requirements. International cooperation in services
  countries and industries. Although international transac-                          has attempted to follow the example of reciprocal market
  tions in services that take place through foreign investment                       opening for goods, but this approach has delivered little
  are difficult to measure, their economic impact can be                             incremental liberalization. More could be achieved through
  estimated. The resulting improved access to financial,                             greater emphasis on international regulatory cooperation.
  communications, and transport services facilitates the




  This paper is a product of the Trade and International Integration Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a
  larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at cheuser@worldbank.org and amattoo@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
        Services Trade and Global Value Chains
                               Cecilia Heuser and Aaditya Mattoo1




Keywords: Global value chains, Services

JEL codes: F10, F13




1
  Cecilia Heuser: cheuser@worldbank.org, Aaditya Mattoo: amattoo@worldbank.org. This paper draws on three
background papers by Van der Marel and Sáez (2016), Miroudot (2016), and Liu et al. (2017). We thank Laura Alfaro,
Maggie Chen, Nick Hope, Gary Hufbauer, Bradford Jensen, Przemyslaw Kowalski, Joscelyn Magdeleine, Andreas
Maurer, Marcel Timmer, Zhi Wang, Zhigang Yao, and participants at the Making Global Value Chains Work for
Economic Development workshop in Washington, D.C., November 2016, for helpful comments. This paper is part of
a joint project by the World Trade Organization, World Bank, Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development, Institute of Developing Economies – Japan External Trade Organization, and the Research Center of
Global Value Chains, University of International Business and Economics. It is supported in part by the Multidonor
Trust Fund for Trade and Development and by the Strategic Research Program. The views expressed in the paper
are those of the authors and not of the World Bank.
In Moliere’s The Bourgeois Gentleman, M. Jourdain discovers that he has "been speaking prose all my
life, and didn't even know it!" We suspect that many of us have been working on global value chains
(GVCs) without quite knowing it. A value chain comprises “the full range of activities that are required to
bring a product from its conception, through its design, its sourced raw materials and intermediate
inputs, its marketing, its distribution and its support to the final consumer.”2 A GVC emerges when these
activities are undertaken by entities based in or from different countries. Several studies of international
trade in services inputs and of foreign direct investment in business services are thus potentially
relevant to an examination of GVCs.

Two questions arise. What makes a value chain a GVC? And why do services merit special consideration
in a discussion of GVCs?

The first question has sometimes been reformulated as “How many ‘borders’ does a value chain have to
cross to qualify as a GVC?” (perhaps analogously to a recent Nobel laureate’s question, “How many roads
must a man walk down, before you call him a man?”). In the GVC case, some analysts have suggested a
fairly precise answer. For example, the widely used GVC participation index proposed in Koopman et al.
(2010) is determined by the foreign value added embodied in the gross exports of a given country and the
domestic value added embodied in the gross exports of third countries. This definition would set a GVC—
such as importing to export—apart from value chains that involve a single international transaction, an
import or export of intermediate goods. It may well be true that multiple international transactions along
a value chain have economic implications that are qualitatively distinct from (the sum of) a series of single
international transactions, even though this has not yet been established empirically. It may, however,
also be true that the implications of even single international transactions along a value chain are
economically important and policy relevant. So, this paper adopts a broader view of GVCs that also
includes single international transactions, covering both simple GVCs, with one border crossing, and
complex GVCs, with two or more border crossings (Wang, Wei, and Zhu 2017). 3

The second question can be reformulated as two questions: Should services be examined separately from
goods in a discussion of GVCs? And should they be treated as a single broad category, the same way goods
are? Our answer to both questions: In some respects no, in others yes.

In some ways, services play a role similar to goods in GVCs, whether they are meant for final consumption
or as inputs in the production of goods or other services. In fact, the most detailed analysis of the role of
services in value chains—drawing on the new world input-output tables and value-added trade
databases—relates only to situations in which services are traded in a manner akin to how goods are
traded. However, services deserve special attention for four reasons, relating to how they are transacted,
how they affect downstream sectors, how they are regulated, and how international cooperation can
contribute to integrating national markets.



2
  https://globalvaluechains.org/concept-tools.
3
  A definition that does not include single international transactions also creates a slight awkwardness in the
treatment of transactions located at the beginning or at the end of linear value chains. Even if they do not qualify as
part of GVCs, the hypothesis must be that the history and the future matter. That is, a final import that involves
border crossings at early stages of the value chain and an initial export that will cross other borders at later stages
of the value chain should have different implications from those that do not.


                                                                                                                     2
First, the notion of global value chains involving services needs to encompass a broader range of
transactions. GVCs need to encompass not only transactions crossing borders, but also transactions within
countries between national and foreign entities. While there is good reason to take a similar broad view
of GVCs involving only goods, the case is overwhelming for services because focusing only on cross-border
trade would ignore the large share of international transactions in services that takes place through:
consumers traveling to other countries (consumption abroad, or mode 2 in World Trade Organization
[WTO] parlance); commercial presence (through foreign investment, or mode 3 in the WTO); and the
presence of natural persons (temporary immigrants, or mode 4 in the WTO).4 Even though our ability to
measure the role in GVCs of international services transactions through commercial presence is limited,
ways have been found to estimate their economic impact.5

Second, the argument that services can have a substantial economic impact because they are vital inputs
into producing downstream goods and services may not seem a sufficient reason for separate
consideration. After all, goods such as computers are also vital inputs. But two features of services seem
to merit special focus. One is that the very existence of GVCs is due to improvements in services like
transport, communication, and computing (or information and communication technology [ICT] services)
that have made it possible to fragment and coordinate production globally. Another is the growing
evidence that when GVCs include finance, communications, transport, and professional and other
business services in favorable price-quality bundles and diverse varieties, firms perform better. These
services enable firms to invest in new business opportunities and better production technology, to exploit
economies of scale by concentrating production in fewer locations, to efficiently manage inventories, and
to make coordinated decisions with their suppliers and customers. The result can be increased total factor
productivity and shifts in the pattern of comparative advantage.

Third, services also differ at least qualitatively from goods in the nature of the policies that both inhibit or
encourage the emergence of services-related GVCs. Border measures like tariffs are much less relevant
for services trade than for goods trade, and behind-the-border regulatory measures are much more
relevant. Some examples: Cross-border trade in international transport services is impeded by the
exclusion of third-country providers and by quantitative restrictions in bilateral agreements. Trade
through commercial presence in banking and communication services must confront restrictions on
foreign ownership and regulatory requirements that can be discretionary and discriminatory. The
presence of foreign professionals is prevented by restrictive visa and work permit rules as well as by a
refusal to recognize their qualifications and licenses. And trade in all data-intensive services is threatened
by diverging national privacy laws.6



4
  For example, mode 3 exports represented on average 67 percent of total US exports of services between 2009 and
2014 according to data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).
5
   Mode 2 trade is captured in the balance of payments (BOP) statistics category “travel” but with limited
disaggregation into sectors. Sales of services by foreign natural persons too are largely covered in BOP statistics but
are not identified separately from cross-border trade. Data on mode 3 trade in services are not part of BOP statistics
but are collected separately by some countries, such as the United States and the European Union. Efforts to improve
the measurement of mode 3 trade are discussed later in the paper.
6
  Restrictive policies of this sort are inherently difficult to identify and measure. Two initiatives provide evidence on
these restrictions: one in the OECD and another in a collaborative project between the World Bank and the WTO.
Some evidence regarding these measures is presented later in the paper.


                                                                                                                       3
Fourth, services markets have seen considerable unilateral liberalization that has facilitated the
emergence of GVCs with services as both inputs and outputs. Unfortunately, international cooperation
has striven to replicate mostly the goods model of “reciprocal market opening,” which has so far delivered
little incremental liberalization. Because the impediments are different for services-related GVCs,
international cooperation needs to take a different form. In particular, much more could be achieved
through a greater emphasis on regulatory cooperation.

The first section below sets the stage by describing the role of services in GVCs, and the second presents
the methods and data sets currently used to measure this role. The third examines the patterns that
emerge, showing the absolute and growing importance of services in GVCs and suggests possible reasons.
The fourth discusses the implications of services’ presence in GVCs, particularly for total factor
productivity and patterns of comparative advantage. The fifth presents evidence on the impediments to
services being part of GVCs, and the sixth argues that these impediments are most effectively addressed
through new forms of regulatory cooperation.

What role do services play in global value chains?
In some ways, services play a role analogous to that of goods. But they are also different, in that they
facilitate the emergence of GVCs in a way that goods do not. They can be seen as elements in GVCs that
are different from the typical cross-border or arm’s-length trade usually analyzed in the case of goods.7

Services global value chains

The emergence of GVCs has increased the opportunities for international specialization not only in final
goods and their parts, but also in services and services tasks. In many instances, services represent the
end stage of a GVC, with services firms choosing to source their inputs internationally. For example,
financial services providers have chosen to outsource and offshore their back-office data-management
and analytical tasks, architects their basic design tasks, and doctors the reading of radiological images. In
each case, direct interaction with the client is by locally based services providers. It has been suggested
that in fragmented production processes of services, value is sometimes created differently than in goods
value chains. Instead of following a linear value chain, in which products move sequentially from upstream
to downstream, adding value at each stage (a “snake” formation in the terminology of Baldwin and
Venables 2013), value creation in services value chains may occur as a network of activities, such as
platform-based communication or transportation networks (a “spider” formation in Baldwin and
Venables). In such cases, multiple parts come together to add value simultaneously in forming a final
product or component—or through alternative models, such as facilitated user networks (which create
value by linking customers, as in insurance or banking services) and solution shops (which create value by
solving customer problems; Miroudot 2016).

Services as links in global value chains

One reason to consider some services in GVCs separately from goods is their role in enabling GVCs to
emerge. The international fragmentation of production was partly driven by changes in transport,

7
 This is not an exhaustive list of how services participate in GVCs. Other relevant aspects, such as bundling goods
and services, and services as value creating activities are discussed in detail in Miroudot (2016).


                                                                                                                 4
logistics, and ICT services. In particular, lower costs and improvements in these services made it possible
for firms to manage production processes that are geographically split (Jones and Kierzkowski 2001a, b).
Even though the anecdotal evidence itself is compelling, a serious gap in the literature is not having
rigorous empirical evidence on how improved access to these connecting services across space and time
has facilitated the emergence of GVCs.

Services as outsourced inputs in global value chains

Besides their role as links between different stages of value chains, services often are important inputs in
the production process of manufacturing goods and services. For example, a value chain may start with
research, design, and engineering activities that are clearly services inputs when they are outsourced. At
the other end of the value chain are other services such as marketing and distribution that are also
important stages in ensuring that a product reaches the consumer. Therefore, services are not only
support functions that enable GVCs, but they are also crucial inputs in key stages of production.

Yet being vital inputs into goods and services production by itself does not constitute sufficient reason to
consider services separately from goods in analyzing GVCs. After all, goods are also vital inputs. The fact
that access to some services of sufficiently high quality, low price, and diversity may matter for firm
performance is an empirical question akin to the role of ICT goods in determining performance. But the
fact that access to services inputs comes through foreign direct investment (FDI) and the movement of
people more often than it does for goods inputs does warrant considering services separately and through
a broader view of GVCs. The relative importance of digital delivery in services also requires modifying the
traditional customs-mediated and customs-measured role of international transactions within GVCs.

Services as in-house inputs in global value chains

Another feature of services as inputs arises in a notion of GVCs that goes beyond arm’s-length market-
based transactions to functions within the firm. It is common for firms to develop their own support
services in house, such as R&D activities or information technology capacity. This means that services are
produced not only by services firms but also by manufacturing firms (Kelle 2013), which often export a
variety of headquarters services to their affiliates. Some analysts argue that this “servicification” inside
firms may need to be considered for a full assessment of the impact of services on trade and value creation
(Miroudot 2016). But as noted below, this deconstruction of activities within firms, when taken to the
limit, may blur the distinction between goods and services because all tasks could potentially be
considered services.

How services participation in global value chains is measured
For a long time, measuring trade in services took a back seat because data on trade in goods were more
extensive and readily available. More recently, measuring trade in services has received impetus from the
new prominence in international policy and negotiating agendas given to liberalizing trade in services, the
increased importance of services in GVCs, and the availability of multicountry input-output tables.




                                                                                                          5
Statistics on trade in value-added cover services as links, outsourced inputs, or final products
in global value chains

As long as services are final products or inputs supplied by other firms in the production process, input-
output tables can help to identify their contribution to value added in output or exports (Francois and
Woerz 2008; Nordås 2008).

The starting point for analyzing the contribution of services to global value chains is the decomposition of
value added in exports by its origin. Following seminal work by Hummels, Ishii, and Yi (2001), an expanding
literature has proposed alternative decompositions of trade in value added and measures of participation
in GVCs (Koopman, Wang, and Wei 2014; Foster-McGregor and Stehrer 2013; Los, Timmer, and de Vries
2016). As in Miroudot (2016), the analysis here relies on the calculations published by the Organisation
for Co-operation and Development–World Trade Organization Trade in Value Added (OECD–WTO TiVA)
project, which feature several indicators that account for services value added in trade (OECD 2013).

The main indicator is the total value added (VA) of the services sector embodied in gross exports of
industry i and country c as a percentage of total gross exports of i of country c, (    	    , ). It is
calculated as:

            	    ,   =∑   ∈   ,   (   ,   )    ,   /      ,   +∑ ∑   ∈    ,   (   ,   )   , ,   /   ,   (1)

where , is the value-added share of services industry j in country p. B is the global Leontief inverse of
the intercountry input-output matrix, = ( − ) , and therefore its ji-th element ( , ) represents
the total requirements of j from p to produce a unit of i in country c.            , , is gross exports from
country c to country p for any given industry I, and      , is total gross exports for country c and industry
i. The first term then represents all direct and embodied domestic services value added in the exports of
product i from country c, and the second term represents all foreign domestic services value added
embodied in the exports of product i from country c.

The services content of gross exports can then be decomposed into a domestic and a foreign part, and
the domestic part can be further decomposed into the direct domestic services industry value added
content of gross exports (the value added from the exporting services sectors), the indirect domestic
services content of gross exports (the domestic services value added embodied in other exporting
industries), and the re-imported domestic services value-added content of gross exports (domestic
services value added in imported intermediate inputs used in exports; figure 1).8 Note that this
decomposition can also be analyzed by services type. A similar approach can be used in measuring the
services value added embodied in foreign final demand.




8
    See OECD (2013) for details on the algebraic definitions of these components.


                                                                                                              6
Figure 1. Deconstructing services value added in gross exports




Source: Authors’ construction.

Value-added trade statistics based on multicountry input-output tables are a starting point for
understanding the importance of services inputs in GVCs, but these statistics cannot fully capture all
services that are relevant to fragmented production processes. In particular, services traded through WTO
mode 3 will not be accurately identified as foreign services in traditional value-added measures.

Existing statistics on trade in value-added do not fully capture services traded though
commercial presence

Since the supply of services through commercial presence abroad is an important way of conducting
international transactions in services (mode 3–commercial presence), the distinction between foreign-
and domestic-owned firms is particularly relevant for services. Accurately assessing the contribution of
services to GVCs requires that the ownership status of the firm that originates the value added affects
whether that contribution is classified as domestic or foreign, as this is bound to inform services trade
policy.9

A GVC accounting framework that allows for this sort of distinction between firms can be similar to the
global supply-use/input-output tables commonly used now, such as OECD Inter-Country Input-Output

9
  More generally, firm ownership, whether domestic or foreign, has been found to be a relevant dimension of firm
heterogeneity, with foreign-owned firms often associated with greater exports, higher productivity, more intensive
use of imported intermediates, and different patterns of value added (Fetzer and Strassner 2015). This in itself makes
firm ownership a relevant dimension to understand participation in GVCs and the effects it may have in an economy.


                                                                                                                    7
(ICIO) tables, but it would also need to identify foreign or domestic ownership for each
commodity/industry. While such a framework is not currently available, initiatives in this direction are
under way by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and the OECD (Fetzer and Strassner 2015; OECD
2015). In both cases, the proposed approach is to link existing supply-use tables to ownership and trade
data—such as OECD ICIO to the Activity of Multinational Enterprises (AMNE) Database, or BEA input-
output accounts to BEA surveys and U.S. Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income data.

Services as in-house inputs in global value chains

When services inputs are supplied in-house, value-added analysis does not capture their contribution to
GVCs. Additional information is needed to identify these services activities within each production
process.

One way to address this issue is to consider business functions, in order to distinguish between the
primary or core activity of the firm and support functions such as R&D, sales, marketing, or information
technology services. But statistics on business functions have only recently started to be collected in some
national surveys (Sturgeon et al. 2013).10 Alternatively, labor force surveys can be used to identify business
functions by matching occupation classifications to business functions (Timmer, Stehrer, and de Vries
2015). Each industry is assigned one business function to describe its core activity, which usually covers
occupations directly related to the production process. All other business functions are classified as
support activities (or secondary business functions) and can be regarded as services activities if they would
be classified as services if outsourced. This approach may supplement the usual trade-in-value-added
analysis, providing a sense of the role of in-house services in GVCs.11

While it is theoretically possible to determine a single core function per industry, it can be difficult in
practice to establish what is not a support function. Even if it were feasible to distinguish between tasks
that would be services if they had taken place at arm’s length (such as book-keeping) and other tasks that
are intrinsically manufacturing or agricultural in nature (such as wood processing), such distinctions slide
on a slippery slope and raise the question: What is not a service? Ultimately, almost any task can be
conceived of as an arm’s length service. For example, one could either directly employ a worker in the
horticultural sector or buy “fruit-picking” services from an individual or a firm. So, this deconstruction of
the firm into constituent tasks could reduce each firm into a bundle of services.

The emerging patterns of services in global value chains
This section presents some stylized facts about the increasing role of services in GVCs—first in aggregate
and then across countries and industries. It then discusses why this might be happening. The evidence is
obtained by computing the value-added measures described in the previous section using the OECD TiVA



10
   Examples include the 2010 National Organizations Survey in the United States (Brown, Sturgeon, and Lane 2014)
and two EUROSTAT surveys on the international sourcing of business functions by enterprises (Nielsen 2008).
11
   Statistics on business functions based on labor force surveys should be interpreted carefully since comparability
across countries may be affected by statistical conventions in the construction of input-output tables. For example,
data collected at the enterprise level and the establishment level could yield different information for identical
processes on what is provided in-house and what is outsourced.


                                                                                                                  8
database. Some results are also presented to illustrate the potential relevance of in-house services in
GVCs.

The patterns of services in GVCs

The share of services in value added trade is large and increasing

Multiple studies have found that the share of services in trade in value added is both large (significantly
larger than the share of services in gross trade) and increasing (OECD, WTO, and World Bank Group 2014).
While services as a share of total world gross exports have remained around 20% since 1980, in value-
added terms they have increased from below 30% to more than 40% (compare figures 2.a and 2.b). For
the case of Asia, this pattern holds by country as well, with no major differences between developed or
developing, high-technology or low-technology, or high-wage or low-wage countries (Baldwin, Forslid,
and Ito 2015).

Figure 2.a Gross exports of goods and services             Figure 2.b Value-added exports of goods and
as a percentage of total world gross exports               services as a percentage of total world value-
                                                           added exports
     82            80                 79
                                                                69
                                                                            61                 57

                                                                                  39                43
                                                                     31
          18            20                 21




      1980          1995              2009                       1980        1995              2009
               Goods       Services                                       Goods     Services


Source: Authors’ calculations based on Johnson and Noguera (2016).

The increasing share of services in value-added trade was driven by services embodied in exports

Now take a closer look at the recent evolution of services value added in exports, decomposed into direct
and indirect domestic value added and indirect foreign value added (figure 3). While direct exported value
added shows a notable increase from 1995–2011, more than 65% of the growth of services value added
in exports was due to an increase in services embodied in other exports. Both domestic and foreign
embodied services grew, but the foreign services value-added component grew the most over the period.




                                                                                                            9
Figure 3. Share of direct, indirect, and foreign services value added in world gross exports, million USD
       10,000

        9,000
                                                                                           2,155
        8,000

        7,000

        6,000
                                                                                           3,946
        5,000

        4,000
                   496
        3,000

        2,000
                  1,337                                                                    3,292
        1,000
                  1,072
            0
                  1995         2000        2005        2008            2009         2010   2011

                                 Domestic direct   Domestic Indirect      Foreign

Source: Miroudot (2016) based on OECD-WTO TiVA 2015.

Figures 2 and 3 suggest that an increasing part of manufacturing exports corresponds to services value
added and that a growing share of these “additional” services is being sourced abroad. Note, however,
that since these measures are based on cross-border trade, value added from foreign services traded
through commercial presence is counted in the “domestic” category, as previously mentioned. The
apparent shift toward foreign services in the decomposition of services value added probably understates
what actually happened.

The share of services value added in exports varies significantly across countries

Decomposition of services value added in exports by country in 2011 supports the general observations
that the share of services value added is high and that embodied services explain a large share of the total
for all countries (figure 4). Countries differ, however, in their share of services value added in exports,
ranging from 35% in Chile to close to 90% in Luxembourg. These differences reflect some specialization
patterns: countries on the bottom of the figure specialize in exports of commodities (Chile, Norway) or
manufactured goods (Republic of Korea, Mexico), while economies on the top are services exporters.
Countries specialized in services also have more indirect (domestic and foreign) services value added in
exports because services are mainly produced with other services.




                                                                                                         10
Figure 4. Direct, indirect, and foreign services value added in gross exports, percent, 2011

                                                                                                     IRL
                                                                                                     GRC
                                                                                                     CHE
                                                                                                     LTU
                                                                                                     ESP
                                                                                                     IND
                                                                                                     CRI
                                                                                                     FIN
                                                                                                     POL
                                                                                                     JPN
                                                                                                     PHL
                                                                                                     AUS
                                                                                                     THA
                                                                                                     MYS
                                                                                                     NOR
                                                                                                     CHL
  0%       10%       20%      30%        40%       50%       60%       70%       80%    90%      100%

                                 Domestic Direct   Domestic Indirect   Foreign

Source: Miroudot (2016) based on OECD-WTO TiVA 2015.

The share of services value added in exports also varies across industries

The share of services value added in exports ranges from 11% in mining to 38% in chemicals and motor
vehicles (figure 5). Caution in interpreting these results is advised, since value-added measures are based
on input-output tables defined by arm’s length transactions and thus exclude services provided in-house.
Mining exports are in many cases driven by large state-owned enterprises that are likely to provide most
services in-house (Miroudot 2016). In Australia, for example, where that is not the case, the share of
services value added in exports is 24%.




                                                                                                           11
Figure 5. Decomposition of services value added in world gross exports, by industry, percent, 2011

                              Mining
                          Agriculture
                   Coke, petroleum
                  Fabricated metals
                Total manufacturing
                             Utilities
               Nonmetallic minerals
                           Machinery
                        Basic metals
                    Other transport
                               Wood
                Electrical machinery
               Other manufacturing
                 ICT and electronics
                 Rubber and plastics
                Textiles and apparel
                      Food products
             Paper, print, publishing
                      Motor vehicles
                           Chemicals
                                         0     5     10     15      20       25     30       35       40   45

                          Distribution       Transport    Finance        Business services        Other

Source: Miroudot (2016) based on OECD-WTO TiVA 2015.

The decomposition of services value added by type of service seems to show similar patterns across
manufacturing industries (see figure 5). Distribution represents about a third of services value added in
exports, as do business services, which includes telecommunication services, computer services,
professional services, R&D services, consulting, advertising and marketing services, technical testing
services, and environmental services. The last third is split among transport, finance, and other services
(a category covering construction, hotels and restaurants, government services, health and education,
entertainment, and audiovisual services).

Why is the share of services in value-added exports increasing?

The information in figures 2 and 3 reveals an increasing share of services in value added exports,
suggesting that the increase may be explained in part by an increase in services value added embodied in
exported manufactures.

The growing importance of services in the economy has been a matter of discussion for a long time.
Bhagwati (1984) set out the main reasons: “splintering” (outsourcing services formerly provided in-house
by manufacturing firms), the high-income elasticity of the demand for services, and relative price shifts
due to the lower growth of productivity in services than in goods. Splintering was seen as the spontaneous
result of the specialization opportunities arising from growth and technical change.




                                                                                                                12
More recently, the increasing importance of services within manufactured goods—servicification, as it has
been called—has been extensively documented, in line with the evidence in figures 2 and 3. 12 While it
has not yet been possible to empirically establish the cause of servicification, Baldwin, Forslid, and Ito
(2015) explore its potential sources in a way that echoes Bhagwati (1984). These include reclassification,
task-composition shifts in connecting services and final goods, and task–relative price shifts.

Reclassification. Over the past decades, many of the services traditionally sourced in-house by
manufacturing firms, and thus classified as manufacturing, began to be sourced at arm’s length and
classified accordingly as services. The servicification that arises from this reclassification can happen even
if there is no change in the products, the production process, or the relative price of inputs. This argument
corresponds to Bhagwati’s “splintering” reason.

Task-composition shift: Connecting services. The emergence of GVCs requires connections among
geographically separate production units, which typically involve services links. These links (including
telecommunications, transportation, and mailing) contribute to the value added embodied in the final
good. So, outsourcing and offshoring per se tend to increase the share of services in a final good’s value
added.

Task-composition shift: Changes in final goods. The second task-composition shift arises from changes in
the nature of the final manufactured goods. For example, today’s cars contain software, which comes
from the services sector. Similarly, many other manufactured goods have become more intensive in
services. This argument resembles the argument that the income elasticity of demand for services is high,
but in this case technological progress is enhancing the services content and the quality of manufactured
goods.

Task–relative price shift. For a variety of reasons, including the need for coordination and face-to-face
interaction, offshoring of tasks tends to be easier for intermediate goods than for intermediate services.
Since the decision to offshore a task is typically driven by cost-reduction motives, there is a natural
tendency for offshoring to reduce the relative price of the offshored tasks. If most of the offshored tasks
are typically performed by the manufacturing sector, then offshoring would—in a mechanical way—raise
services value added in final manufactured goods. This argument is a variant of the differential
productivity growth reason but is being driven by differences between goods and services in cost-reducing
opportunities through offshoring.

The limits of value-added analysis: In-house services play a large role in manufacturing

As mentioned earlier, services enter GVCs not only as outsourced inputs or final products, but also as
inputs frequently provided in-house, which traditional value-added measures do not capture. Illustrating
how relevant this omission can be, Miroudot (2016) matched occupation classifications and business
functions for 37 countries over 1995–2013. This decomposition of jobs embodied in manufacturing
according to business function by industry reveals considerable variation across industries, with

12
  For example, Lodefalk (2013) shows that services embedded in Swedish manufactured goods account for a major
and increasing share of Sweden’s services exports. Similar evidence is presented for other European countries in
Boddin and Henze (2014), Crozet and Milet (2014), Kelle (2013), Kelle and Kleinert (2010). Baldwin, Ito, and Sato
(2014) show that since the 1990s the share of value added in manufactured products in Asia has shifted decisively
away from manufacturing and toward services.


                                                                                                              13
employment in core activities (operations) at more than 90% in agriculture, but at only about 33% in coke
and petroleum (figure 6). This variability carries over to differences across countries as well. On average,
the core activities of manufacturing firms account for only 50% of employment, meaning that half the
employees of manufacturing firms perform services activities. This suggests that the services value added
embodied in manufacturing, and thus the contribution of services to GVCs, could potentially be much
higher than that captured by traditional value-added measures.

Figure 6. Decomposition of jobs embodied in gross manufacturing exports, by industry, percent, 2011

                  Utilities
    Other manufacturing
    Transport equipment
               Electronics
               Machinery
                   Metals
    Nonmetallic minerals
      Rubber and plastics
                Chemicals
        Coke, petroleum
  Paper, print, publishing
                    Wood
     Textiles and apparel
           Food products
                   Mining
               Agriculture

                              0%                20%                40%            60%                  80%   100%
                               Research and development, engineering, and related technical services
                               Operations
                               Transport, logistics, and distribution
                               Marketing, sales, and after-sales services
                               Horizontal support activities

Source: Miroudot 2016.

The implications of services in global value chains
As seen, services constitute the vital connecting links of value chains as well as a range of inputs sourced
either at arm’s length or in-house. These value chains are “global” not just when transactions cross
international boundaries but also when consumers or providers do so, especially by establishing a
commercial presence abroad.

Growth theories have emphasized that trade in intermediate goods and services generally improves the
allocation of capital and labor across sectors and countries (Jones 2011). The literature helps draw out the
implications of services in GVCs for two key aspects of economic performance: the growth of productivity
and the evolution of comparative advantage.




                                                                                                                    14
The literature uses a framework based on Rajan and Zingales (1998) and first applied to services broadly
in Arnold, Javorcik, and Mattoo (2011) in a study of the Czech Republic. The typical study examines
whether increased access to specific foreign services enhances performance in downstream sectors
whose production is relatively intensive in those services. The usual specification takes the following form:

                   ,   =   +    ∙           	           ,       +   ,   ∙       +   +       +   ,     (2)

                                                            and

                                                	           ,   =∑      ,   ∙           ,

Where i is the firm, j the sector, and X a matrix of sector-level control variables. Yi,t is the outcome of
interest (productivity, comparative advantage), and the key explanatory variable, services linkage, is the
interaction between a measure of a specific sector’s dependence on services inputs and a measure of
services access (which could be related, for example, to services policy reforms or FDI inflows).13 The
hypothesis is that sectors using specific services relatively more intensively benefit relatively more from
the reform of those services. This general framework becomes clearer in the specific examples discussed
below.

For productivity

India offers a powerful example of the benefits of greater participation in manufacturing value chains by
foreign services firms. Conventional explanations of the modest resurgence of Indian manufacturing since
the early 1990s have focused on policy reforms in manufacturing industries. But a key factor lies outside
manufacturing and in the services sector. Reforms in the 1990s visibly transformed services sectors, with
greater openness and improved regulation leading to dramatic growth in domestic and foreign
investment. Indian manufacturing firms were no longer at the mercy of inefficient public monopolies but
could now source services from a wide range of domestic and foreign providers operating in an
increasingly competitive environment. As a result, they had access to better, newer, more reliable, and
more diverse business services.

These improvements enhanced firms’ ability to invest in new business opportunities and better
production technology, to exploit economies of scale by concentrating production in fewer locations, to
efficiently manage inventories, and to coordinate decisions with suppliers and customers.

To analyze the link between services reforms and manufacturing productivity in India, Arnold et al. (2016)
collected detailed information on the pace of reform across Indian services sectors, with a focus on entry
and operational restrictions. To make this information amenable to econometric analysis, the study
aggregated it into time-varying reform indexes. They then related the total factor productivity of about
4,000 manufacturing firms to the state of liberalization in services sectors, taking into account other
aspects of openness, such as tariffs on output and intermediate inputs as well as foreign direct investment
in final and intermediate goods sectors.



13
   The services linkage variable can be interpreted as a weighted average across sectors of the access measure of
interest, with the weights indicating the sensitivity of sector j to input k (weight aj,k can, for example, be the share of
k in total inputs of j).


                                                                                                                        15
The results suggest that procompetitive reforms in banking, transport, insurance, and
telecommunications boosted the productivity of both foreign and locally owned manufacturing firms. A
one-standard-deviation increase in the aggregated index of services liberalization resulted in a
productivity increase of 11.7% for domestic firms and 13.2% for foreign enterprises. The largest additional
effect was for transport reforms, followed by telecommunications and banking reforms.

Several other studies show that access to low-cost and high-quality (domestic or foreign) producer
services can promote productivity and economic growth (Hoekman and Mattoo 2008). Using firm-level
data for the Czech Republic for 1998–2003, Arnold, Javorcik, and Mattoo (2011) find a positive effect on
the productivity of domestic firms in downstream manufacturing as a result of services sector reforms
leading to greater FDI. Using the annual manufacturing survey of Chilean firms, Fernandes and Paunov
(2012) find a positive effect of substantial FDI inflows in producer services sectors on the total factor
productivity of Chilean manufacturing firms. Their findings also suggest that services FDI fosters
innovation in manufacturing and offers opportunities for laggard firms to catch up with industry leaders.14
These benefits arise not just from foreign investment but also from cross-border trade in services. For
example, Amiti and Wei (2009a) find that services offshoring by high-income countries tends to raise their
manufacturing sectors’ productivity.15

To investigate whether regulations in domestic services markets have an effect on industries that rely on
GVC linkages in services to generate value added, Van der Marel and Sáez (2016) differ from the earlier
studies in looking at all downstream sectors rather than just manufacturing. They examine the impact on
domestic value added rather than on productivity and on the link to upstream services sectors through
backward foreign and domestic linkages. Their key interactive variables are a product of the foreign and
domestic backward linkages of services for each downstream sector with services-specific regulatory
policies. Both entry restrictions and policies affecting the operations of firms matter, but the strength of
their impact depends on the type of backward linkages that are more important for the industry in
question. Industries that rely more on backward foreign linkages of services are adversely affected by
entry barrier regulations, while those that rely more on backward domestic linkages of services are more
sensitive to behind-the-border regulations.

For comparative advantage

Since a large part of goods trade includes trade in embodied services, the development of the domestic
services sector and access to imported services inputs can be expected to influence comparative
advantage in manufacturing trade. The impact of services development on manufacturing trade is not
straightforward. Since services are used as inputs in the production of manufactured goods, their
development can increase manufacturing production. But since services and manufacturing compete for
resources, the development of services can be at the expense of manufacturing. For example, the
development of the services sector has drawn resources away from manufacturing not just in industrial




14
   Similar results have been found for Sub-Saharan Africa (Arnold, Mattoo, and Narciso 2008) and Indonesia (Duggan,
Rahardja, and Varela 2013).
15
   While services offshoring has both positive and negative effects on domestic employment, Amiti and Wei (2009b)
show, at least for the United States, that it tends to enhance domestic employment on average.


                                                                                                                16
countries like the United States and the United Kingdom, but also in developing countries like India (see,
for example, Kochar et al. 2006).

Some early studies examined the link between services as inputs in manufacturing and the pattern of
manufacturing exports using single national input-output tables. For example, Francois and Woerz (2008)
find significant and strong positive effects of increased business services openness (greater imports) on
some industries. Their reliance on national data means that inputs cannot be broken down according to
their origins, and services inputs are mismeasured due to two-way trade in intermediate products. More
recently, Stehrer, Foster, and de Vries (2012), Timmer et al. (2013), and Liu et al. (2017) used the newly
constructed international input-output tables to measure more precisely the embodied services and
indirect trade through other sectors.

Liu et al. (2017) focus on two key services sectors: financial services and business services. Well-
functioning financial sectors are critical in mobilizing resources, stimulating investment, and helping firms
(and households) manage risk. Business services cover a variety of critical activities, from software
consulting and data processing to management consultancy, engineering, and R&D. Intensive use of these
modern services can help manufacturing firms increase productivity, reduce the cost of doing business,
expand their input choices, differentiate their products from those of competitors, and strengthen their
after-sale customer services. But these are the services that most strongly provoke deindustrialization
concerns, such as financial services in industrial countries like the United States and the United Kingdom
and business services in developing countries like India and the Philippines.

Liu et al. (2017) quantify the indirect role of services in international trade in goods and construct new
measures of revealed comparative advantage based on domestic value added in gross exports. Embodied
services in manufacturing sectors are computed using a method developed by Koopman, Wang, and Wei
(2014) and Wang, Wei, and Zhu (2013) that generalizes the vertical specialization measures proposed by
Hummels, Ishii, and Yi (2001). Revealed comparative advantage (RCA) is calculated based on domestic
value added in gross exports, as in Koopman, Wang, and Wei (2014) and Wang, Wei, and Zhu (2013), who
improve on the traditional (Balassa 1965) measure of RCA by taking into account both domestic
production sharing and international production sharing.16

In Liu et al.’s econometric analysis of the impact of services development on RCA in manufacturing sectors,
the key explanatory variable is the interaction between a measure of the development of financial (or
business) services and the financial (or business) services intensity of each manufacturing sector.
Domestic services development has a mixed effect on the RCA of manufacturing exports: services
development reduces the RCA of manufacturing exports in manufacturing sectors with low embodied
services (basic and fabricated metals) but increases it in sectors with a high degree of embodied services
(food, beverages and tobacco) (figure 7).




16
  Note that RCA based on gross exports (used as a dependent variable) can cause an endogeneity problem because
the embodied services (used as explanatory variables) are part of gross manufacturing exports. Liu et al. (2017) avoid
this problem because manufacturing RCA is based on the value added created by the factors employed in
manufacturing sectors, excluding the embodied services in gross exports contributed by the factors employed in
services sectors.


                                                                                                                   17
Figure 7. Financial development and revealed comparative advantage, 2005

                                          2         Basic & Fabricated Metals (low S)                                                                       Food, Beverages & Tobacco (high S)




                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                IRL   DNK
                                                            SVK

                                                                   SVN                                                                                              BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                      NLD
                                                                                      JPN




                                                                                                                  RCA (based on domestic value added)
    RCA (based on domestic value added)




                                                             CZE
                                          1.5




                                                            BRA                 KOR
                                                                                ITA                                                                             IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                      CYP




                                                                                                                                            2
                                                       TUR                              AUT
                                                                          FIN            DEU                                                                         LTU       BEL
                                                                                        CHN  ESP                                                                                        AUS
                                                        RUS
                                                       ROM                          SWE
                                                                                                                                                                    POL
                                                         POL
                                                           BGR                   FRA
                                          1




                                                                          BEL
                                                                                    AUS                                                                                      EST
                                                      MEX                                    CAN                                                                           LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                   FRAMLT   ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                              PRT
                                                             IND    USA                                                                                        TUR CZE                 AUT
                                                                   HUN                             PRT                                                                                  CHN
                                                                                                                                                               ROMSVK




                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                            LUX           GBR                                                                                     GBR
                                                                                                                                                                    BGR          ITA      CAN
                                                                                                            NLD                                                                         DEU
                                                                                                            DNK
                                                                    LVA GRC                                                                                                    GRC
                                          .5




                                                                                                                                                                         HUN
                                                                                                                                                              MEX         SVN             LUX
                                                                     EST                                                                                                                SWE
                                                                                                                                                                              FIN
                                                                                                                                                                      IND USA
                                                        IDN                                                CYP
                                                           LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                    KOR JPN
                                                                                      MLT           IRL
                                                                                                                                                                RUS
                                          0




                                                                                                                                      0

                                                0              .5            1                      1.5                                                 0              .5            1          1.5
                                                             Bank Private Credit/GDP                                                                                 Bank Private Credit/GDP



RCA is revealed comparative advantage.
Source: Liu et al. 2017.
Note: The figures show a negative association between the manufacturing RCA (based on domestic value added)
and a measure of financial development for a sector with low embodied financial services, but a positive association
for a sector with high embodied financial services.



Liu et al. also consider the role of services imports in overcoming the limitations of domestic services
markets. In countries with less developed services, manufacturing exports benefit more from access to
foreign services inputs. Such a bypass effect is also discussed in a theoretical model by Ju and Wei (2010),
which derives the conditions for financial globalization to serve as a substitute for reforms of domestic
financial systems. These results suggest that lower services trade barriers can help developing countries
bypass inefficient domestic services provision and promote their manufacturing exports through
intersectoral linkages.



Direct and indirect value-added exports of services

The patterns of direct and indirect domestic value-added exports of services for financial and business
services reveal how goods and services value chains and comparative advantage evolve (figure 8). The
horizontal axis measures direct value-added exports of services and the vertical axis measures indirect
domestic value-added exports of services (the value-added exports of services embodied in exports of
goods). Lines representing the median shares divide the countries into groups occupying four quadrants.


                                                                                                                                                                                                            18
Figure 8. Direct and indirect value added exports as shares of GDP, select services, 1995-2009

                                                          Financial Services                                                                                     Business Services
                                                                   BGR                                                                                                      BEL




                                                                                                                                        .5
                                                                                     BEL
                                     .15
                                                                         MLT




                                                                                                                                                           DEU                          LUX
                                                                               NLD




                                                                                                                                        .4
                                                                                           AUT
                                           CHN




                                                                                                                                    P
                                 P




                                                                                                                                   D
                                D




                                                                                                                                                                                  NLD




                                                                                                                                 /G
                              /G




                                                  KOR                                                                                                 FRA




                                                                                                                              rts
                           rts




                                                      HUN                                                                                                                 SWE
                                                     SVN PRT




                                                                                                                            po
                         po


                                     .1




                                                 IND
                                                            LVAEST




                                                                                                                           x
                        x




                                                                                                                                        .3
                                                                                                                         dE
                      dE




                                                        DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                               IRL
                                                  CZE
                                                    AUS                                                                                                             HUN




                                                                                                                       de
                    de




                                                                                                                                                          SVN    EST
                                                    ITA
                                                   FRA
                                                    DEU                                          GBR
                                                                         SWE




                                                                                                                      d
                   d




                                                                                                                                                                      GBR
                                                                                                                                                                     AUT




                                                                                                                    eA
                 eA




                                              JPN                                                                                                          CZE     FIN
                                                    CAN                                                                                                                         MLT




                                                                                                                  lu
                                                   CYP                                                                                                     DNK
              alu




                                                                                                                                                    ITA




                                                                                                                                        .2
                                            LTU    POL ESP                                                                                                SVK




                                                                                                                 a
                                            BRA
                                             TUR ROM IDN




                                                                                                             ct V
          ct V




                                               MEX                                                                                                  LVA
                                                FIN          USA                                                                                   KOR
                                                                                                                                                     POL
                                     .05




                                                                                                                                                   AUS




                                                                                                          ire
                                                                                                                                                      CAN
       ire




                                                    SVK




                                                                                                       Ind
    Ind




                                                                                                                                                  PRT
                                                                                                                                                  USA
                                                                                                                                                      ESP
                                           RUS   GRC                                                                                          JPN   ROM
                                                                                                                                             RUS LTU
                                                                                                                                             MEX




                                                                                                                                        .1
                                                                                                                                                  CYP
                                                                                                                                                 CHN
                                                                                                                                                BGR
                                                                                                                                              BRA

                                                                                                                                             TUR
                                                                                                                                               GRC                 IND

                                                                                                                                             IDN
                                     0




                                                                                                                                        0
                                           0                .05          .1                      .15                                         0                    .2           .4                    .6
                                                    Direct Value Added Exports/GDP                                                                        Direct Value Added Exports/GDP




Source: Author’s calculations based on OECD Trade in Value Added (TiVA) data.
Note: the panel for financial services does not include Ireland and Luxembourg.


For financial services, figure 8 shows:

                                    In the bottom left quadrant are Greece, the Russian Federation, and Turkey. The low
                                     competitiveness of financial services in these countries is reflected in the low share of direct
                                     exports and the low level of embodied exports—which could reflect the low financial services
                                     intensity of goods production, the reliance primarily on imported financial services, or both.

                                    In the top left quadrant are China, India, and the Republic of Korea, which are not yet sufficiently
                                     competitive to export financial services directly, but which do export a significant share indirectly.
                                     That goods sectors in these countries rely significantly on domestically produced financial services
                                     could be because financial services in these countries have reached an intermediate level of
                                     development at which they can compete in the domestic market but not yet internationally. It
                                     could also be that restrictions on cross-border imports in these countries oblige goods producers
                                     to use domestically produced services.

                                    In the top right quadrant are Austria, Belgium, and the Netherlands, whose more developed
                                     financial services sector exports both directly and indirectly.

                                    In the bottom right quadrant are such “mature deindustrializers” such as Britain and the United
                                     States, where the domestic tangible industries have shrunk in importance and financial services
                                     are mostly exported directly.



                                                                                                                                                                                          19
For business services, figure 8 shows two interesting differences:

        Given the greater cross-border tradability or openness to trade of business services, there is less
         scope for an intermediate stage (for countries to populate the top left quadrant). When a country
         is not competitive in producing these services, it neither exports them nor do its goods sectors
         import them. When a country is competitive, it exports both directly and indirectly.

        In the bottom right quadrant, India offers an example of “premature deindustrialization,” where
         direct exports of business services are high but indirect exports are low, perhaps because of the
         relative weakness of goods sectors.

Policy implications
Two types of policy issues inhibit an enhanced role for services in goods value chains and the emergence
of services value chains: explicit restrictions on foreign services and services suppliers, and regulatory
divergence across jurisdictions. Explicit restrictions on linking services, such as telecommunications,
inhibit the emergence of all GVCs. Restrictions in other services—such as finance, business, education,
and health services—either block the emergence of GVCs involving services or increase the associated
transaction costs. Regulatory divergence reduces the intercompatibility of goods and services and services
components that is needed to enable fragmenting production across jurisdictions. This divergence is one
reason that GVCs have been slow to emerge in sectors like education and health. Regulatory cooperation
is necessary not just to address regulatory divergence but also to facilitate the removal of explicit
restrictions.

National policy barriers to international trade in services

Unlike the rich information on policies affecting trade in goods, information remains limited on policies
affecting trade in services.17 The World Bank Services Trade Restrictions Database reveals interesting
policy patterns. Although public monopolies are now rare, and few services markets are completely
closed, numerous second-generation restrictions remain on entry, ownership, and operations. Even
where there is little explicit discrimination against foreign providers, market access is often unpredictable
because the allocation of new licenses remains opaque and highly discretionary in many countries.
Regulatory discretion is accentuated by a lack of accountability in a number of countries where regulators
are not required to provide reasons for rejecting a license application or where foreign providers do not
have the right to appeal regulatory decisions.

Across regions, some of the fastest growing countries in Asia and the oil-rich Gulf states have restrictive
policies on services, while some of the poorest countries are remarkably open—as measured by the

17
  Two major initiatives to address this gap in information are in the OECD and in a collaborative project between
the World Bank and the WTO. This section describes information on trade policies for services contained in the
earlier World Bank Services Trade Restrictions Database. This database covers 103 countries, five major services
sectors—financial services, basic telecommunications, transport, distribution, and selected professional services—
and the relevant modes of services delivery. This information, collected in 2008–10, has been subsequently updated
only for some countries. Even though there is evidence of few major policy changes in the last few years, the data
presented here are best seen as indicating broad patterns rather than the precise current situation in specific
countries.


                                                                                                               20
Services Trade Restrictions Index, which takes values from 0 for completely open regimes to 100 for
completely closed (figure 9).18 Across sectors, professional and transport services are among the most
protected industries in both industrial and developing countries, while retail, telecommunications, and
even finance tend to be more open (figure 10).19

Figure 9. Restrictiveness of services trade policy




Source: Borchert, Gootiiz, and Mattoo 2014.
Note: This figure compares the restrictiveness of services trade policy across countries based on the World Bank
Services Trade Restrictions Index, which ranges from 0 to 100. The World Bank Services Trade Restrictions Database
covers 103 countries (79 developing) and financial, basic telecommunications, transport, distribution and selected
professional services. The information for the database was collected between 2008 and 2010.




18
   The analysis assesses policy regimes in their entirety and assigns them to one of the following five principal
categories: completely open (that is, no restrictions at all); completely closed (that is, no entry allowed at all);
virtually open but with minor restrictions; virtually closed but with limited opportunities to enter and operate; and
a residual “intermediate” category of regimes that allow entry and operations but impose restrictions that are
neither trivial nor stringent. It is convenient to assign a value to each of these five categories of regimes on a scale
of decreasing openness from zero to one with intervals of 0.25.
19
   There is some evidence of recent reform in services sectors. For example, a lifting of foreign equity caps, partly or
fully, is observed in Indonesia (air transport, architecture, engineering, telecommunications, distribution services,
audiovisual services, and logistics), China (distribution services and maritime transport), and India (air transport,
insurance, and broadcasting). Mexico has opened the telecommunications sector and introduced procompetitive
reforms.


                                                                                                                     21
Figure 10. Services trade restrictiveness by services sector and region


         Europe and Central Asia


                            OECD


     Latin America and Caribbean


              Sub-Saharan Africa


             East Asia and Pacific


 Middle East and North Africa


                       South Asia


        Gulf Cooperation Council


                                     0       10         20         30        40          50         60        70
                                                      Services trade restrictiveness index

                     Professional services   Transportation   Retail    Telecommunications    Financial

Source: Borchert, Gootiiz, and Mattoo 2014.
Note: This figure compares the restrictiveness of services trade policy across countries based on the World Bank
Services Trade Restrictions Index, which ranges from 0 (completely open) to 100 (completely closed). The
information for the database was collected between 2008 and 2010.

International cooperation and services in global value chains

Much of the openness in services markets and the emergence of services-related GVCs has come from
unilateral liberalization. Services trade negotiations have generated an abundance of rules and
commitments that have enhanced the transparency and security of market access but have not produced
much additional liberalization. One reason is a form of “negotiating tunnel vision,” which has led to a focus
on reciprocal market opening rather than on creating the regulatory preconditions for liberalization. More
could be achieved if negotiations offered regulators the opportunity not just to tie their hands (through
agreed-on commitments) but also to secure assistance to deal with problems they cannot solve on their
own.20

One obvious reason for international cooperation is that poorer developing countries do not always have
regulatory institutions equipped to deal with international competition. These countries would participate


20
  The capture of regulatory barriers by established services providers may also partly explain the limited progress
on this front.


                                                                                                                22
meaningfully in negotiations that offered an opportunity not merely to make binding commitments but
also to mobilize assistance for national regulatory reform. Market-opening negotiations now take their
course in the WTO or in regional fora with only ad hoc links to international assistance for regulatory
reform, including that from institutions like the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. It would
help to establish a credible mechanism for regulatory assistance to support liberalization commitments
by developing countries. Then, developing country policy makers would be reassured that any regulatory
inadequacies that could undermine the benefits of liberalization would be diagnosed and remedied before
any market-opening commitments take effect.

A second obvious reason for cooperation is that regulatory divergence segments markets. Firms must
fulfill separately the regulations of each market—such as financial and accounting standards—which
reduces the scope for exploiting economies of scale and the intensity of competition in each segment.
Regulatory convergence through harmonization or mutual recognition of regulations—or a combination
of the two, as has tended to happen in the European Union—creates an integrated market for
competition, economies of scale, and GVCs to flourish.

A less obvious case for regulatory cooperation is that even countries with sound national regulatory
institutions can find it difficult to address market failures related to services trade that originate outside
their jurisdiction. A country will be reluctant to open its financial markets unless it is confident that it can
prevent market instability and protect its consumers from unsound foreign financial institutions, or to let
its citizens’ data flow to other jurisdictions unless it is reasonably certain that that data will be kept secure,
or to open its transport and Internet-based services markets unless it is convinced that the gains from
liberalization will not be appropriated by international oligopolies. In some cases, such as the supply of
services through locally incorporated subsidiaries, the importing country can, at least in principle, deal
unilaterally with market failure because the provider is in its jurisdiction. But doing so requires adequate
regulatory capacity and could increase the costs of trade by fragmenting markets (say, by requiring local
capital adequacy or local servers). In other cases, such as cross-border banking, transport, or data-
processing services, addressing market failure efficiently requires the cooperation of the regulator in the
exporting country.

A solution to these problems is the assumption of obligations not just by importing countries but also by
exporting countries when negative externalities are transmitted through exports of services. Regional and
multilateral negotiations are now structured in a way that requires importing countries alone to make
binding commitments to market opening, regardless of the conditions in, or cooperative efforts by, source
countries. Instead, market access commitments by importing countries could be made transparently and
predictably conditional on the fulfillment of specific conditions by exporting countries. These exporter
commitments need not be in the context of trade agreements but could be secured in other existing or
new fora for international regulatory cooperation. Then, regulators in importing countries would be
reassured that exporting countries will cooperate to protect their consumers’ privacy, financial security,
and well-being from the consequences of international market failures.

An example of exporting country regulatory commitments: Data flows

International data flows provide an example of how such exporting country commitments work. By
allowing communication and coordination of production across countries, such commitments have
probably been the most important reason for the emergence of GVCs. Governments are taking different


                                                                                                               23
approaches to regulating personal data collected by private enterprises. The European Union has the
world’s most comprehensive legal data protection regime, the Data Privacy Directive (DPD) adopted in
1995, which it plans to develop further.21

The DPD makes it illegal to transfer personal data outside the European Union unless the European
Commission has found that the third country receiving the personal data provides adequate protection.
In the absence of an adequacy decision, data can be transferred to a third country under so-called
derogations, the main ones being consent of the data subject, when the transfer is necessary for the
performance of a contract between the data subject and the controller or is necessary on important public
interest grounds. The DPD also allows for a cross-border transfer pursuant to a contract between the
controller and the processor that guarantees the same protection of the personal data as under the DPD.
A global conglomerate can transfer data among its units where it has implemented binding corporate
rules that also ensure data protection consistent with the DPD.

The U.S.-EU Safe Harbor Framework (SHF), recently supplanted by the so called Privacy Shield Agreement,
was developed in response to the absence of a finding that the United States provides adequate data
protection.22 The European Commission recognized the SHF Privacy Principles as providing adequate
protection for personal data transfers from the European Union to approximately 3,000 companies in the
United States that have signed up to the principles.23 A key difference between the SHF and the EU DPD
adequacy standards is that the SHF recognizes the self-regulatory approach with U.S. government
enforcement as an effective means of guaranteeing that personal data from the European Union will be
accorded privacy protection consistent with the data privacy principles agreed under the SHF. Under the
SHF, U.S. organizations can either join a self-regulatory privacy program that adheres to the safe harbor
principles or self-certify (most common) to the U.S. Department of Commerce that they are complying
with these principles. The US Department of Commerce reviews every SHF self-certification and annual
recertification submission it receives from companies. The U.S. Federal Trade Commission enforces the
SHF against companies that self-certify as being in compliance.24

The exporting country commitments embodied in the SHF have played a crucial role in allowing data flows
between the European Union and the United States even though some concerns were expressed about
its operation and effectiveness. Some of these have been addressed in the recent Privacy Shield
Agreement, but some shortcomings remain (Hufbauer and Jung 2016). A major remaining problem that


21
   As a directive, implementation of the DPD is left to EU member states, which vary widely in their enforcement.
The European Commission is seeking to update the DPD as a regulation.
22
   According to a 1999 Opinion from the Article 29 Working Party, the U.S. approach was seen as not providing
adequate protection in all cases for personal data transferred from the European Union.
23
   The SHF consists of seven principles that reflect mainly the key elements of the EU Data Protection Directive. The
main ones are commitments to give European data subjects notice that a U.S. entity is processing their data; to limit
onward transfers of data to countries that also subscribe to the Safe Harbor principles or are subject of an adequacy
finding; to take reasonable steps to protect personal data from loss or misuse; to process personal data only for the
expressed purposes the organization intends to use it; to give European data subjects access to their personal
information and the ability to correct, amend, or delete inaccurate information; and to commit to enforce the
principles and give European data subjects access to affordable enforcement mechanisms.
24
   To date, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has brought 10 Safe Harbor-related enforcement actions. The
FTC acts on referrals from EU data protection authorities and from third-party private dispute resolution providers,
as well as on its own.


                                                                                                                  24
can affect the emergence of GVCs is that the agreement applies only to EU–U.S. data transfers and so it is
not useful for companies that want to transfer data globally—that is, to establish a globally accessible
database or a global human resources information system. In sum, the SHF is an example of remarkably
effective, yet imperfect, dynamic regulatory cooperation.

Conclusions
This paper has illustrated the role of services in GVCs, drawing on selected evidence. For many purposes,
services can be treated analogously to goods in both the measurement and the analysis of GVCs. And that
is what existing trade-in-value-added databases and the literature that relies on them have tended to do.
Even though the share of services in trade in value added varies across countries and industries, it is
generally high (and rising) and considerably larger than the share of services in gross trade. While directly
exported value added has increased in recent years, close to two-thirds of the growth of services value
added in exports is due to an increase in services embodied in exports of other sectors—particularly
foreign services, revealing the growing importance of GVCs.

The reasons for these developments are variants of the older arguments for why the share of services in
GDP tends to grow: the splintering or outsourcing of services activities from manufacturing firms; the
growing importance in a GVC world of connecting services like telecommunications and transport; the
growing services component in sophisticated manufacturing goods, such as software in cars; and the
increase in the prices of services tasks relative to manufacturing tasks because manufacturing tasks are
easier to offshore to lower cost locations. However, there is little empirical evidence for these arguments,
and understanding the reason for these developments should be an area for future research.

For services GVCs, there are good reasons to look beyond the traditional arm’s-length cross-border trade
data, which ignore the large share of international transactions in services that take place through
commercial presence for FDI. Some initiatives to remedy the commercial presence gap are being taken by
the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and the OECD.

Some evidence shows that the emergence of GVCs through FDI in services can affect downstream sectors.
Improved access to finance, communications, transport, and other services, either through general reform
or reform of FDI, enhances manufacturing firms’ productivity and other aspects of the performance of
downstream firms. The development of domestic services sectors and access to foreign services can also
shift the pattern of comparative advantage. Preliminary evidence suggests that trade-in-value-added data
could help in understanding dynamic structural change and deindustrialization—areas that merit more
analysis.

Some have called for developing a notion of GVCs that goes beyond arm’s-length market-based
transactions to functions within the firm. It may be feasible to distinguish between tasks that would have
been services if they had taken place at arm’s length (such as book-keeping) and other tasks that are
intrinsically agricultural or manufacturing in nature (such as wood processing). But such distinctions slide
on a slippery slope: ultimately, almost any task can potentially be conceived of as an arm’s length service.
A horticultural laborer can be hired as a worker in a horticultural firm, or the laborer’s “fruit-picking”
services can be purchased from an individual or a firm. This kind of deconstruction of a firm into its
constituent tasks could reduce each firm to a bundle of services regardless of what it ultimately produces.



                                                                                                          25
Perhaps what really matters is not what a person makes but what the person does. For a long time, notions
of economic performance have been closely tied to economic sectors—manufacturing, agriculture, and
services. In a world of fragmented production, these distinctions are hard to sustain and may not be
economically meaningful. Instead, the focus could be on the implications of performing certain tasks. Do
product design and marketing offer greater scope for innovation and learning-by-doing and thus for
productivity growth than product assembly? Such task-based analysis—perhaps initially focusing on
occupational structures—could be more help than the traditional sector-based analysis in comprehending
the implications for individuals and countries of the new international division of labor.

Finally, some policies both inhibit and encourage the emergence of services-related GVCs. Even though
most services markets are much more open today, thanks to unilateral liberalization, services reforms
remain incomplete, and barriers to domestic and foreign competition persist. Most of the policy barriers
to competition and to foreign direct investment are not in goods but in services. For example, countries
in Southeast Asia that have reaped huge benefits from the liberalization of trade and investment in goods,
continue to maintain restrictions on foreign presence in services. Trade in transport services, in particular,
remains impeded in both industrial and developing countries by the exclusion of third-country providers
and by quantitative restrictions in bilateral agreements.

International cooperation in services has attempted to replicate the goods model of reciprocal market
opening, but so far that approach has delivered little incremental liberalization. Much more could be
achieved through a greater emphasis on regulatory cooperation. First, and most obviously, greater
regulatory convergence—as in prudential regulation-intensive financial, health, education, and
professional services—is needed to create more integrated markets in which competition, economies of
scale, and GVCs can develop. Second, credible regulatory commitments by exporting countries to
safeguard the interests of consumers in importing countries—as for deposit protection when capital flows
internationally or privacy when data flow internationally—could also induce greater liberalization of
explicit barriers to international transactions by providing importing countries with the regulatory
reassurance they need.




                                                                                                           26
References
Amiti, Mary, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2009a. "Service Offshoring and Productivity: Evidence from the US." The
       World Economy 32 (2): 203–20.

———. 2009b. "Does Service Offshoring Lead to Job Losses? Evidence from the United States."
   In International Trade in Services and Intangibles in the Era of Globalization, edited by M. Reinsdorf
   and M. J. Slaughter, 227–43. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Arnold, Jens, Aaditya Mattoo, and Gaia Narciso. 2008. "Services Inputs and Firm Productivity in Sub-
      Saharan Africa: Evidence from Firm-Level Data." Journal of African Economies 17 (4): 578–99.

Arnold, Jens, Beata Javorcik, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2011. "Does Services Liberalization Benefit
      Manufacturing Firms? Evidence from the Czech Republic." Journal of International Economics 85
      (1): 136–46.

Arnold, Jens, Beata Javorcik, Molly Lipscomb, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2016. "Services Reform and
      Manufacturing Performance: Evidence from India." The Economic Journal 126 (590): 1–39.

Balassa, Bela. 1965. "Trade Liberalization and 'Revealed' Comparative Advantage." The Manchester
      School 33 (2): 99–123.

Baldwin, Richard, and Anthony J. Venables. 2013. "Spiders and Snakes: Offshoring and Agglomeration in
     the Global Economy." Journal of International Economics 90 (2): 245–54.

Baldwin, Richard, Rikard Forslid, and Tadashi Ito. 2015. “Unveiling the Evolving Sources of Value Added in
     Exports.” IDE-JETRO Joint Research Program Series No. 161.

Baldwin, Richard, Tadashi Ito, and Hitoshi Sato. 2014. "Portrait of Factory Asia: Production Network in Asia
     and its Implication for Growth—The ‘Smile Curve.’" Joint Research Program Series 159, Institute of
     Developing Economies-Japan External Trade Organization, Chiba, Japan.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. 1984. "Splintering and Disembodiment of Services and Developing Nations." The
     World Economy 7 (2): 133–44.

Boddin, Dominik, and Philipp Henze. 2014. "International Trade and the Servitization of Manufacturing:
     Evidence from German Micro Data." Working Paper, European Trade Study Group, Münich,
     Germany.

Borchert, Ingo, Batshur Gootiiz, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2014. "Policy Barriers to International Trade in
     Services: Evidence from a New Database." The World Bank Economic Review 28 (1): 162–88.

Brown, C., T. Sturgeon, and J. Lane. 2014. “Using a Business Function Framework to Examine Outsourcing
     and Offshoring by US Organizations.” Institute for Research on Labor and Employment (IRLE)
     Working Paper No. 121-14, IRLE, Berkeley, CA.

Crozet, Matthieu, and Emmanuel Milet. 2014. "The Servitization of French Manufacturing Firms." Centre
      d'Études Prospectives et d'Informations Internationales (CEPII) Working Paper 2014-10, CEPII, Paris.



                                                                                                         27
Duggan, Victor, Sjamsu Rahardja, and Gonzalo J. Varela. 2013. "Service Sector Reform and Manufacturing
     Productivity: Evidence from Indonesia." Policy Research Working Paper No. 6349, World Bank,
     Washington, DC.

Fernandes, Ana, and Caroline Paunov. 2012. "Foreign Direct Investment in Services and Manufacturing
     Productivity: Evidence for Chile." Journal of Development Economics 97 (2): 305–21.

Fetzer, James, and Erich Strassner. 2015. “Identifying Firm Heterogeneity in Value Added and Trade for
      U.S. Business.” Fetzer, James and Strassner, Erich H., Identifying Heterogeneity in the Production
      Components of Globally Engaged Business Enterprises in the United States (June 10, 2015).
      Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2657672 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2657672

Foster-McGregor, Neil, and Robert Stehrer. 2013. "Value Added Content of Trade: A Comprehensive
      Approach." Economics Letters 120 (2): 354–57.

Francois, Joseph, and Julia Woerz. 2008. "Producer Services, Manufacturing Linkages, and Trade." Journal
      of Industry, Competition and Trade 8 (3–4): 199–229.

Hoekman, Bernard, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2008. “Services Trade and Growth.” Policy Research Working
     Paper No. 4461, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, and Euijin Jung. 2016. "The US-EU Privacy Shield Pact: A Work in Progress." Policy
     Brief 16-12, Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC.

Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2001. "The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in World
    Trade." Journal of international Economics 54 (1): 75–96.

Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2016. "A Portrait of Trade in Value Added over Four Decades."
      National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper No. 22974, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

Jones, Charles. 2011. "Intermediate Goods and Weak Links in the Theory of Economic
      Development." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (2): 1–28.

Jones, Ronald, and Henryk Kierzkowski. 2001a. "A Framework for Fragmentation." In Fragmentation: New
      production patterns in the world economy, edited by Sven W. Arndt and Henryk Kierzkowski, 17–
      34. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

———. "Horizontal Aspects of Vertical Fragmentation." 2001b. In Global production and trade in East Asia,
   edited by Leonard K. Cheng and Henryk Kierzkowski, 33–51. New York: Springer.

Ju, Jiandong, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2010. “Domestic Institutions and the Bypass Effect of Financial
       Globalization.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (4): 173–204.

Kelle, Markus. 2013. "Crossing Industry Borders: German Manufacturers as Services Exporters." The World
       Economy 36 (12): 1494–1515.

Kelle, Markus, and Jörn Kleinert. 2010. "German Firms in Service Trade." Applied Economics Quarterly 56
       (1): 51–71.




                                                                                                       28
Kochar, Kalpana, Utsav Kumar, Raghuram Rajan, Arvind Subramanian, and Ioannis Tokatlidis. 2006.
     “India’s Pattern of Development: What Happened, What Follows.” NBER Working Paper No. 12023,
     NBER, Cambridge, MA.

Koopman, Robert, William Powers, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2010. "Give Credit Where Credit is Due:
     Tracing Value Added in Global Production Chains." NBER Working Paper No. 16426, NBER,
     Cambridge, MA.

Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2014. "Tracing Value-Added and Double Counting in
     Gross Exports." The American Economic Review 104 (2): 459–94.

Liu, Xuepeng, Aaditya Mattoo, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2017. “Services Development and
      Comparative Advantage in Manufacturing.” Unpublished manuscript.

Lodefalk, Magnus. 2013. "Servicification of Manufacturing – Evidence from Sweden." International
      Journal of Economics and Business Research 6 (1): 87–113.

Los, Bart, Marcel Timmer, and Gaaitzen de Vries. 2016. "Tracing Value-Added and Double Counting in
      Gross Exports: Comment." American Economic Review 106 (7): 1958–66.

Miroudot, Sébastien. 2016. “Services in Global Value Chains: From Inputs to Value-Creating Activities.”
     Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Trade Policy Paper, OECD, Paris.

Nielsen, P. B., ed. 2008. International Sourcing: Moving Business Functions Abroad. Copenhagen: Statistics
      Denmark.

Nordås, H. 2008. “The Impact of Services Trade Liberalisation on Trade in Non-Agricultural Products.”
     OECD Trade Policy Paper No. 81, OECD, Paris.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2013. Interconnected Economies:
     Benefiting from Global Value Chains. Paris: OECD.

———. 2015. “OECD Expert Group on Extended Supply-Use Tables. Draft: Terms of Reference.”

OECD and WTO (World Trade Organization). 2015. Trade in Value Added (TiVA) database. Paris: OECD.
     Available          at:    http://www.oecd.org/sti/ind/measuringtradeinvalue-addedanoecd-
     wtojointinitiative.htm.

OECD, WTO and World Bank Group. 2014. “Global Value Chains: Challenges, Opportunities, and
     Implications for Policy”. Report prepared for submissions to the G20 Trade Ministers Meeting,
     Sydney, Australia, 19 July 2014.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. 1998. "Financial Dependence and Growth." American Economic
      Review 88 (3): 559–87.

Stehrer, Robert, Neil Foster, and Gaaitzen de Vries. 2012. “Value Added and Factors in Trade: A
      Comprehensive Approach.” World Input-Output Database Working Paper No. 7, European
      Commission, Brussels.



                                                                                                       29
Sturgeon, T., P. B. Nielsen, G. Linden, G. Gereffi, and C. Brown. 2013. “Direct Measurement of Global Value
      Chains: Collecting Product- and Firm-Level Statistics on Value Added and Business Function
      Outsourcing and Offshoring.” In Trade in Value Added: Developing New Measures of Cross-Border
      Trade, edited by A. Mattoo, Z. Wang, and S.-J. Wei, 291–321. London: Centre for Economic Policy
      Research and the World Bank.

Timmer, Marcel, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen de Vries. 2013. "Fragmentation, Incomes and Jobs:
    An Analysis of European Competitiveness." Economic Policy 28 (76): 613–61.

Timmer, M., R. Stehrer, and G. de Vries. 2015. “Occupations in Global Value Chains: Patterns of
    International Specialisation.” OECD Trade Policy Paper, OECD, Paris.

Van der Marel, Erik, and Sebastián Sáez. 2016. “Servicification, Regulation and Economic Performance in
     GVCs.” World Bank Background Paper prepared for the conference, "Making Global Value Chains
     Work for Economic Development and Shared Prosperity," Beijing, March 17–18.

Wang, Zhi, Shang-Jin Wei, and Kunfu Zhu. 2013. "Quantifying International Production Sharing at the
     Bilateral and Sector Levels." NBER Working Paper No. 19677, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

———. 2017. "Measures of Participation in Global Value Chains and Global Business Cycles." NBER
   Working Paper No. 23222, NBER, Cambridge, MA.




                                                                                                        30
