                                                  WPS8197


Policy Research Working Paper                    8197




                    Flies Without Borders
   Lessons from Chennai on Improving India’s Municipal
                 Public Health Services

                              Monica Das Gupta
                               Rajib Dasgupta
                               P. Kugananthan
                               Vijayendra Rao
                              T.V. Somanathan
                                 K.N. Tewari




Development Research Group
Poverty and Inequality Team
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8197


  Abstract
  India’s fast-growing cities face three key challenges in                           fragmentation of services that directly affect health out-
  improving public health outcomes. The first is the per-                            comes. In India, some cities have addressed these challenges
  sistence of weak links in the chain—notably, slums badly                           more effectively than others have. This paper explores the
  underserved with basic civic services—that can pose public                         management of municipal public health services in two
  health threats to all. Richer residents corner public resources,                   major Indian metropolises with sharply contrasting health
  such as water and sanitation services, but their children’s                        and sanitation indicators. The paper explains how Chennai
  health indicators suggest they are deeply affected by con-                         mitigates these challenges through active service outreach to
  tagion from the broader urban environment. The second                              vulnerable populations, and a considered approach to devo-
  challenge relates to devolution of services to elected bodies.                     lution that distributes responsibilities appropriately between
  Devolution works poorly for intangible and highly techni-                          line agencies, technical personnel, and elected representa-
  cal services, such as public health, where success is measured                     tives. Services in Delhi are quite constrained. These policy
  by the lack of (adverse) events. The third challenge is high                       lessons are pertinent to other Indian cities and beyond.




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Inequality Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may
  be contacted at vrao@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
                         Flies Without Borders:*
Lessons from Chennai on Improving India’s Municipal Public Health Services
Monica Das Gupta1, Rajib Dasgupta2, P. Kugananthan3,Vijayendra Rao4, T.V. Somanathan5, and
                                       K.N. Tewari6




Keywords: Public health, Sanitation, Urban, Local government, India, Governance

JEL Codes: D73, H11, I18, O18

Acknowledgements: Valuable suggestions from Pranab Bardhan, Shashank Bhide, Jean Dreze, K.P.
Krishnan, Peter Miovic, Dilip Mookherjee, and J. Radhakrishnan are gratefully acknowledged. *We
thank “Doctors Without Borders” for inspiring the title of this paper.




1
  (Corresponding Author) Research Professor, Department of Sociology, University of Maryland, College
  Park, USA. Email: mdasgupta@gmail.com
2
  Professor, Centre of Social Medicine and Community Health, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
  and earlier Deputy Health Officer, Municipal Corporation of Delhi. Email: dasgupta.jnu@gmail.com
3
  City Health Officer, Chennai Municipal Corporation (retired). Email: drkugan@yahoo.com
4
   Lead Economist, Development Research Group, The World Bank, Washington DC, USA. Email:
  vrao@worldbank.org
5
  Joint Secretary, Government of India, New Delhi, formerly Director at the World Bank. Email:
  tvsomanathan@gmail.com
6
  Municipal Health Officer, Municipal Corporation of Delhi (retired). Email: kntewari@yahoo.com
                         Flies Without Borders:
Lessons from Chennai on Improving India’s Municipal Public Health Services
    ‘Public health is the science and the art of preventing disease…through organized community
    efforts for the sanitation of the environment, the control of community infections, the education
    of the individual in principles of personal hygiene, the organization of medical and nursing
    service for the early diagnosis and preventive treatment of disease….’ (Winslow 1920:30).


Introduction
India has a very high burden of diseases related to poor environmental sanitation, which has many
negative consequences.1 Urban areas are subject to especial public health risks, even though they
have better sanitary infrastructure and access to medical care than rural areas. Their high
population density greatly facilitates the spread of disease, especially when compounded by
underprivileged groups living in insanitary conditions and with inadequate access to quality health
care. Effective municipal services can do much to reduce these risks. For example, they can reduce
mosquito breeding sites by collecting solid waste and maintaining drainage systems, and reduce
exposure to water-borne diseases by improving water and sewerage facilities.
Municipal governance and service delivery in India is widely recognized to be inadequate.2 Rapid
urbanization adds further stress on the system. We argue that there are two key sets of obstacles to
improving municipal public health and sanitation:
(a) “Weak links in the chain”: Very uneven distribution of public resources, especially to slums
    such that poorer residents have inadequate access to water, solid waste, drainage,
    sewerage/toilets. Sanitary conditions for slum dwellers actually worsened between 2008 and
    2012 (Figure 2). There are also distinctions between categories of slums – the terminology
    differing between reports but always resulting in high vulnerability in some pockets of cities.
   This runs counter to the first principle of public health service provision − that public health
   outcomes are driven by the weakest links in the chain, so services need to be designed with a
   population-wide approach focused especially on the most vulnerable links in the chain. This
   requires identifying the weak links − such as underserved populations or weak infrastructure
   − that could pose public health threats, and planning services to address them.
   Without this approach, the whole population is exposed to the risk of disease, including those
   who are able to appropriate public resources. Slums are typically located near more upscale
   areas3 where work can be found − in homes, offices, factories, or the informal sector. The
   broader urban population is exposed to the diseases that slum residents suffer as a consequence
   of the insanitary conditions in which they are forced to live.



                                                                                                        2
   Child stunting illustrates how richer households can suffer from the effects of poor sanitation.
   Child stunting is very high in India: 48 percent of boys and of girls were stunted in 2005-06.4
   Yet the most striking feature of the Indian data is the high levels of stunting among the
   wealthiest quintile of households, compared to lower-income countries in regions such as Latin
   America or Sri Lanka, which have better public health systems (Figure 1). There is almost no
   child stunting in the top wealth quintile in these countries, while in India 25% are stunted.5
   Studies indicate a strong relationship between increases in height and decreases in disease
   burden.6
   Children in the top wealth quintile are unlikely to be stunted because of shortage of food or
   medical care.7 However, they are exposed to contaminated environments outside their homes
   if not at home. Access to medical care ensures low mortality among these privileged children,
   but repeated infections expose them to stunting – which is associated with lower cognitive
   ability, earnings, and longevity.8 This happens even if a child does not appear ill:
       ‘Subclinical infections, resulting from exposure to contaminated environments and poor
       hygiene, are associated with stunting, owing to nutrient malabsorption and reduced ability of
       the gut to function as a barrier against disease-causing organisms’ (WHO 2014:2).

   Recognition of the need to focus on the weakest links in the chain in order to protect the elites
   was a key motivation for municipal governments in the West to invest in improving sanitary
   conditions in their crowded and dirty slums.9
       ‘The knowledge that the diseases of the workers who sewed clothes in their filthy tenement
       homes or who processed food could be spread to decent, clean, and respectable citizens served
       as a powerful incentive to the reform of public health.’ (Duffy 1971:809).

   The Government of India’s ‘Swacch Bharat’ sanitation campaign offers hope that sanitation
   and public health may get more of the importance they deserve in public policy.

(b) Governance arrangements that impair the accountability of service providers, including:
      Devolution of service delivery that transfers funds and responsibilities to elected local
       bodies, without strong arrangements for holding them accountable for effective financial
       management or service delivery.
       Public health services are especially vulnerable to such devolution, for at least two reasons.
       First, their success is defined by a lack of (adverse) events. It is far easier for elected
       representatives to reap credit with their constituents by opening a hospital. Second,
       decision-making for public health services is highly technical in nature, and needs to shift
       in response to ever-shifting disease conditions. This is difficult to achieve if key decisions
       must be approved by non-technical people.
      Fragmentation of services with inadequate coordination arrangements. Public health
       outcomes depend on the provision of multiple services − in particular water supply, solid
       waste, drainage, and sewerage. Poor drainage or uncollected garbage can seriously hamper
       efforts at mosquito control efforts. Many other sectors are also involved here, such as those
       responsible for leveling roads and drains.
       Poor coordination of these services is detrimental to protecting population health. This
       also demoralizes public health staff and citizens seeking to improve health conditions.

                                                                                                       3
This paper illustrates how these issues can affect municipal public health services, and how some
of their negative impacts on health outcomes can be mitigated. It looks at the organization of these
services in Chennai and Delhi, two of India’s major metropolitan cities. The paper focuses largely
on Chennai, which offers some lessons on ways to mitigate these constraints on public health
services. Examples from Delhi illustrate how severely these issues can hinder service delivery.
Service delivery in the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) is quite sharply affected by these
problems. It is also affected by factors unique to Delhi, notably (a) the complex administrative
relationship between the central government, Delhi’s state government, and the MCD, and (b) that
Delhi is surrounded by the National Capital Region, which has heavy traffic to and from Delhi,
but is administered by three other states. The MCD was also split in 2012 into three bodies (for
North, South, and East Delhi) − but organized as before, so the MCD discussed here refers to both
the pre-2012 and the trifurcated MCD. Problems arising from these unique aspects of Delhi are
not discussed here. This paper explores problems with the MCD’s public health services arising
from the issues summarized above, which apply across much of the country.
The functioning of the Chennai Municipal Corporation (CMC) illustrates how Indian
municipalities can mitigate some of the systemic handicaps they face. The Tamil Nadu state
administration keeps some pressure on CMC public health service delivery by (a) professional
management within the CMC, and (b) technical support and monitoring by the State Health
Department. That these efforts are helpful is suggested by Chennai’s relatively good health and
sanitation outcomes compared to other major metropolitan cities (Figures 3 and 4, Table 1).
This paper summarizes lessons from Chennai, which are reproducible in other Indian
municipalities. These help to mitigate the health impact of poor slum sanitation and devolution of
service delivery. However, more needs to be done to address the issue of service fragmentation, in
particular by giving the CMC’s public health department greater authority and responsibility to
assure better sanitation and public health engineering in the city.
This paper focuses on municipal public health services, complementing earlier papers that
discussed public health management in Tamil Nadu’s districts.10 It is based on extended field
interviews and secondary data, as described in Appendix 1. Section 1 discusses the issue of unequal
resource distribution, and how the CMC mitigates its health impact. Section 2 discusses the
problems arising from devolution and fragmentation of service delivery, followed by a discussion
of how some of these problems are mitigated in the CMC. Section 3 concludes.


Section 1: Very unequal allocation of resources
Economically and politically privileged groups in India – as in most countries − tend to corner
public resources, so their areas receive better civic services.11 For example, Delhi has huge
disparities in the planned provision of water to different sub-populations, let alone its actual
provision.12 In 2013, a quarter of Delhi’s population was being supplied water from tankers, at an
average of 3.82 liters per day per capita, although the norm was 172.13 In 2014-15, only 6% of
unauthorized slums had some sewerage facilities, rising to 14.6% by 2016-17.14 This sharply
increases slum residents’ exposure to disease, exacerbating vulnerabilities arising from crowding,
poor housing, poverty, and lower access to health care.


                                                                                                  4
1.1 Lessons from Chennai on mitigating some of the negative impact on health outcomes15
The CMC’s Health Department seeks to mitigate this uneven allocation of resources by focusing
their services especially on the most vulnerable. This is stated on their website:
    ‘The main aim of the Public Health Department in the Chennai Corporation… is to reduce health
    inequalities throughout the city of Chennai targeting resources, programs, and attending to high
    need neighborhoods in the city.’ 16

The Health Department manages the Urban Primary Health Centres (UPHCs), and uses them
systematically to provide active medical outreach to vulnerable populations with a view to (a)
helping the individual, (b) dealing with cases of communicable disease before they cause an
outbreak, and (c) improving their disease surveillance data so that they can analyze disease patterns
and tailor their services accordingly.
They send teams to slums to provide general medical care and to conduct routine “fever
screenings” for vector-borne diseases, typhoid, etc., and seasonal diseases such as conjunctivitis.
The frequency of these health camps depends on needs. For example, during the monsoons they
hold two camps daily until the “fever” cases decline, and in healthier seasons they hold two camps
a month. This supplements the health care they provide to slum residents who visit the UPHCs
directly. UPHCs are typically located close to slums.
The two branches of the CMC’s Health Department (medical and public health) work in tandem
for these camps. Sanitary Inspectors (from public health) arrange the camps’ location. Along with
Basic Health Workers (from public health) and Female Health Visitors (from medical services),
the Sanitary Inspectors conduct health education on communicable disease prevention, mosquito
breeding, personal/domestic hygiene, and environmental sanitation.
The public heath staff conduct vector control in the slums. They also test the water quality and
general environmental sanitation conditions, and inform the Water and Sewerage Board
(MetroWater) and the Engineering Department respectively of shortfalls. They would be far better
placed to protect population health if they had more authority to require other departments to
improve environmental sanitation in slums and more broadly across the city.
Similar active screening and treatment is conducted in the Homeless Shelters. The CMC’s Public
Health Department is the nodal agency for the shelters, and the Zonal Health Officers are
responsible for ensuring that the shelters in their area are well run.17
Active outreach is also conducted for maternal and child health (MCH) services including
contraception, antenatal care, delivery, postnatal care, and immunization. The Family Welfare staff
under the Zonal Medical Officer have a program to visit slums every month on fixed dates, so that
women know when to expect them for services. They enumerate marriages, pregnancies, births,
deaths, who is eligible for family planning, and new people who have moved to the slum. In their
home visits for MCH care, they look for cases of fever, vector-borne and diarrheal diseases, and
any re-emergence of diseases like polio. These cases are followed up by the medical staff, and
referred to the public health staff for tracing contacts and preventive measures.




                                                                                                       5
Another way of protecting the health of the poor is to sell subsidized meals. The CMC does this
through a chain of very popular outlets,18 whose hygiene and staff health are checked by the Health
Department. The state government has also provided free school meals for decades.19
By contrast, the MCD’s health dispensaries and MCH centers do little active outreach, confining
themselves to serving those who come to the clinic. The Delhi state government’s clinics do
likewise. There is some slum outreach through the Mobile Health Scheme, but they serve low
proportions of the slum population except for pulse polio immunization.20 The difference between
Chennai and Delhi’s slum health outreach is evident in the MCH service coverage and in the child
stunting rates (Figures 3 and 4).
Delhi’s health clinics confine themselves to reporting cases of the notifiable diseases on the central
government’s list (unlike the wide range of diseases tracked in Chennai for planning services), and
report only cases that come to their clinics instead of actively searching for cases. Delhi’s homeless
shelters are run by the Slum Board, with no effort to systematically screen residents’ health. All
this affects public health service planning in Delhi.


Section 2: Governance arrangements that impair accountability
Some quite severe handicaps to effective service delivery arise from governance arrangements that
apply across most states. The key arrangements that impair accountability in public health service
delivery are summarized in below, followed by a discussion of how some of these problems are
mitigated in the CMC.

2.1 Impairing Accountability: Devolution of service delivery to elected local bodies21
The 74th Constitutional Amendment of 1992 tasked states to devolve power for several functions
(including sanitation and health) to urban local bodies. This sought to transfer “funds, functions,
and functionaries” from line agencies to elected representatives.22 The Commissioner remains the
Chief Executive of the Corporation, but the Mayor and Councilors were empowered to exercise
control over the Commissioner’s powers and functions, and over the other staff.23
Devolution can improve the delivery of many types of service, especially those that are easily
monitored locally, such as teacher attendance and availability of water supply.24 However, several
problems arise with devolution of public health service delivery,25 including:
a) Elected representatives have little incentive to provide relatively intangible services such as
   public health except when faced with an outbreak that gets media attention or citizen outcry.
   Even in response to an outcry, for example over dengue, politicians typically demand visible
   measures such as “fogging” whole neighborhoods with insecticide spray rather than the more
   effective approach of controlling larval density. By contrast, they have clear incentives to
   improve medical services, which are highly visible and offer easy political credit. 26
   Devolution of funds and responsibilities without strong accountability mechanisms can make
   for poor management of finances and service quality, and reduce focus on providing public
   goods.27 Local politicians are primarily accountable to their parties. They are less directly
   accountable to their constituents, except at the time of the next election. However, elections

                                                                                                    6
   take place only every few years − and public health takes a back seat among election issues in
   most countries, especially where citizens have little experience of healthier environments.
   Under these circumstances, devolution to local bodies can diminish technical /professional
   inputs into service delivery. This can be very discouraging to staff performance. Even in a
   country like Sri Lanka, where citizens have come to expect good public health services, the
   1987 devolution to the province level made it harder for line agency staff to maintain
   professional standards.28
b) Some areas of service delivery are highly technical in nature, and require management by
   trained professionals rather than lay politicians.29 Public health requires a high level of
   technical expertise, to assess evolving threats and design effective responses to them.
   Professionalization of the sector is important for sustaining institutional capacity. And as
   Mansuri and Rao (2012:177) note: “When externalities are significant, it is particularly
   important that standards and rules be set at a higher level”.
Interestingly, two small privileged enclaves of Delhi rejected such devolution. The New Delhi
Municipal Council (NDMC), home to the central government that had promoted devolution,
explicitly stated that such arrangements would be inefficient:
    ‘Efficient function of the Municipal services in this area is critical for the internal image of the
    country…. it was felt that any scheme for the governance of this area based on conventional
    pattern of representative local self-government, would be unworkable and out of place since the
    pre-eminent character of this area is that of the seat of the Central Government.’ 30

The NDMC Council is managed by Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officers nominated by
the Central Government, with some inputs from local elected representatives and civilian
professionals.31 The Delhi Cantonment area is run by the Army, with some inputs from local
elected representatives. These small enclaves of Delhi are well-resourced, which certainly helps,
but their governance structure is critical for achieving good outcomes. The NDMC and Delhi
Cantonment rank very high in the urban sanitation surveys, while the MCD that serves 96% of
Delhi’s population languishes far behind (Table 1).
Devolution has been carried out in both the MCD and the CMC, with elected representatives
formally in charge, while IAS officers manage the staff. However, their governance and
accountability arrangements differ substantially, with the CMC retaining far more professional
control of service delivery.
In the MCD, the elected representatives (Councilors) take charge at every level, from the
headquarters down to the ward where grassroots service delivery takes place. At each of these
levels, they take all the major decisions while the technical and field staff work under them. There
are few accountability mechanisms within the MCD, and scant checks on the Councilors’ powers.
A randomized control trial in Delhi slums found faint evidence that politicians respond to citizens’
reporting of problems with sanitary services.32 With enough political pressure, Councilors can
have IAS officers transferred,33 so the latter are constrained in monitoring and supporting their
staff. The MCD’s technical staff is thus left to adjust as best they can to the wishes of the elected
politicians.



                                                                                                           7
In response to Delhi’s evident service shortfalls, efforts have been made to devolve responsibilities
further to communities. Resident Welfare Associations are asked to monitor service delivery, but
it is hardly possible for them to find the time and technical expertise to do this. Another thrust is
to organize Mohalla Sabha meetings, where politicians ask citizens to tell municipal staff what
they should do.34 This followed a central government initiative to strengthen community
participation in municipal services, with the model Nagara Raj Bill of 2006 adopted by many
states.35 It is not clear that this has improved public health and sanitation services in Delhi. By
contrast, the CMC emphasizes that protecting public health is a core function of the state:
    ‘among all the objects sought to be secured by Governmental laws, none is more important than
    the preservation of the Public Health and an imperative obligation rests upon the civic body
    through its agencies to take all necessary steps to promote this object.’36

In Tamil Nadu state as a whole, line agency staff are not devolved to be managed by local bodies.37
This helps maintain technical and managerial standards. Moreover, the CMC Act empowers the
state government to remove elected representatives for misdemeanors, to dissolve the entire
Council for incompetence, and to suspend/cancel any of their decisions/actions.38 The MCD Act
is vaguer on these issues.39
Tamil Nadu offers broader lessons on the appropriate distribution of responsibilities and powers.
Elected representatives in the districts tend to be given monitoring roles that they are well-placed
to play,40 though they have a broader role in the CMC. Professional administrators form the top
management, but have technical people manage technical issues. For example, the State Health
Department is headed by an IAS officer, but immediately below him technical Directorates
manage the department’s work. The latter are accorded high independent status — for example,
the Director of Public Health is the technical advisor on public health matters to the Health
Secretary and the Health Ministry. This contrasts sharply with the Central Health Ministry and
many State Health Departments, where technical staff are buried in relatively low positions.

2.2 Impairing Accountability: Fragmentation of service delivery41
Fragmentation of services is a well-known problem in municipal governance. In principle,
fragmentation need not create problems, if each authority is careful to discharge its responsibilities,
and there are strong arrangements for monitoring by, and accountability to, a higher authority −
but many studies show that this is not the case in Indian municipalities.42
Fragmentation poses special problems in public health, given the high degree of service
coordination needed for good outcomes. Such coordination is facilitated in the developed world
by enabling public health authorities to monitor services provided by many other actors – such as
those managing drainage − to ensure that they do not threaten public health.43 Such mandates
would be very helpful for public health departments in India.
Some of the common ways in which public health departments in Indian municipalities are
separated from other key inputs to public health include:
   Separation of public health from those handling key sanitary inputs such as solid waste, drains,
    and sewerage. Issues related to public health engineering were separated from the Health
    Department in most states, including Delhi and Tamil Nadu. The CMC makes some attempt
    to resolve this by having a Deputy Commissioner and Assistant Commissioners oversee both

                                                                                                     8
    Health and Solid Waste Management, holding joint meetings to review and coordinate their
    work. The MCD health department has little such inter-sectoral coordination.
   In many cities, including Delhi and Chennai, water supply and sewerage are managed by
    Boards based outside the Municipal Corporation. The Municipal Commissioner serves on the
    Board of Directors, but there is no representation from the Health Department of either the
    municipality or the state.44 There are arrangements for joint water testing by field staff of the
    Board and the Corporations.
   Separate Boards for handling slums (Slum Boards) have been established in many cities,
    including in Delhi and Chennai. This has the unfortunate side effect of separating slum
    planning from the rest of urban planning. Slum Boards are primarily charged with clearing
    slums and resettling the populations into approved housing.45 They are not well-placed for
    additional charges such as running homeless shelters in Delhi: having these managed by Zonal
    Health Officers in Chennai greatly enhances their management and integration into public
    health services.
   Delhi’s Department of Food Safety was separated from its Health Department, following the
    central government’s 2004 revision of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.46 Tamil
    Nadu’s Food Safety Administration is based in the Health Department, with a senior member
    of the State Public Health Directorate as the Director (Food Safety).
   Large municipalities have several other agencies whose work directly affects public health
    conditions. These include the agencies in charge of city planning, and the Public Works
    Department, which constructs and maintains major infrastructure. The health sector has limited
    input into the work of these agencies.47
The MCD’s Health Department is undermined also by internal fragmentation: its public health,
veterinary health, and medical services are managed by three separate Directorates.
   Veterinary Health is not under the Municipal Health Officer, except human vaccine for rabies.
    The CMC’s City Health Officer manages Veterinary Services − controlling zoonotic diseases,
    slaughterhouse hygiene and meat safety.
   Medical and public health services in the MCD do not work closely with each other, as
    described in Section 1. By contrast in the CMC, these two services work in close cooperation
    with each other at headquarters and in the field (Sections 1 and 2.3(b)).

2.3 Lessons from Chennai on mitigating the negative impact of these governance
    arrangements

(a) Management by professional managerial and technical cadres48
The CMC headquarters is managed by the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioners, who are
professional managers from the Indian Administrative Service (IAS). Junior managers (Regional
Deputy Commissioner and Assistant Commissioners) oversee services in the CMC’s 3 Regions
and 15 Zones. Below these professional administrators, technical staff manage service delivery.
All IAS officers in Tamil Nadu are sensitized to the complex requirements of public health
services, as from the outset of their careers in the districts they attend the inter-sectoral meetings

                                                                                                    9
where State Public Health Directorate staff discuss plans for responding to seasonal health threats,
emergencies, and disasters, and highlight the inter-sectoral coordination they require. These issues
are discussed at all levels of the state administration.
Health services come under the Deputy Commissioner of Health and Solid Waste Management.
Below her are the City Health Officer who manages the public health services, and the City
Medical Officer who manages the medical services. At the Zonal level are the Zonal Health
Officers, the Zonal Medical Officers, and all their field staff.
Keeping the public health and medical services separately staffed ensures that public health
services are not ignored in favor of medical care. Importantly, though, these two sets of staff work
very closely together to protect population health (Section 2.3b). The Health Officers are from the
public health cadre, i.e. they are medical doctors trained in and charged entirely with public health
administration. The Medical Officers are medical staff.
Regular coordination meetings to monitor and review the work are held at every level of the CMC
hierarchy, using videoconferencing to include all staff. Monitoring is facilitated by the fact that
the field staff responsibilities are clearly delineated at a micro level, as described below.
The coordination meetings begin by discussing the minutes of the previous meeting, to check that
outstanding issues have been resolved. The work of the units is then reviewed, and monitoring and
supervision strengthened to help resolve problems. Complaints received are discussed, and needed
actions recorded for follow-up at the next review meeting. Meetings chaired by the administrative
heads focus on general review of services and complaints, while those chaired by technical heads
provide technical support and oversight of field operations.

   The commissioner holds weekly meetings with all department heads, down to zonal staff
    including the Zonal Health Officers and Zonal Medical Officers. Among other business, they
    review which complaints are still unresolved, and instructions given for resolving them within
    seven days.
   Some meetings include staff from the health and solid waste departments. The Deputy
    Commissioner holds fortnightly meetings that include all these staff down to the zonal heads
    of the units. The meetings held by the Regional Deputy Commissioner and by the Assistant
    Commissioner also include the health and solid waste staff.
   Some meetings are just for the health staff. The City Health Officer and the City Medical
    Officer of the CMC headquarters hold weekly meetings of their staff, first separately and then
    jointly. The Zonal Health Officers and Zonal Medical Officers hold joint meetings fortnightly
    to review and coordinate their work. The Zonal Medical Officers hold weekly meetings to
    review the work of the Urban Primary Health Centres, and inspect them jointly with the Zonal
    Health Officers.
Complaints are collated and acted on. The CMC has a Public Relations Officer who scans the
media for complaints about municipal services. Citizens can register complaints on the Online
Grievance Redressal Mechanism, or by ordinary mail. People can also send instant photos of poor
solid waste management to the Sanitary Inspector or Zonal Health Officer, who forwards them to
the solid waste staff for action. If no action is taken, they inform their superior or submit the
complaint on the online Grievance Redressal Mechanism.

                                                                                                  10
While far from perfect, this system of handling complaints is a serious one. It contrasts sharply
with the situation in Delhi, where citizens’ complaints and almost daily newspaper reports
detailing poor health and sanitary conditions are not acted upon. The Delhi High Court sometimes
intervenes and orders the MCD to act, but even this may be ignored.49
Other standard management procedures in the CMC include recruiting staff only to fill posts that
have been sanctioned and included in the budget. Recruitment is through the Employment
Exchange, from whose lists the Commissioner sends a list of potential candidates for approval to
the Appointments Committee (of elected representatives). By contrast, in Delhi, staff recruitment
especially at lower levels is treated largely as an instrument of political patronage. The ranks of
field staff such as sweepers are bloated as a result, exacerbating the MCD’s financial crisis.50
The CMC Health staff are also helped by having their authority limited in other ways, reducing
the potential lucrativeness of their functions. Drugs are procured externally by the Tamil Nadu
Medical Services Corporation, which also instructs them on what insecticides to procure and from
whom. Trade licensing is handled by the CMC’s Revenue Department, with a “No Objection
Certificate” required from the Public Health Department only for larger enterprises. CMC health
staff report that in meetings chaired by elected representatives, the discussion is largely on
departments such as Engineering, for which large contracts need to be approved.
Public health services in the CMC are also helped by being underpinned not only by the Municipal
Act, but also by Tamil Nadu’s Public Health Act. The latter offers a much more comprehensive
legal basis for public health action than India’s Municipal Acts. Unfortunately, most states lack a
Public Health Act.
The CMC Health Department’s clear understanding of public health is reflected in the mission
statement on its website.51 This contrasts sharply with the largely ad hoc list of services that are
listed on the health department websites of most Indian municipalities, including Delhi.52

(b) Tight organization of public health services53
The CMC’s public health services are tightly organized on the ground. Chennai is divided into
three regions, each with an Additional City Health Officer and a Sanitary Officer. The main
operational units are the 15 zones headed by Zonal Health Officers. These are staffed with (a)
entomologists who conduct daily vector surveillance, (b) Sanitary Officers and Sanitary Inspectors
whose tasks include conducting inspections, testing water quality, supervising the work of field
staff, and collating vital registration and disease surveillance data. Each zone has 3-4 units, each
supervised by a Sanitary Officer, and each unit has 5 divisions.
The division is a major operational unit for public health services. These are headed by a Sanitary
Inspector, and staffed with a Basic Health Worker and Sector Workers allocated to sectors of about
500-800 households each. The Sector Workers are responsible for visiting each household once a
week to check for vector breeding in and around homes, and take anti-larval measures. However,
their staff size needs to be increased in response to rapid urban population growth. If these workers
come across cases of fever, they report these to the Sanitary Inspector.
Sanitary Inspectors inform the Solid Waste or the Engineering Department if they see insanitary
conditions such as overflowing sewers, water accumulation, or garbage accumulation, and if no

                                                                                                  11
action is taken they can complain to the Deputy Commissioner. That Chennai ranked 13th of 423
cities surveyed for sanitary conditions in 2009-10 indicates that this system could work better
(Table 1).
The public health and medical staff work very closely together on the ground. A few examples are
their fortnightly joint review meetings, collaboration in disease surveillance and health camps, and
joint inspections of the Urban Primary Health Centres. The collaboration runs throughout their
work: for example, clusters of cases are referred by the medical staff to the Zonal Health Officer
for the Sanitary Inspectors to trace contacts, and to address conditions that caused the outbreak.
The health department uses the CMC’s powers to improve disease reporting, including from the
private sector which is widely viewed elsewhere in India as delinquent on this. They point out that
private health facilities need the CMC for their licensing, so they have an incentive to comply with
disease reporting requirements.

(c) Professional support from the State Directorate of Public Health54
Tamil Nadu’s State Public Health Directorate plays an important role in providing technical
support and oversight of the CMC’s public health services. Its Director has overriding powers
across the state, to monitor outbreaks, ask local bodies about their disease control measures, and
make technical suggestions. S/he can also offer technical expertise as needed, and send manpower
if an outbreak is not under control. In the case of the CMC, the Director communicates directly
with the Commissioner, to send orders to the CMC and to review progress, and will sit in the
review meetings. The Directorate backs up the CMC’s public health work in many other ways,
such as providing continuing training for CMC health staff, and help with emergencies.
This strong external technical support and oversight helps the CMC’s public health staff to
maintain professional standards in their work, counter-balancing the elected representatives’ lay
opinions and more politically-driven agendas. For example, they note that they can explain to
their elected representatives that spraying insecticide in the air (“fogging”) is largely ineffective.
They felt that ideally the City Health Officer and Zonal Health Officers would be line agency staff
serving a term with the CMC and therefore interested in maintaining credibility with their peer
group − instead of serving in the CMC for their lifetime, with the constraints imposed by elected
representatives.
The State Public Health Directorate also forms a technical peer group against which the CMC
health staff can measure themselves. It is easy for the CMC public health staff to communicate
with counterparts in the Directorate, as they have the same training. The senior staff are from the
public health cadre (medical doctors trained in public health administration), just like their
counterparts in the Directorate. The Health Inspectors are also trained like the Sanitary Inspectors,
who are their counterparts in the Directorate.
Tamil Nadu’s powerful technical Public Health Directorate contrasts sharply with other states,
where such expertise is at best scattered, and independent oversight of public health conditions
and services is at best weak. The Directorate raises awareness of public health issues across Tamil
Nadu, sensitizing the state administration to these matters as described. Combined with the
Directorate’s health education outreach, this helps raise broad awareness of public health issues
and puts pressure on politicians to seek better services. This is reflected, for example, in local

                                                                                                   12
politicians reporting the location of stray cattle to the Zonal Health Officers and asking them to
have them removed.
Delhi’s Directorate of Health Services’ Public Health Wing is small and dependent on project
funds even for hiring its State Epidemiologist. It cannot offer the MCD much technical support.
While most states have a larger public health unit, these typically lack the autonomy and mandate
to provide the strong support that Tamil Nadu’s State Directorate routinely provides.55


Conclusions
Key organizational principles for effective public health and sanitation services include: (1) a focus
on the weakest links in the chain; (2) management of services and budgets by professional
managers and technical staff, with carefully structured oversight by elected representatives; and
(3) coordination of the work of different actors.
Over the years, a series of policies have been adopted in India which handicap services to reduce
the population’s exposure to disease. One is to have “weak links in the chain” through unequal
distribution of civic amenities. Slums are especially neglected and their poor sanitation hurts their
residents and creates crucibles from which contagion can spread across the city.
Another major issue arises from the implementation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment tasking
many basic services (including sanitation and health) to be devolved from line agencies to elected
local bodies, without strong mechanisms for ensuring that these bodies are held accountable for
services. In the case of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, this results in budgetary disarray as
personal and party interests override concerns about budgetary discipline. In view of weak service
delivery, the central government encouraged states to formalize community oversight of services,
again without specifying strong accountability mechanisms.
Such devolution can be damaging for services such as public health, which require a high level of
technical knowledge to respond to the ever-shifting threats to the population’s health. And the
application of the technical expertise is greatly helped by having a strong State Public Health
Directorate. Without this, even the understanding of what constitutes public health services can
unravel, as it has in Delhi.
A third major handicap arises from increasing fragmentation of agencies, hindering coordination
of services that are central to protecting health. Provision of water supply and sewers has been
separated from many municipal corporations. Within the corporations, the management of solid
waste and drains has been separated from the health department − fairly completely in Delhi, but
with more effort at coordination in Chennai. The revised Food Safety Act made it possible to
place food safety outside the health department, as was done in Delhi State.
The Chennai Municipal Corporation (CMC) manages to avoid some of the negative fallout of these
policies. It benefits from the Tamil Nadu state administration’s efforts to maintain an effective
distribution of responsibilities between line agencies, technical personnel, and elected
representatives. This paper illustrates some of the ways in which this helps the CMC mitigate
some of the systemic shortfalls that confront Indian municipalities. These include:



                                                                                                   13
   Considered approach to devolution and management: Tamil Nadu state does not transfer all
    control over funds and line agency staff to local bodies. The CMC Act empowers the state
    government to sanction errant elected representatives. The CMC’s work is overseen by elected
    representatives, but is managed by a few professional administrators from the Indian
    Administrative Service and by technical professionals below them. These managers hold
    regular meetings to review their staff’s work. Such monitoring is facilitated by tight
    organization of services, with clearly-specified responsibilities.
    The CMC field staff is helped to maintain professional standards by monitoring and support
    from the CMC’s Headquarters and from the Tamil Nadu State Public Health Directorate.
    Public health and medical services are kept separate so that both sets of services can focus on
    their quite distinct tasks, but they work in close collaboration to maximize their joint product.
   Clear understanding of and support for public health services: Tamil Nadu has a strong State
    Public Health Directorate, whose head is empowered to monitor and support the CMC’s public
    health services. It provides crucial support to the CMC.
    This Directorate is unusual in India in its strong capacity for public health administration, with
    a clear mandate and budget. Its staff are experienced in managing public health services. At
    all levels of the state administration, the Directorate staff participate in inter-sectoral meetings
    to discuss current and potential public health threats, raising administrators’ awareness of the
    complexities involved in generating good public health outcomes. In most other states, State
    Public Health Directorates are too weak to do this.
   Active approach to service delivery, especially to vulnerable populations. The CMC’s Health
    Department provides active outreach to vulnerable populations, including setting up camps in
    slums and visiting homeless shelters. They screen slum residents for diseases, to treat them,
    as well as to collect disease prevalence data to inform service planning and avert outbreaks.
    Such outreach is crucial given the high externalities of communicable diseases.
This approach goes far towards improving health outcomes in Chennai, as suggested by lower
levels of child stunting than in other major Indian metropolises. Child stunting levels in Chennai’s
slums are much lower than among Delhi’s non-slum population. Maternal and child health service
coverage in slums is also very high in Chennai, and far lower in Delhi.
The CMC’s approach is fairly successful in mitigating the negative impacts of devolution and of
neglecting vulnerable groups. However, its health department needs to be given more authority to
ensure better environmental sanitation in Chennai, to further improve health outcomes.
These lessons from Chennai can be used in other Indian cities, since they share the same overall
administrative system. Chennai should not be dismissed as an irrelevant outlier, as was Kerala’s
success in improving human development indicators. Some might argue that Tamil Nadu is
“different” because of its bureaucracy’s strong work culture. This misses the point that a strong
work culture can be generated by systematically applying standard management methods. Staff
are motivated to work well if they are trained, supported in their work, given clear responsibilities
and held accountable for them. It also helps to work in a team with a shared mission, such as to
protect people’s health. Conversely, work cultures unravel with pervasive lack of accountability
and responsiveness from above, as is starkly evident in Delhi.



                                                                                                     14
                      Figure 1: Percentage of children stunted, by wealth quintile,
                   India, Sri Lanka and poorest countries in Latin America circa 2006
              75



                                      60

                                                     54

                   48                                                   49
              50
                                            46
                                              43
                                                                                           41
  % Stunted




                                          34              34
                                                        31 32
                        27                      28
                                                                           26                                  25
                      24 25
              25                                                               2220
                                                                   20
                               17                                                     16    15
                                                                                              14 13
                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                    5 7 5


               0
                         All              Poorest         Second             Middle             Fourth            Highest
                                                     Household Wealth Quintile
               India 2005-6, GDP $3,213              Haiti 2005-6, GDP$1,562                    Bolivia 2008, GDP $4,695

               Honduras 2005-6 GDP $3,962            Sri Lanka 2006-7, GDP $6,527



Notes:
1. The countries selected are from countries with surveys around 2005-06, for easy comparison with the
   last DHS (NFHS) survey data available for India. These are all low or low-middle income countries,
   as classified by the World Bank (2005:291).
2. GDP per capita in 2005, PPP (constant 2011 international $). Source: World Bank, World Devt
   Indicators http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.KD
3. Child stunting data from the DHS surveys (IIPS 2007, Cayemites et al 2007, Coa et al 2009, DCS
   2009, Secretaria de Salud 2006). Stunting is defined as a height-for-age which is -2 or more Standard
   Deviations below the 2006 WHO reference population median in their child growth standards.*
4. The DHS Household Wealth Quintiles are estimated from a list of household assets.
* Studies find similar genetic potential for growth in height across populations (Natale and Rajagopalan
 2014:6). Cross-population differences in height seem related largely to non-genetic, environmental
 factors, while genetic factors play more of a role in intra-population differences (NCD-RisC 2016:1).




                                                                                                                                15
                    Figure 2: Percentage of slums by sanitary conditions,
                                   India 2008-9 and 2012
  100
               78
   80                71

   60
                                                                    41
   40                             31           31                        32      2008-09
                                                            27
                             15           16           16                        2012
   20

     0
              Tap major    No latrine   No drainage No garbage Approach
              source of     facility      facility     disposal    road
               drinking                             arrangement waterlogged
                water                                             in rain


          Source: NSSO (2013)



                    Figure 3: Maternal & Child Health Service Coverage
                           in Slums, Chennai and Delhi, 2005-06
                                         99                  99
     100
                      89

         80

                                               58
         60                52
                                                                  42
         40
                                                                              Chennai
                                                                              Delhi
         20


          0
                % of children aged % of women who % of live births born
                 12-23 mths, fully    received 3+       <5 years before the
                vaccinated before Antenatal Care visits survey, delivered
                    the survey                         with assistance from
                                                         health personnel


Source: Gupta et al (2009: Figures 3.5, 3.8 and 3.9), derived from India’s NFHS-3 survey.




                                                                                            16
                      Figure 4: Percentage of children stunted by slum/non-
                       slum residence, 4 metropolitan cities, India 2005-06
               60
                                      51
               50                                    47
                                                          42
               40                          38
                                                                    33
               30      28                                                             Slum
                            25
                                                                           23
                                                                                      Non-slum
               20

               10

                0
                      Chennai         Delhi          Mumbai         Kolkata

                       Source: Arnold et al (2009:12), derived from India’s NFHS-3 survey.

                            Table 1. Sanitation rankings of metropolitan cities

                                                       2009-10                             2014-15
                                                     Rank Order                          Rank Order
                                                (among 423 cities, using          (among 476 cities, using
                                                   19 parameters of                  2 parameters: open
                                                      sanitation)                         defecation
                                                                                and solid waste management)
 Delhi:
          Municipal Corporation of Delhi                  168                                398
       Delhi Cantonment                                    5                                  -
      New Delhi Municipal
                                                           4                                 16
 Corporation
 Chennai                                                  13                                 61
 Kolkata                                                  25                                 56
 Mumbai:
           Navi Mumbai                                    11                                  -
           Greater Mumbai                                 45                                 140
Source: Government of India. National Urban Sanitation Policy (NUSP) for the 2009-2010 rankings, and
Swacch Bharat for the 2014-15 rankings.56

Subsequent Swachh rankings are not directly comparable to these surveys, as they give half the weight to
self-assessed performance by municipal bodies (50% weight in 2016 and 45% in 2017), 25-30% weight to
direct observation, and the rest to citizens’ reports.57


                                                                                                          17
18
                                               References
Ahluwalia, Isher Judge. 2017. “Urban governance in India”, Journal of Urban Affairs (Published online:
   15 February 2017)
Arnold, Fred, Sulabha Parasuraman, P. Arokiasamy, and Monica Kothari. 2009. Nutrition in India.
   Mumbai: IIPS; Calverton, Maryland, USA: ICF Macro.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Anjali Bharadwaj, Rohini Pande, and Michael Walton. 2013. “Services Delivery and
   Centralization in Urban Slums, Delhi”, International Growth Centre Policy Brief
   http://www.theigc.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Banerjee-Et-Al-2013-Policy-Brief.pdf (accessed
   25 May 2017)
Bardhan, Pranab. 2002. “Decentralization of Governance and Development.” Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 16(4):185–205.
Bardhan, Pranab, and Dilip Mookherjee. 2016. “Clientelistic Politics and Economic Development”,
   http://people.bu.edu/dilipm/wkpap/EDIclientsurv.pdf (accessed 30 April 2017)
Batley, Richard, and Claire Mcloughlin. 2015. “The Politics of Public Services”, World Development
   74:275–285
Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2007. “Reforming Public Service Delivery”, Journal of African
   Economies 16(AERC Supplement 1):127–156
Bozzoli, Carlos, Angus Deaton, and Climent Quintana-Domeque. 2009. “Adult Height and Childhood
   Disease” Demography 46(4):647–669
(CAG) Comptroller and Auditor-General of India’s Audit Report No 2 of 2013, Performance Audit on
   Social Sector Non-PSUs of the Government of Delhi.
 (CGDR)      Centre      for    Global    Development      Research.       2011.     Slums      of   Delhi,
   planningcommission.nic.in/reports/sereport/ser/ser_slum.pdf (accessed 8 January 2017)
CMC         Act      (The       Chennai       City      Municipal         Corporation      Act        1919)
   http://www.janaagraha.org/asics/report/The-Chennai-City-Municipal-Corporation-Act-1919.pdf
   (accessed 10 March 2017)
Case, Anne, and Christina Paxson, 2008. “Stature and status: height, ability, and labor market out-comes”,
   Journal of Political Economy 116:499–532.
Cayemittes, Michel et al. 2007. Enquête Mortalité, Morbidité et Utilisation des Services, Haïti, 2005-2006.
   Calverton, Maryland, USA: Macro International Inc.
Chadwick, Edwin. 1842. Inquiry into the Sanitary Conditions of the Labouring Population of Great Britain,
   London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
Coa, Ramiro, and Luis H. Ochoa. 2009. Bolivia Encuesta Nacional de Demografía y Salud 2008,
   MEASURE DHS/Macro International.
Chaplin, Susan E. 2011. “Indian cities, sanitation and the state: the politics of the failure to provide”,
   Environment & Urbanization 23(1): 57–70.
Crimmins, Eileen M., and Caleb E. Finch. 2006. “Infection, inflammation, height, and longevity”,
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103(2):498-503.
Das Gupta, Monica, B.R. Desikachari, Rajendra Shukla, T.V. Somanathan, P. Padmanaban, and K.K. Datta.
   2010. “How Might India’s Public Health Systems Be Strengthened?: lessons from Tamil Nadu”,
   Economic and Political Weekly 45(10):46-60
Das Gupta, Monica, KCS Dalpatadu, CK Shanmugarajah, and HMSS Herath. 2013. “Multisectoral
   preventive health services in Sri Lanka”, Washington DC:World Bank Policy Research Paper 6558.
(DCS) Department of Census and Statistics and Ministry of Health. 2009. Sri Lanka Demographic and
   Health Survey 2006-07. Colombo, Sri Lanka: DCS and MOH.


                                                                                                        19
Dreze, Jean, and Aparajita Goyal. 2003. “Future of Mid-Day Meals”, Economic and Political Weekly
    38(44):4673-4683
Duffy, John. 1971. “Social Impact of Disease in Late Nineteenth Century”, Bulletin of the New York
    Academy of Medicine 47(7):797-810
Duffy, John.1990. The Sanitarians: a History of American Public Health, Urbana and Chicago: University
    of Illinois Press.
Government of Delhi 2000: Economic Survey of Delhi 1999-2000.
Government of Delhi. 2015a. Urban Slums in Delhi, Based on NSS 69th Round Survey (July 2012 – Dec
    2012) State Sample Delhi: Directorate of Economics and Statistics
Government of Delhi. 2015b. Economic Survey of Delhi 2014-15.
Government of Delhi. 2017. Economic Survey of Delhi 2016-17.
Government of India, Planning Commission (n.d.) Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Five-Year Plan (2002-
    2007), http://planningcommission.nic.in/plans/mta/midterm/midtermapp.html (accessed 25 May 2017)
Government of India, Planning Commission. 2011. Mid-Term Appraisal of the Eleventh Five-Year Plan
    (2007-2012) http://planningcommission.nic.in/plans/mta/11th_mta/MTA.html (accessed 5 June 2017)
Government of India, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Press Information Bureau. 2012. “Devolution of Funds
    and Functions to Panchayats”, http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=90607 (accessed 21
    June 2017)
Government of India. 2015. Slums in India: A Statistical Compendium, New Delhi: Ministry of Housing
    and Urban Poverty Alleviation.
Grasgruber P, Cacek J, Kalina T, Sebera M. 2014. “The role of nutrition and genetics as key determinants
    of the positive height trend”, Economics and Human Biology 15:81–100.
Gupta, Kamla, Fred Arnold, and H. Lhungdim. 2009. Health and Living Conditions in Eight Indian Cities,
    Mumbai: IIPS; Calverton, Maryland, USA: ICF Macro.
Guven, Cahit and Wang-Sheng Lee. 2015. “Height, aging and cognitive abilities across Europe”,
    Economics & Human Biology 16:16-29
Hammer, Jeffrey, and Dean Spears. 2016. “Village sanitation and child health”, Journal of Health
    Economics 48:135–148
Hatton, Timothy J. 2014. “How have Europeans Grown so Tall?”, Oxford Economic Papers 66(2):349-72
Hoddinott, John, et al 2013. “Adult consequences of growth failure in early childhood”, American Journal
    of Clinical Nutrition, 98(5):1170-1178
(IIPS) International Institute for Population Sciences and Macro International. 2007. National Family
    Health Survey (NFHS-3), India, 2005-06: India, Mumbai:IIPS.
Jayachandran, Seema, and Rohini Pande. 2017. “Why Are Indian Children So Short? The Role of Birth
Order and Son Preference”, American Economic Review forthcoming September 2017.
Khaleghian, Peyvand , and Monica Das Gupta. 2005. “Public Management and the Essential Public Health
  Functions”, World Development 33(7): 1083-1099.
Khwaja, A. I. 2004. “Is Increasing Community Participation Always a Good Thing?” Journal of the
  European Economic Association 2(2–3):427–36
Lubove, Roy.1962. The Progressives and the Slums: Tenement House Reform in New York City, 1890-
  1917, New York: The University of Pittsburgh Press.
Mansuri, Ghazala, and Vijayendra Rao. 2012. Localizing Development: Does Participation Work?
  Washington, DC: World Bank, Policy Research Report.
MCD      Act    http://www.janaagraha.org/asics/report/The-Delhi-Municipal-Corporation-Act-1957.pdf,
  (accessed 10 March 2017)

                                                                                                     20
NCD-RisC (NCD Risk Factor Collaboration). 2016. “A century of trends in adult human height”, eLife
   2016;5:e13410 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13410
(NSSO) National Sample Survey Office. 2013. Key Indicators of Urban Slums in India, New Delhi:
   Government of India.
Natale Valerie, and Anuradha Rajagopalan. 2014. “Worldwide variation in human growth and the World
   Health Organization growth standards: a systematic review”, British Medical Journal BMJ
   Open 2014;4:e003735. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003735
Novick, Lloyd, Cynthia Morrow, and Glen Mays (eds). 2008. Public Health Administration: Principles for
   Population-Based Management, Sudbury MA: Jones and Bartlett Publishers
Prüss-Ustün, Annette, et al. 2014. “Burden of disease from water, sanitation and hygiene in low resource
   settings”, Journal of Tropical Medicine and International Hygiene 19(8):894–905.
Rajendran, S. 2013.“Amma Unavagams of Tamil Nadu Panacea for Urban Food Insecurity?”, Economic
   and Political Weekly Vol XLVIII(50):22-24 (December 14, 2013)
Rosen, George. 1993. A History of Public Health, Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University
   Press.
Ruet, Joel, and Stephanie Tawa Lama-Rewal (eds.).2009. Governing India’s Metropolises, London, New
   York and Delhi: Routledge
Scutchfield, Douglas, and William Keck (eds.). 2009. Principles of Public Health Practice (3rd edition)
   Clifton Park, New York:Delmar Cengage Learning
Secretaría de Salud. 2006. Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Demografía 2005-2006. Tegucigalpa, Honduras:
   SS, INE y Macro International.
Sharma, Saroj. 2006. Delhi Municipal Corporation: Performance and Challenges, New Delhi: Shakti Book
   House
Tanner James M.1992. “Growth as a Measure of the Nutritional and Hygienic Status of a Population”,
   Hormone Research 38(Supplement 1):106–115
Tiwari, Piyush et al. 2015. India’s Reluctant Urbanization, Basingstoke and New York:Palgrave
   Macmillan.
(UNICEF) United Nations Children’s Fund, World Health Organization, The World Bank. 2017.
   UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Joint Child Malnutrition Estimates, New York:UNICEF, Geneva:WHO;
   Washington, DC:The World Bank.
(US) United States Treasury Department. 1922. Public Health Reports by the United States Public Health
   Service 37(1), May 26, 1922, Washington: Government Printing Office.
(WHO) World Health Organisation. 1978. Role, Functions and Training Requirements of Environmental
   Health Officers (Sanitarians) in Europe, Copenhagen:WHO Regional Office for Europe.
(WHO) World Health Organisation. 2014. World Health Assembly Global Nutrition Targets 2025: Stunting
   Policy Brief,
Winslow CE. 1920. “The Untilled Fields of Public Health”, Science 51(1306):23-33.
World Bank. 2005. World Development Report 2006, Washington DC: World Bank.




                                                                                                     21
                                 Appendix 1: Methodology
We conducted detailed case studies of the Municipal Corporations of Chennai and Delhi − two of
India’s major municipalities – focusing on the organization of public health and environmental
sanitation services. The goal is to understand how better management of health and sanitation
services results in better public health outcomes, and draw broader lessons from this for policy.
The analysis integrates theories and evidence from four different fields: Public Health, Public
Economics, Local Government, and Urban Studies to understand the challenges of running
effective sanitation programs in big cities.
Our analysis draws on data collected through a mix of qualitative and quantitative methods:
1. Qualitative data: Extensive field interviews were conducted in Chennai and Delhi, to learn
   about their governance, management methods, and service delivery arrangements.58 In both
   cities we interviewed people from the State Health Department, and from the Municipal
   Corporation departments in charge of public health, solid waste management, and drains. This
   included staff from Headquarters down to the ground-level field staff of these departments.
   We also interviewed people who had earlier served in the state government or the municipal
   corporation. In all a total of 68 people were interviewed for this study between November
   2013 and April 2017, many of them on multiple occasions. The total of 153 interviews are
   listed in Table A.1 below. Many of the issues discussed are potentially sensitive in nature, so
   to preserve the confidentiality of our respondents we have only identified them by broad
   classifications and the city where they work. Qualitative and secondary data previously
   collected on public health arrangements in Tamil Nadu and other states also helped inform this
   analysis.

2. Secondary sources of information: Data and other information posted on the websites of these
   and other municipal corporations in India were examined. The legal underpinnings of these
   entities were examined, for the light they throw on their governance arrangements. Other
   secondary sources include published government reports of the central and state governments,
   and peer-reviewed academic literature.

3. Survey data: Data from national slum surveys and sanitation surveys were analyzed to examine
   sanitary conditions in slums and in major metropolitan cities. To analyze differentials in child
   stunting by wealth quintile, we used data from the Indian National Family Health Survey
   (NFHS) and from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). The NFHS and DHS surveys
   are directly comparable as they were conducted using the same methods and core
   questionnaires. The DHS surveys analyzed are from some lower-income countries that
   conducted surveys around 2005-06, which is when the last NFHS survey (NFHS-3) was
   conducted for which a detailed report has been published. The NFHS-3 also analyzed
   differences between slums and non-slums of some metropolitan cities in maternal and child
   health indicators, and these data are presented here to contrast outcomes in Delhi with those of
   Chennai. The specific sources of data used are indicated in each figure and table.




                                                                                                22
                     Table A.1: List of interviews conducted

                  DELHI                                      CHENNAI
State Health Department, Directorate of         State Health Deparment, and
Public Health, and national public              Directorate of Public Health (15
health institutions (18 interviews, with        interviews, with 7 people)
8 people )

Date of              Topics                     Date of             Topics
Interview                                       Interview
11-15 Nov-        The relationship between      27 Oct -1    The relationship
2013              the federal, state and the    Nov 2014     between the state health
17 March- 4       MCD health services:          16-21 Nov    services and the CMC:
April 2014        what support given, etc       2015         what support given, etc
18-25 Oct         The role of the national      20-25
2014              public health institutions    March
9-14 Nov          in supporting state and       2017
2015              municipal public health
                  services
Municipal Corporation staff, from               Municipal Corporation staff, from
Headquarters and field offices (58              Headquarters and field offices (29
interviews, with 27 people)                     interviews, with 19 people)
11-15 Nov         Organizational structure,     27 Oct -1    Organizational structure,
2013              detailed nature of services   Nov 2014 detailed nature of
17 March- 4       provided, supervision and     16-21 Nov services provided,
April 2014        accountability                2015         supervision and
18-25 Oct         arrangements, role of         20-25        accountability
2014              local elected                 March        arrangements, role of
9-14 Nov          representatives               2017         local elected
2015                                                         representatives
1-7 April 2017
Other: Central Health Ministry staff,           Other: IAS officers, public health
other IAS officers, public health               researchers, etc. (12 interviews, with
researchers, etc. (21 interviews, with 10       4 people)
people)
11-15 Nov-        Background information        27 Oct -1    Background information
2013              on the state and central      Nov 2014     on the state and central
17 March- 4       government health             16-21 Nov    government health
April 2014        sectors, and on the           2015         sectors, and on the
18-25 Oct         functioning of the            20-25        functioning of the
2014              municipal corporation.        March        municipal corporation.
9-14 Nov          Details of specific           2017         Details of specific
2015              research on public health                  research on public health
1-7 April 2017 issues.                                       issues.




                                                                                         23
Endnotes
We are deeply grateful to many people in Chennai and Delhi for their patience and help. At the Tamil Nadu Health
Department we especially thank Dr J. Radhakrishnan (Health Secretary), Dr Kolandaswamy (Director, Directorate of
Public Health), Dr Vanaja (Additional Director , Directorate of Public Health), and Dr Balasubramanian (Joint
Director Epidemics, Directorate of Public Health), and Dr P. Umanath (Managing Director, Tamil Nadu Medical
Service Corporation). At the Chennai Municipal Corporation we especially thank Dr Vijayalakshmi (Deputy
Commissioner Health & Solid Waste Management), Dr Sentil Nathan (City Health Officer), Dr Jagadeesan (earlier
Acting City Health Officer), Dr Gopinath (Chief Medical Officer), Dr Manohari (Additional Chief Medical Officer),
Dr Mahalaxmi (Zonal Health Officer), Mr Rajendran (Executive Engineer, Storm Water Drains), and Ms Rajeshwari
(Engineer, Solid Waste Management). In Delhi we especially thank Dr Charan Singh (Additional Director Public
Health, Delhi State), Debashree Mukherjee (earlier CEO, Delhi Jal Board), Anshu Prakash (earlier Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Health), Virendra Prakash (Chief Secretary, Delhi, retired), Dr A.C. Dhariwal (Director,
National Vector Borne Diseases Control Programme of India), Dr P.K. Sharma (Medical Officer of Health and
Director Health Services, New Delhi Municipal Council), Col Ghosh (Commanding Officer, Station Health
Organization, Delhi Cantonment), and many staff of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (South, North, and East
zones), and the Delhi State Directorate of Public Health.
This study was partly funded by grants from the World Bank, through its Research Support Budget [RF-P158512-
RESE-BBRSB-Governance of Environmental Sanitation], and its South Asia Food and Nutrition Security Initiative
(SAFANSI).
All views expressed in this paper are the personal views of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of
the World Bank or its member countries, or of the Government of India or any state government.

1
    Prüss-Ustün et al (2014), Hammer and Spears (2016).
2
    See for example Ahluwalia (2017), and the papers in Ruet and Tawa Lama-Rewal eds (2009).
3
    In Delhi, “About 74.46% slums are surrounded by residential areas, 3.36% by industrial areas, 0.66% by commercial
     areas and rest by other type of areas” (Government of Delhi 2015a, report on the NSSO 2012 survey). In India
     overall, “As per the latest 69th Round survey (2012) an estimated 66.4% of slums were surrounded by residential
     area. 9.5% of slums were surrounded by industries and about 6.7% of slums were surrounded by commercial
     establishments (Government of India 2015:53).”
4
     See the NFHS-3 survey report (IIPS 2007: Table 10.1). Jayachandran and Pande (2017) find that if the firstborn
     child is male, he is somewhat less likely to be stunted than other sons and daughters.
5
    The preliminary results of the 2015-2016 NFHS-4 survey show that child stunting in the top wealth quintile dropped
    slightly to 22%, since the 2005-06 survey. http://rchiips.org/NFHS/pdf/NFHS4/India.pdf, accessed 23 May 2017.
6
    Bozzoli et al(2009), Hatton (2014), Grasgruber et al (2014), Crimmins and Finch (2006), and Tanner (1992). Average
     heights have also been found to decrease when conditions deteriorate, as in parts of sub-Saharan Africa today (NCD-
     RisC (2016: Figure 8), Floud et al (2011). Grasgruber et al (2014:86) note this also in the European country of
     Lithuania when it was placed under economic stress after the collapse of the USSR.
7
    Child stunting can result from poor maternal health/nutrition; inadequate child feeding; infection; and limited access
    to effective health care (WHO 2014:2, NCD-RisC 2016:1). Of these, infection is the most applicable to children in
    the top wealth quintile.
8
    Case and Paxson (2008), Hoddinott et al.(2013), Guven and Lee (2015), NCD-RisC (2016), and UNICEF (2017).
9
    This included efforts to upgrade housing to reduce crowding and install water, drainage, and sewer systems for slum
     dwellers. A large literature on this includes Chadwick’s (1842) pioneering report (summarized in Rosen 1958:190-
    191), Lubove (1962), Rosen (1958), and Duffy (1990).
10
     Das Gupta et al (2010).
11
     Chaplin (2011).

                                                                                                                       24
12
     This is noted by the Government of Delhi (2000: chapter 13). “Delhi Jal Board has estimated that if the norm of 60
     gpcd (gallons per capita per day) for planned colonies, 34 gpcd for regularized-unauthorized colonies and 11 gpcd
     for other areas is adopted, the water requirement for the present population of Delhi will be about 440 MGD as
     against present capacity of 591 MGD”. The report also notes that actual distribution of water within the MCD
     territory varies widely between areas.
13
     CAG (2013:5)
14
     Government of Delhi (2015b:199), Government of Delhi (2017:199).
15
     In this section, the description of services in Chennai draws on 29 interviews conducted between October 2014 and
     March 2017, with headquarters and field staff of the CMC Health Department (from both the public health and the
     medical branches). For Delhi, it draws on 28 interviews conducted between November 2013 and April 2017, with
     staff of the Delhi State Government’s Health Department and with headquarters and field staff of the MCD Health
     Department. All information from the interviews was double-checked in March-April 2017. Secondary sources
     used are indicated in the text and accompanying endnotes.
16
      http://www.chennaicorporation.gov.in/healthdirectory/pdf/PublicHealthDepartment.pdf, accessed January 19,
     2017.
17
     Corporation of Chennai. 2014. Standard Operating Procedure for Institutionalising Basic Services for the Urban
     Homeless      H.D.C.NO./B1/3249        /2014,     http://www.ihrn.org.in/knowledgebase/Policy-Analysis-and-
     Documents/Corporation-of-Chennai-Standard-Operating-Procesure-for-Institutionalising-Basic-Services-for-the-
     Urban-Homeless (accessed 19 January 2017).
18
     Rajendran (2013) observed that it was especially popular among slum residents and laborers.
19
     “Tamil Nadu has served nourishing school meals with clock-like regularity for more than 20 years” (Dreze and
     Goyal 2003:4678).
20
     CGDR (2011: Tables 3.18 and 3.19).
21
      This sub-section draws on secondary sources, as indicated in the text. The description of arrangements in Delhi
     draws on 38 interviews conducted between March 2014 and April 2017, with headquarters and field staff of the
     municipal health departments of the MCD, the New Delhi Municipal Council, and the Delhi Cantonment, as well as
     with senior staff of the central Health Ministry. The description of arrangements in Chennai draws on 34 interviews
     conducted between October 2014 and March 2017, with headquarters and field staff of the Tamil Nadu State Health
     Department and the CMC Health Department. The information on Tamil Nadu and other states is supplemented
     with information from an earlier study (Das Gupta et al 2010). All information from the interviews in Chennai and
     Delhi was double-checked in March-April 2017.
22
     See the 74th Constitutional Amendment http://indiacode.nic.in/coiweb/amend/amend74.htm, and Government of
     India (n.d.:485).
23
     See the MCD and CMC Acts, amended in line with the 74th Constitutional Amendment.
24
     Batley and McLoughlin (2015:278), Mansuri and Rao (2013).
25
     Khaleghian and Das Gupta (2005).
26
     Batley and Mcloughlin (2015:278).
27
     Mansuri and Rao (2013), Bardhan (2002), Bardhan and Mookherjee (2016). The need for stronger mechanisms of
     financial accountability has been raised in successive reports by the central government, e.g. “The proposed transfer
     of funds to the PRIs by the central and state governments must be accompanied by efforts at strengthening their
     accounting and auditing procedures” (Government of India, Planning Commission, n.d.:487). See also Government
     of India (2011: ch.3).
28
     Das Gupta et al. (2013).
29
     Khwaja (2004) studied the effect of community participation in development projects in Northern Pakistan. He
     finds that “while community participation improves project outcomes in nontechnical decisions, increasing
     community participation in technical decisions actually leads to worse project outcomes.”

                                                                                                                       25
30
     New Delhi Municipal Council website https://www.ndmc.gov.in/ndmc/introduction.aspx, accessed 27 February
     2017.
31
     New Delhi Municipal Council website https://www.ndmc.gov.in/ndmc/introduction.aspx, accessed 27 February
     2017.
32
     Banerjee et al (2013).
33
     Sharma (2006:133).
34
     See description of Mohalla Sabhas at http://www.lokrajandolan.org/images/mohalla_sabhas_a_how_to_guide.pdf,
     (accessed 12 July 2016), and at http://mohallasabha.delhi.gov.in/ (accessed 25 May 2017).
35
     This is the Nagara Raj Bill https://www.uclg-
     cisdp.org/sites/default/files/India%20Nagar%20Raj%20Bill_2010_en_final_0.pdf (accessed 16 June 2017).
36
      CMC website http://www.chennaicorporation.gov.in/departments/health/publicHealthDept.htm, accessed 20
     January 2016, citing a classic statement by the US Public Health Service (US Treasury Department 1922).
37
     See the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994 http://www.tnrd.gov.in/pract/pract_draft.pdf (accessed 20 April 2017),
     Government of India (2012: Annexure). As Besley and Ghatak (2007:136) point out ‘Bureaucrats are unlike
     politicians in that they can be held to formal contracts and standard management methods’.
38
     Sections 34,43A,44,53 of the CMC Act.
39
     The MCD Act seems to allow only for dissolution of the whole Council (not removal of individual Councilors), for
     non-performance or overstepping their powers (Section 490). Sections 9,80 and 462 prohibits Councilors from
     having conflicts of interest, without clear sanctions other than that they are subject to national criminal laws.
40
     This is very clearly laid out in the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994 http://www.tnrd.gov.in/pract/pract_draft.pdf
     (accessed 20 April 2017).
41
      In this section, the description of services in Chennai draws on 37 interviews conducted between October 2014 and
     March 2017, with headquarters and field staff of the CMC Health Department and the Tamil Nadu State Public
     Health Directorate. The description for Delhi draws on 49 interviews conducted between March 2014 and April
     2017, with staff of the Delhi State Government’s Health Department, with senior staff of the Jal Board, with
     headquarters and field staff of the MCD Health Department. Both the discussion of Chennai and Delhi also draw on
     10 interviews conducted between March 2014 and April 2017 with staff of national health agencies such as the
     NCDC and the Ministry of Health. All information from the interviews in Chennai and Delhi was double-checked
     in March-April 2017. Secondary sources used are indicated in the text.
42
     Ruet and Tawa Lama-Rewal (2009), Tiwari et al (2015).
43
     See for example Scutchfield and Keck eds (2003:ch8,23), Novick and Morrow (2008), and WHO (1978).
44
     See the Chennai Metrowater Board of Governors http://www.chennaimetrowater.tn.nic.in/boardofdirectors.html,
     and Delhi Jal Board
     http://www.delhi.gov.in/wps/wcm/connect/DOIT_DJB/djb/home/information/djb+act/chapter+-+ii (accessed 19
     January 2017).
45
     See the description of the Slum Board in Chennai http://www.tnscb.org/, http://www.tnscb.org/wp-
     content/uploads/POLICY%20NOTE%202016-%2017%20English.pdf, and in Delhi
     http://delhishelterboard.in/main/ (accessed 19 January 2017).
46
     See http://www.delhi.gov.in/wps/wcm/connect/doit_pfa/PFA/Home/Organisation+Setup (accessed 19 January
     2017).
47
     See the organization of the Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority
     http://www.cmdachennai.gov.in/aboutcmda.html, http://dda.org.in/ddanew/organizational_chart.aspx, and the
     Delhi Development Authority https://www.dda.org.in/planning/docs/list_of_authority_members.pdf (accessed 19
     January 2017).
48
     In this section, the description of services in Chennai draws on 30 interviews conducted between October 2014 and
     March 2017, with the senior management of the CMC and with headquarters and field staff of the CMC Health
                                                                                                                    26
     Department. It also draws on an earlier study in Tamil Nadu (Das Gupta et al 2010). For Delhi, it draws on 41
     interviews conducted between November 2013 and April 2017, with staff of the Delhi State Government’s Health
     Department and with headquarters and field staff of the MCD Health Department. All information from the
     interviews were double-checked in March-April 2017. Secondary sources used are indicated in the text.
49
     Sharma (2006:193,207).
50
     Sharma (2006:126, 223).
51
     See the website of the CMC Public Health Department
     http://www.chennaicorporation.gov.in/departments/health/publicHealthDept.htm (accessed 20 January 2016).
52
     See the website of the MCD Health Department http://mcdonline.gov.in/tri/sdmc_mcdportal/healthindex.php
     (accessed 30 May 2017).
53
     In this section, the description of services in Chennai draws on 32 interviews conducted between October 2014 and
     March 2017, with headquarters and field staff of the CMC Health Department (primarily from the public health, but
     also corroborated by staff from the medical branch). All information from the interviews was double-checked in
     March 2017. Secondary sources used are indicated in the text.
54
      In this section, the description of services in Chennai draws on 35 interviews conducted between October 2014 and
     March 2017, with staff of the Tamil Nadu State Directorate of Public Health, and with headquarters and field staff
     of the CMC Health Department (primarily from the public health branch). For Delhi, it draws on 26 interviews
     conducted between November 2013 and April 2017, with staff of the Delhi State Government’s Health Department,
     and of the Ministry of Health and national health agencies. All information from the interviews were double-checked
     in March-April 2017. The information on Tamil Nadu and other states is supplemented with information from an
     earlier study (Das Gupta et al 2010). Secondary sources used are indicated in the text.
55
     Das Gupta et al. (2010).
56
     The 2009-10 rankings are at http://pib.nic.in/archieve/others/2010/may/d2010051103.pdf, and the 2014-15
     rankings at http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=124639. The parameters used in the 2009-10 survey,
     are at https://www.zaragoza.es/contenidos/medioambiente/onu/1186-eng.pdf (all accessed 25 May 2017).
57
     The methods used in the 2016 and 2017 surveys are at http://swachh-survekshan.in/SS_2016_report.pdf,
     http://swachh-survekshan.in/SS_2017_Report.pdf (accessed 25 May 2017).
58
     A partial list of people interviewed is before endnote 1.




                                                                                                                     27
