                                                  WPS8022


Policy Research Working Paper                    8022




   Neighborhood Effects in Integrated Social
                  Policies
                                Matteo Bobba
                               Jérémie Gignoux




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8022


  Abstract
 When potential beneficiaries share their knowledge and                             A higher treatment density in the areas surrounding
 attitudes about a policy intervention, their decision to                           the evaluation villages is found to increase the take-up
 participate and the effectiveness of both the policy and                           of scholarships and enrollment at the lower-secondary
 its evaluation may be influenced. This matters most nota-                          level. These cross-village spillovers operate exclusively
 bly in integrated social policies with several components.                         within households receiving another component of the
 In this article, spillover effects on take-up behaviors are                        program, and do not carry over larger distances. While
 investigated in the context of a conditional cash transfer                         several tests reject heterogeneities in impact due to spatial
 program in rural Mexico. These effects are identified using                        variations in program implementation, evidence is found
 exogenous variations in the local frequency of beneficia-                          suggesting that spillovers stem partly from the sharing of
 ries generated by the program’s randomized evaluation.                             information about the program among eligible households.




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a
  larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at jeremie.gignoux@psemail.eu.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
Neighborhood Effects in Integrated Social Policies

                               Matteo Bobba and Jérémie Gignoux




       JEL Codes: C9, I2, J2, O2
       Keywords: take-up; social policy; spatial externalities; knowledge spillovers;
       policy evaluation; conditional cash transfers.




Matteo Bobba is an assistant professor at Toulouse School of Economics, University of Toulouse 1
Capitole, 21 Allée de Brienne 31000 Toulouse, France; his email address is matteo.bobba@tse-fr.eu.
Jérémie Gignoux (corresponding author) is a research fellow at the French National Institute for
Agricultural Research and Paris School of Economics, 48 boulevard Jourdan 75014 Paris, France; his email
address is jeremie.gignoux@psemail.eu. The authors thank the editor and three anonymous referees, Orazio
Attanasio, Samuel Berlinski, François Bourguignon, Giacomo De Giorgi, Pierre Dubois, Marc Gurgand,
Sylvie Lambert, Karen Macours, Eliana La Ferrara, Imran Rasul, and Martin Ravallion for insightful
comments, Marco Pariguana for excellent research assistance, and the Secretaría de Educación Publica
(Mexico) and the Oportunidades staff, and, in particular, Raul Perez Argumedo for their kind help with the
datasets, and Cepremap for financial support. Previous versions of this article circulated under the title:
“Spatial Externalities and Social Multipliers in Schooling Interventions” and “Policy Induced Social
Interactions”.
Demand-side schooling interventions have now become an important component of social
policies in developing countries. The available empirical evidence suggests that cash
subsidies in particular can have a large effect on schooling decisions (e.g., Glewwe
and Kremer 2006). These interventions have been found to be effective devices for
encouraging the human capital investments of poor households (e.g., Parker et al. 2008 and
Fiszbein and Schady 2009). Recent studies have documented that they can also induce a
set of non-market interactions that can further increase their effects (Angelucci et al. 2010,
Bobonis and Finan 2009, and Lalive and Cattaneo 2009). Social interactions affecting
preferences for investments in education and transfers within extended families have, in
particular, been posited and documented. However, there is still incomplete knowledge of
the specific networks within which those interactions occur and the underlying mechanisms
at play.
    The sharing of knowledge and attitudes about policy interventions among networks of
potential beneficiaries is one set of social interaction that remains under-documented in the
setting of social policies in developing countries. The role of information-sharing and
initial preferences and prejudices in determining program participation has been
emphasized in the context of social policies in the United States. For instance, Bertrand
et al. (2000) and Aizer and Currie (2004) find evidence of networks effects, that is,
correlations in program take-up decisions within neighborhoods and ethnic groups. In the
case of the Food Stamp Program, Daponte et al. (1999) find that ignorance about the
program contributes to non-participation.
    The conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs that have been recently implemented in
developing countries create many opportunities for knowledge spillovers between
beneficiaries. These opportunities are likely to affect the take-up of some subsidies, notably
schooling subsidies, and are influenced by three types of factors that span both supply and
demand sides. First, in integrated social policies, cash subsidies for schooling tend to be
associated with complementary interventions for the provision of health care or support for
better nutrition. Beneficiaries do not necessarily participate in all interventions, so that
there is an intensive margin for potential recipients to increase their participation in the
program by taking up more components. Second, the recipients of the transfers, notably
women and mothers, regularly encounter each other during program operations, for

                                              2
instance in meetings of beneficiaries or during activities of complementary interventions,
such as visits to health centers. Third, the targeting of those interventions implies that
participants often have similar socioeconomic backgrounds and are thus likely to identify
with each other (Akerlof 1997). Hence, demand-side schooling interventions are likely to
both enhance the existing interactions among groups of beneficiaries and to further shape
those groups, thus producing externalities that would not occur were individuals treated in
isolation.
    In this paper, we examine the role of spillover effects in the form of information sharing
within networks of potential beneficiaries and in shaping the take-up of the schooling
subsidy component of the Progresa-Oportunidades CCT program (see, e.g., Schultz 2004,
and Parker et al. 2008). The program entails several unbundled components in addition to
the schooling subsidies, notably food stipends conditional on health checks. While the take-
up of the nutrition and health component is almost 100 percent, a large share of children
eligible for transfers for secondary schooling remain un-enrolled.
    The program targets poor households in small villages located in rural areas of Mexico.
Due to the high level of program penetration and geographic targeting, the topography of
the area covered by the program consists of clusters of neighboring villages with a high
density of beneficiary households. In this context, program beneficiaries living in
neighboring villages are likely to interact in several ways, thereby potentially sharing
information about the program. In order to examine the effects of those interactions, we
investigate the extent to which variations in the local frequency of the program in areas
surrounding beneficiary villages affects the take-up response of potential beneficiaries.
    Spillovers have previously been examined in the context of Progresa-Oportunidades
by comparing the outcomes of ineligible and eligible households in the same villages by
means    of   a   partial-population    design    (Moffitt 2001).    Accordingly,    Bobonis
and Finan (2009) and Lalive and Cattaneo (2009) have found evidence of spillovers
through peer effects in school enrollment, and Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009), Angelucci
et al. (2010) and Angelucci et al. (2015) provide evidence of transfers within both village




                                              3
and household-level networks.1 However, in the Progresa-Oportunidades setting, many
beneficiary communities are very close to each other, thus spillovers may occur not only
within, but also across, villages.
    To investigate the presence of neighborhood effects, we combine data from the
experimental evaluation of the program with information on the geo-referenced locations
of the villages benefitting from it. We focus our analysis on the secondary school
participation decisions of program-eligible children, which is the primary short-run
outcome of the intervention and the key requirement associated with the largest component
of the in-cash transfer.
    We use a simple empirical framework that allows us to disentangle the effects of the
incentives resulting from the program eligibility of the household (and the village it resides
in) from the indirect effects arising from the local density of program recipients at the level
of areas surrounding targeted villages. In particular, we exploit the randomized evaluation
design and the clustered spatial distribution of the villages in our sample in order to identify
the causal effects of program externalities generated by those neighboring villages selected
in the experimental treatment group. Next, we investigate whether spillovers arise in this
setting because of social interactions between program beneficiaries or as a result of other
changes associated with variations in the local density of the program across areas
surrounding villages.
    We find evidence of a positive effect of the local frequency of participants in the
program over short distances (0–5 km) on secondary school participation decisions, which
tend to quickly dissipate at larger distances (5–10 km). With estimated effects of
respectively one or two or more treated villages in the neighboring area on secondary
school enrollment of 6.1 and 8.0 percent, this spillover effect does not increase linearly
with the number of treated villages. But the magnitude of the indirect effect of the program
is substantial when compared to the direct effect of own village treatment of 9.7 percent.
    Crucially, these spatial externalities appear to exclusively affect children from
beneficiary households; there is no evidence of such effects for children in the control


    1. Other recent examples from the literature include Duflo and Saez (2003) who examine the
take-up of retirement plans within academic departments and Kuhn et al. (2011) who study spillover
effects of lottery winnings within Dutch postal codes.

                                                 4
group and for those in treated villages who are not eligible for the program. This remarkable
heterogeneity sheds light on the mechanisms behind program externalities. Interactions
within networks of potential beneficiaries spanning across villages seem to have
contributed to increase the take-up of the educational component of the program and
heighten its impacts on schooling. We argue that, while interactions through preexisting
social networks should affect all households that share local resources, social interactions
that are restricted to program beneficiaries are likely to be associated with knowledge and
attitudes toward the program. Accordingly, we find that our variation in local treatment
frequency is associated with increased knowledge among eligible households about the
different components of the program—notably the schooling subsidies.
    Some sort of spatial variation in the delivery of the program among evaluation villages
could, in principle, explain the observed relationship between the local density of treatment
and the take-up of schooling subsidies. This may occur if, for instance, areas with more
evaluation villages benefit from more efficient program operations or receive larger
investments in supply infrastructure, thereby helping recipients comply with the schooling
requirements of the program. However, using direct measures of efficiency of program
operations or schooling infrastructures, we find little support in the data for this alternative
interpretation.
    Our results thus provide evidence of the effect of the local frequency of treatment on
the take-up of the different components of social policies. We find evidence to suggest that
knowledge spillovers among networks of beneficiaries is likely to be driving those effects.
Our findings also relate to other studies which have used experimental variations of
treatment frequency to identify the effects of the spillover of interventions (e.g., Miguel
and Kremer 2004, Banerjee et al. 2010, and Ichino and Schundeln 2012). However, those
studies were conducted during small-scale interventions and hence potentially miss
important effects that occur during the full-scale implementation of a program.2 Our results
shed light on those scaling-up effects by examining spatial externalities in an experimental
sample surveyed in the midst of the implementation of the policy on a large scale.


    2. To partially overcome this issue, researchers have recently begun to inject experimental
variations directly into the intensity of spillover effects by varying the saturation of individuals treated
within treated clusters (Baird et al. 2015; Crepon et al. 2013).

                                                     5
                                      I. SETTING AND DATA

                                        Program Features

Initiated in 1997 and still in effect, Progresa-Oportunidades is a large-scale social program
that aims to foster the accumulation of human capital in the poorest communities of Mexico
by providing both cash and in-kind benefits, which are conditional on specific behaviors,
in the key areas of health and education. The program grants scholarships and school
supplies to children aged under 17 conditional on regular attendance at one of the four last
grades of primary schooling (grades three to six) or one of the three grades of junior
secondary schooling (grades seven to nine). The scholarships increase in amount with
school grade level achieved, and in grades seven to nine the scholarships are larger for girls
than boys. The program also distributes cash transfers for the purchase of food, provides
food supplements, and promotes healthcare through free preventive education intervention
on hygiene and nutrition. The distribution of the food stipends and nutritional supplements
are conditional on healthcare visits at public clinics. The benefits are delivered to the
female head of the household (usually the mother) on a bimonthly basis after verification

of each family member’s attendance at the relevant facility.3

    The Progresa program is targeted both at the village and household levels. During the
first years of the program, poor rural households were selected through a centralized
process which encompassed three main steps. First, villages were ranked by a composite
index of marginality computed using information on socioeconomic characteristics and
access to the program infrastructures from the censuses of 1990 and 1995.4 Second,


    3. Overall cash transfer amounts can be substantial: the median benefits are 176 pesos per
month (roughly 18 USD in 1998), equivalent to about 28 percent of the monthly income of
beneficiary families.
    4. Localities with fewer than 50 or more than 2,500 inhabitants were excluded during the first
years of the program. We use the words “locality” and “village” interchangeably when referring to
distinct census-designated rural population clusters, (i.e., settlements in which inhabitants live in
neighboring sets of living quarters and have a name and locally recognized status, including
hamlets, villages, farms, and other clusters). Rural localities (also called rural communities), or
villages, are defined as having fewer than 2,500 inhabitants.

                                                 6
potentially eligible localities were grouped based on geographical proximity, and relatively
isolated communities were excluded from the selection process. Third, eligible households
were selected using information on covariates of poverty obtained from a field census
conducted in each locality before its incorporation into the program.5
    The program started in 1997 in 6,300 localities with about 300,000 beneficiary
households and expanded rapidly during the following years. In 1998, it was delivered to
34,400 localities (1.6 million households), and, in 1999, coverage increased to 48,700
localities (2.3 million households). The expansion of the program continued in subsequent
years both in rural and urban areas.
    An experimental evaluation of the program was conducted during this phase of
geographical expansion in rural areas. A sample of 506 villages was randomly drawn from
a set of localities that had been selected to be incorporated into the program, which were
located in seven central states of Mexico (Guerrero, Hidalgo, Queretaro, Michoacan,
Puebla, San Luis de Potosi, and Veracruz) after stratification by geographic region (which
coincide roughly with the States) and population size. The randomness of the evaluation
sample is corroborated in section S1 of the supplemental appendix. We document in
particular that evaluation localities do not have different observable characteristics
compared to non-evaluation localities located in the same neighborhoods. Also, the
characteristics of evaluation localities and their population are not statistically significantly
associated with the number of evaluation localities once the number of non-evaluation
localities in their neighborhood are controlled for. Of those villages, 320 localities were
randomly assigned to the treatment group and started receiving the program’s benefits in
March and April 1998; the remaining 186 formed the control group and were thus
prevented from receiving the program benefits until November 1999.

                                       Program Take-up




    5. A proxy-mean index was computed as a weighted average of household income (excluding
children), household size, durables, land and livestock, education, and other physical
characteristics of the dwelling. Households were informed that their eligibility status would not
change until at least November 1999, irrespective of any variation in household income.

                                               7
Importantly for our purposes, the two transfer components are unbundled. Households
declared eligible to receive benefits can take up food stipends, scholarships, or both. They
can also choose to receive the scholarships for some but not all of their eligible children.
Beyond transfer amounts, take-up decisions are largely dependent on the tightness of the
conditions attached to each grant component. While nominally conditional, a substantial
fraction of the transfers is de facto unconditional. In particular, the conditions attached to
the food stipends and scholarships for primary school children do not seem to incur a high
cost to households, because school enrollment at that level is almost 100 percent. We use
data to document take-up from the administration of the program on the distribution of the
different transfers in the 320 treatment localities of the evaluation. This data confirms the
complete take-up of the food stipends: at the end of 1998 and 1999, respectively 97.1 and
98.0 percent of eligible households in those localities received the transfers.
    In contrast, the conditionality of the scholarships at the secondary level is binding for
many households whose eligible school-age children would not have gone to school in the
absence of the program. The same data indicates that, respectively, 83.0 and 91.3 percent
of households that are eligible for a scholarship for at least one child enrolled at the primary
or secondary level received one. However, only 63.7 percent of children who were eligible
for a scholarship for secondary-level school attended school in 1998 with 61.9 percent
attending in 1999.
    Hence, partial take-up of the program benefits is prevalent in this setting whereby some
eligible households comply with the food stipend conditions but refrain from enrolling
some or all of their children in secondary school. However, once they are incorporated into
the program, recipients can further adjust their behavior by enrolling some of their
program-eligible children. While take-up of the food transfers is almost complete, there is
thus a margin for increasing the take-up of the schooling component, which can be seen as
an intensive margin of program participation.

                                   Village Neighborhoods

In this paper, we use the term ”neighborhood” to describe areas within a given radius
around each evaluation village. We borrow this terminology from a literature based mainly
on urban data, but, in our context, ”neighborhood” means an area or cluster of villages.

                                               8
    In order to characterize the local densities of the intervention (in the neighborhoods),
we combine information from the program administration, indicating which localities were
eligible for the program at the end of 1998 and 1999, with information from the 2000
population census and the annual school census. The population census provides the
geographical coordinates (latitudes and longitudes) for all the rural localities in Mexico
while the school census provides the coordinates of all secondary schools. The geo-
referenced data further allows us to identify the locations of the evaluation localities.6
    As in many rural regions of Latin America and elsewhere, the topography of the area
covered by the program consists of clusters of villages with a quasi-continuum of dwellings
rather than isolated villages. On average, there are 22 localities with an overall population
of roughly 6,400 inhabitants within an area defined by a five-kilometer radius from each
evaluation village. This proximity favors the interactions between inhabitants of
neighboring villages.
    Looking now at the intervention, figure 1 depicts the geographic scope of the Progresa
penetration during the first two years of program roll-out in the seven central states where
the evaluation took place. The rural localities targeted by the program in 1998 and 1999
are shown in light and dark grey respectively, while treatment and control localities are
reported in red and blue. In order to provide a more in-depth depiction of the areas
surrounding evaluation villages, the map features a smaller-scale view of a region in the
State of Michoacan in which circles of a five-kilometer radius are drawn around each
evaluation village.

As both maps reveal, beneficiary and evaluation villages tend to be geographically
clustered with more deprived areas featuring a higher program frequency. These patterns
are confirmed by descriptive statistics of the areas surrounding the evaluation sample,



    6. We have used official information on the listing of all rural localities receiving the program
(broken down by each program component) at the closing of each fiscal year in 1998 and 1999 in
order to verify which localities were receiving the program in late 1998 and 1999. A fraction (about
20 percent) of control localities started receiving the program’s food stipends by November 1999,
but none of those villages had received any scholarship by that date. We thus continue to treat
those observations as belonging to the control group in November 1999.

                                                 9
which are shown in table 1. By the end of 1998, there are, on average, ten program-
beneficiary localities within a neighborhood defined by a five-kilometer radius around each
evaluation village. Those localities have an average total population of 834 children aged
six to 14, of which, on average, 386 (46 percent) receive scholarships from Progresa
(column 1).77 Moreover, several evaluation villages are indeed located very close together.
Of the 506 evaluation localities, 139 (27 percent) have another evaluation locality within
five kilometers, 57 (11 percent) have two such localities, and 16 (three percent) have three
or more. Thus, 212 (41 percent) villages in the experiment have other evaluation villages
in a five-kilometer radius. Our empirical analysis identifies the effects of cross-village
externalities for these villages. On average, evaluation villages have, respectively, 0.62
other evaluation localities and 0.40 localities allocated to the experimental treatment group
within a five-kilometer radius. The density of the program, as captured by the numbers of
both non-evaluation and evaluation beneficiary villages, roughly doubles in areas with
more marginalized localities (columns 2 and 3). This is consistent with the targeting design
of the Progresa intervention discussed above. In addition, and as expected by the village-
level random program assignment among the evaluation localities, there are virtually no
differences in the density of the program between neighborhoods with treated or control
centroids (columns 4 and 5).

Basic education and health infrastructures serve areas that comprise several neighboring
villages. For instance, only 14 percent of the villages in the evaluation sample have a health
clinic. Yet, 68 percent have access to such a facility within five kilometers. Similarly, most
localities do not have a junior secondary school—only 17 percent in the evaluation
sample—while 93 percent have access to one or more junior secondary schools in other
villages within five kilometers. Hence, households from different program localities
located in the same area can interact when utilizing social infrastructure. Furthermore,
some operations which are specific to the program are also organized in conjunction for



    7. Evaluation villages tend to be less populated than non-evaluation villages (average total
population in the two groups is 258 and 338, respectively) while the marginalization index is, on
average, very similar (4.66 vs. 4.72, respectively). Accordingly, there are, on average, slightly more
scholarship recipients in non-evaluation villages (49.2) than in evaluation villages (34.5).

                                                 10
several neighboring villages. This is most notably the case of the distribution of transfers
in temporary and mobile outposts, located in hub localities, which serve an additional
function to assist beneficiaries and disseminate information on the program. Hence,
program beneficiaries from different neighboring villages can interact in a number of
places.

                                      Sample Description

We combine the geo-referenced locality data mentioned above with three of the five rounds
of the evaluation survey collected in October 1997 (from the baseline targeting ENCASEH
survey), October 1998 (second round of the ENCEL evaluation surveys), and November
1999 (fourth round of the ENCEL surveys).8 The resulting dataset contains detailed
information on the outcomes of children and socioeconomic characteristics of a panel of
households that reside within the evaluation localities.
    The evaluation survey was intended to cover all inhabitants of the localities under
study. However, a small share of the population was not interviewed at baseline, and there
were some changes in the village populations so that the total number of households
observed in the data is 24,077 in October 1997, 25,846 in October 1998, and 26,972 in
November 1999. Some attrition occurred due, in part, to migration out of the villages and,
in part, to errors in identification codes that occurred for a few enumerators: 8.4 percent of
the 1997 households cannot be followed and matched in all three rounds of the survey. Yet,
this is unrelated to the treatment assignment.
    At baseline (October 1997), 60 percent of the households in evaluation localities were
classified as eligible to receive program benefits. In this paper, we study the schooling
decisions of the children of those eligible households.9 Our main outcome of interest is
school enrollment, for which we also use the term “school participation” interchangeably.


    8. We have discarded the March 1998 and June 1999 rounds of the survey because we only
have information on the roll-out of the program at the end of each year.

    9. About 12 percent of the households were classified as non-poor at baseline but were later
reclassified as eligible. To avoid arbitrary classifications, we exclude those households from our
analysis.

                                                11
This answers the question, Does the child currently attend school?, which tracks
information regarding both enrollment and overall attendance in school (but not regular
attendance). Primary school enrollment is almost universal in rural Mexico while
secondary school enrollment is the most problematic area for school attainment. Also,
secondary grade levels are where Progresa has had its greatest impact among eligible
children (Schultz 2004). We thus restrict our attention to the enrollment decisions of
children who, at baseline, are aged less than 18 and have either completed grades five or
six of primary school or the first grade of secondary school.10 We further reduce the number
of observations in the data in order to generate a balanced panel of children observed at all
rounds.
    The resulting sample contains 6,690 children who are making the transition from
primary to secondary school, remaining in secondary education or dropping out of school
during the academic years 1998–1999 and 1999–2000. For 807 (12.6 percent) of children,
no information was collected on either school participation or parental education, thereby
leaving a final sample of 5,883 children observed in both 1998 and 1999. At baseline, the
average enrollment rate is 63.8 percent (59.3 percent for girls and 68.5 percent for boys).

                       II. PROGRAM EXTERNALITIES ACROSS VILLAGES

                                        Empirical Strategy

Our identification strategy exploits two features of the program evaluation design: (i) the
proximity between many evaluation villages; and (ii) village-level random assignment to
treatment. The key intuition is that, after conditioning for the number of neighboring
evaluation localities, the parceling of those assigned to the treatment and control groups is
random. This enables us to identify the effect on schooling decisions of the variations in
treatment frequency induced by the randomized evaluation within any neighborhood of an
evaluation village.




    10. The sample selection cannot be based on the grade during the follow-up period because
that grade is potentially affected by the treatment.

                                                 12
      Neighborhoods are defined as concentric circles around each evaluation village using
geodesic distance d as the radius.11 Program treatment Tj is administered at the village level.
It is randomly assigned only within the subset of 506 villages which participated in the
evaluation of the program, and not all beneficiary villages participated in the evaluation.
Hence, as described in subsection 2.3, neighborhoods of evaluation villages are comprised
of other evaluation villages, non-evaluation beneficiary villages, and non-eligible villages.

                     j , d , t  N j , d , t  N j , d ,t
                    NB             T             NE
Let then                                                    denote the total number of program beneficiary villages
situated within distance d from evaluation village j in a given post-treatment period t.
                               NT
                                j , d ,t
Among those,                               is the number of evaluation villages that are randomly assigned to the
                                                                            N jNE
                                                                                , d ,t
treatment group of the evaluation and                                                    is the number of other neighboring (non-
evaluation) villages that are targeted by the intervention during each post-treatment period

                          j , d ,t  N j , d ,t  N j , d ,t  N j , d ,t
                         NP            T            C            NE
t. Now let                                                                  denote the number of potential program villages
situated at distance d from village j in a given post-treatment period t, where we have added
NC
 j , d ,t
            , to indicate the number of villages randomly assigned to the control group of the
evaluation.
      To estimate the spillover effect of the program on school participation, we use the
following linear regression model:


                         j , d ,t   3 N j , d , t   4  X i , j , d  ò
Yi , j ,t  1Tj   2 N B                P
                                                                           i , j , d ,t ,            (1)


             Yi , j ,t
where                    is a dummy indicating that program-eligible child i in evaluation village j in a
given post-treatment period t is going to school, Tj is the randomly assigned treatment
                                                                                                               X i , j ,d
indicator that denotes whether or not locality j receives the program,                                                      is a column-



      11. Due to data limitation, we do not take into account the local geography (natural obstacles
or communication axes such as mountains, rivers, or valleys) or transportation networks. This
restriction may potentially introduce some measurement error in neighborhood characteristics and
generate some attenuation biases in our estimates.

                                                                                  13
vector of baseline characteristics at the individual, household, village, and neighborhood
               òi , j ,d ,t
levels while                  captures other unobservable determinants of the school participation
decision which are potentially correlated with the targeting of the program.
    In this framework, the parameter α1 captures the sum of the average direct effect of
program eligibility and the average indirect effects that stem from treatment of other
households in the same village. Due to the fact that program treatment status varies at the
village level, it is not possible to separately identify these two effects.12 The main parameter
of interest is α2, which captures the neighborhood-level spillovers stemming from the
allocation of treatment among the evaluation localities. Finally, the parameter α3 captures
the effects of any unobserved determinant of the school participation decision that are
correlated with the program geographic targeting.
    The identification challenge is that more marginalized regions tend to have higher
treatment densities (see table 1) due to a variety of unobserved factors associated with the
geographic roll-out of the intervention, which are also likely to affect program outcomes.
However, the random program assignment within the subset of evaluation villages provides
some exogenous variation in the local density of treatment in the geographic areas
surrounding the evaluation villages over and above the (endogenous) spillover effects
coming from the non-evaluation beneficiary villages. After conditioning for the potential
                                                      NP
                                                       j , d ,t
treatment frequency in the neighborhood                           , cross-neighborhood variations in the
frequency of the program are solely determined by the random allocation of neighboring
evaluation villages to the treatment and control groups. Indeed, the number of program
beneficiary villages in the neighborhood is given by the difference between the number of
potential beneficiary (or targeted) villages and the number of villages selected into the

                                                                , j ,t  N i , j ,t  N i , j ,t
                                                              NiB           P            C
control group for the randomized evaluation:                                                       . Hence, because the
number of villages allocated to the control (and treatment) group is random, the potential



    12. A partial population approach, exploiting the presence of ineligible households in beneficiary
villages, can be followed, as it has been in previous studies. However, it requires some
assumptions, notably that spillovers affect both eligible and ineligible individuals and is thus not
well-suited for investigating spillovers on the take-up of program components.

                                                     14
schooling outcomes of child i who reside in time t in village j with program treatment status
T j  0,1                                                                                    N dB,t
                and neighborhood treatment frequency                                                  , are independent of that realized
                                                                                                                                    N dP,t
treatment frequency when controlling for targeted neighborhood treatment frequency
. Formally:



          ,t | N j , d ,t , N j , d ,t ]  E[ yi , j ,t | N j ,d ,t ].
            B                                        B
E[ yiT, ,jN      B            P                T ,N         P
                                                                                                 (2)


Under this conditional independence property, comparisons of average outcomes across

different levels of actual treatment frequency
                                                                                      NiB
                                                                                        , j ,t
                                                                                                 , for example,
                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                  n1B and n2  n1B , at a

                                                                                 NiP
                                                                                   , j ,t
given level of potential treatment frequency                                                , capture the causal effect of an increase

in actual treatment frequency from
                                                                      B
                                                              n1B to n2 . Formally (and omitting the indexes):


E[ y n2 | N B  n2 , N P ]  E[ y n1 | N B  n1B , N P ]  E[ y n2 | N B  n2 , N P ]  E[ y n1 | N B  n2
        B                                       B                                            B                          B
                 B                                                          B                            B
                                                                                                           , NP]



 E[ y n2 | N P ]  E[ y n1 | N P ].
            B                      B




As a validation test of the property depicted in equation (2), we use data from the baseline
collected in October 1997 on children’s school participation as well as the full set of
covariates that we employ in the empirical analysis and estimate equation (1) using those
baseline characteristics as outcomes. This amounts to a test of the balancing of baseline
covariates with respect to the variation in local treatment frequency generated by the
randomized experiment. Table 2 reports the means and standard deviations for those
variables (columns 1 and 2), along with the associated OLS coefficients of the
                                                                     NB
                                                                      j , d ,t
neighborhood treatment density term (                                            ). In column 3, we display the unconditional
marginal effects which reveal the presence of systematic differences in observable
characteristics across neighborhoods with different degrees of program frequency.
Consistent with the targeting design of the program, treatment frequency correlates


                                                                             15
positively both with the level of deprivation in the centroid village and with the density of
villages/population in the neighborhood. However, as reported in column 4, those
differences disappear once we control for the potential treatment frequency in the
                      NP
                       j ,t
neighborhood (                ). An F-test of joint significance of all baseline characteristics does not
reject the null hypothesis that the entire set of variables is equal to zero (p-value=0.227)
with this specification.13


      Our econometric model is thus a linear regression in which we are interested in the
                                                                             NB
                                                                              j , d ,t
parameter of a regressor, the density of actual program villages                         , which is exogenous
                                                                                                       NP
once controlling for another regressor—the density of potential program villages                        j , d ,t


(note that Tj is exogenous with or without any conditioning variable). As program targeting
                                                                                                       NP
                                                                                                        j , d ,t
is partly correlated with local poverty levels, we expect the estimated parameter of
to be biased downward. However, the bias on that parameter is orthogonal to both the Tj
       NB
and     j , d ,t
                   terms, and, hence, it does not contaminate the estimates of the α1 and α2
parameters.14
      Furthermore, in equation (1), neighborhood treatment frequency is orthogonal to
village-level program treatment assignment so that the spillover effect of the program can
be identified for both treatment and control group villages. This feature of our empirical
framework allows us to disentangle whether spatial externalities extend to the entire
population or exclusively affect the outcomes of children and families who are included in
the program. We thus consider the following variant of equation (1):




      13. Two of the baseline variables (the share of eligible households and the number of secondary
schools) remain marginally statistically associated (at the ten percent confidence level) with the
density of the program. Consistent with our main estimates, we estimate those placebo regressions
by using a five-kilometer radius (d = 5). Results (available upon request) are very similar when
considering alternative radiuses.
      14. This statement is formally verified in section S2 of the supplemental appendix.

                                                       16
                        j , d ,t  3 [T j  N j , d ,t ]   4 N j , d ,t  5 [T j  N j , d ,t ]  X i , j , d ,t0 6  ui , j , d ,t ,
Yi , j ,t  1Tj  2 N B                      B                  p                      P



             (3)
where the village-level treatment assignment term (Tj) interacts with the density of both
                NB
                 j , d ,t                                NP
                                                          j , d ,t
actual (                    ) and potential (                        ) neighboring beneficiary localities so that the effects of
cross-village externalities are identified separately for the control and treatment groups.
This specification allows us to test whether or not program externalities differentially vary

with treatment assignment ( 3  0 ).
      To be more explicit on the parameter we estimate, note that our model is equivalent to
one in which we are interested in the effects of the neighboring evaluation villages assigned
                                                 NiT, j ,t
to the treatment group,                                      , and we condition for the numbers of evaluation villages,
NiE
  , j ,t                                                                                NiNE
                                                                                          , j ,t
           , and non-evaluation beneficiary villages,                                               . This model writes:


                         j , d ,t   3 N j , d , t   4 N j , d , t   5  X i , j , d  ò
Yi , j ,t  1Tj   2 N T                E                 NE
                                                                                             i, j , d ,t .                (4)


      The same conditional independence property that stems from the randomized allocation
                                                                                                              NiT, j ,t
into treatment of neighboring evaluation localities implies that                                                          is random conditional
      NE
       j , d ,t              N jNE
                                 , d ,t
on                 and                    , that is:



          ,t | N j , d ,t , N j , d ,t , N j , d ,t ]  E[ yi , j ,t | N j , d ,t , N j , d ,t ].
            T                                                          T
E[ yiT, ,jN      T            E            NE               T ,N         E            NE
                                                                                                                          (5)


The α2 parameter in equations (1) and (4) capture the effects of the same exogenous
variation in neighborhood treatment density (that is, the spillover effect of the experimental
treatment group villages), and the estimates obtained with these two models are the same.
      In addition, we do not assume that the effects of spillovers are linear. We can account
for non-linearities by using discrete variables indicating the specific numbers of
neighboring treatment villages and use a flexible (or ”granular”) specification for the
numbers of evaluation or non-evaluation localities in the neighborhood. Below (see section
3.2), we report the estimates of equation (1) with one single parameter for the number of
                                                                                 17
beneficiary villages as well as those of equation (4) with fully discretized controls for the
numbers of experimental treatment, evaluation, and non-evaluation beneficiary localities.15
While the former provides an average spillover effect, the later specification allows us to
check for the presence of non-linearities in the marginal effects of neighboring evaluation
localities assigned to treatment.
    Finally, several other features of the empirical specifications depicted above should be
noted. First, the parameter α2 in equation (1) is estimated out of the subset of eligible
households of the controlled experiment that have other evaluation villages in the
neighborhood of radius d. For a radius of five kilometers, we have such identifying
variation for 42 percent of the evaluation villages.
                                                                               X i , j ,d
    Second, the inclusion of the vector of sociodemographic variables                       in equations
(1), (3), and (4) is meant to increase the precision of the estimates. The control variables
are all measured at baseline using the 1997 data in order to avoid any endogeneity concern,
and, taking advantage of the panel dimension of the data, include, in particular, baseline
school enrollment. The remaining control variables are as follows: child’s gender and age
(both in levels and squares), parental education, distance to the nearest city, the share of
eligible households, the presence of a secondary school in the locality, total population in
the locality, the number of localities, total population, and the mean degree of
marginalization in the neighborhood. We also include state- and year-fixed effects.
    Lastly, in order to account for the fact that evaluation villages may belong to multiple
neighborhoods, we cluster standard errors for groups of partially overlapping
neighborhoods. These groups are defined as sets of evaluation villages such that each
village lies within the radius-based neighborhood of another village of the set. Intuitively,
as soon as an evaluation village belongs to two radius-based neighborhoods, those two
neighborhoods will belong to the same cluster. This allows for correlations beyond single
radiuses. In the empirical analysis, our preferred specification uses a five-kilometer radius,
but we also use concentric radiuses of ten and 20 kilometers. Considering a larger radius



    15. Given the small number of experimental treatment localities within the neighborhoods in our
sample (see table 1), we group them into two binary categorical variables according to the
presence of one or two or more such localities (vis-a-vis zero) in the neighborhood.

                                                18
leads to a smaller number of clusters. In particular, the 506 villages in the experiment
belong to 358 clusters of partially overlapping five-kilometer neighborhoods—the 320
treatment villages belong to 249 such clusters—and this number reduces to 180 when
considering clusters formed by overlapping ten-kilometer neighborhoods and 45 with 20-
kilometer ones.

                                          Main Results

Tables 3 and 4 report the OLS estimates of the spillover effects of the program on eligible
children’s school participation decisions. The estimates are obtained using the data for the
post-treatment period (October 1998 and November 1999).
    The estimates in table 3 correspond to the model in equation (1) with continuous
variables for the numbers of beneficiary, NB, and potential beneficiaries, NP. The estimates
are obtained with two alternative measures of program frequency NB in the areas
surrounding the evaluation villages: the models in columns 1–3 use the numbers of villages
treated in a five-kilometer radius, while those in columns 4–6 instead use the numbers of
eligible households within the same radius. This second definition takes into account the
variations in population density across neighborhoods and, hence, possibly better captures
the extent of potential interactions among program beneficiaries. We report and discuss
only the estimates of the parameters α1 and α2 but, as explained above, the regressions
further include controls for the numbers of potential beneficiaries and for baseline
characteristics observed in October 1997, notably baseline school enrollment.16




Column 1 of table 3 reports the estimates for the baseline model in equation (1) when
measuring program frequency by the numbers of villages. It indicates that when
considering the entire sample of children in treatment and control villages while living in



    16. The last rows of table 3 report the estimated coefficients of the conditioning term NP in
equation (2), split into its two components, NE and NNE. Those are, in general, negative and
significant, suggesting the presence of strong downward biases stemming from the process of
geographic targeting of evaluation villages and non-evaluation villages.

                                                19
a treated community increases school participation by 9.7 percent, having an additional
treated village within a five-kilometer radius further increases enrollment rates by 2.9
percent (this spillover effect is statistically significant at the ten percent level). The
estimated own-village treatment effect of the program is in line with the results obtained
in previous studies (e.g., Schultz [2004]).
    In order to document the heterogeneity of cross-village externalities by treatment
status, column 2 of table 3 reports OLS estimates of the augmented model specified in
equation (3) and column 3 estimates of the model in equation (1) obtained after restricting
the sample to the treatment group.17 Program externalities appear to matter only for
children who live in treatment group localities. Column 2 indeed shows no evidence of
spillovers affecting school enrollment of children in control villages (the parameter for the
main effect of program frequency has a negative point estimate and it is not statistically
significant), but it does show evidence of strong spillovers for the treatment group. The
point estimate for the differential effect of spillovers in treatment villages as compared to
control villages (given by the parameter for the interaction term β3 in equation 3) reaches
7.8 percent, and this estimated differential effect is statistically significant at the five
percent level.18 The finding of spillovers restricted to the control group is confirmed by the
estimates reported in column 3, in which we restrict the sample to the treatment group. The
effect on school enrollment of having an additional treated village within a five-kilometer
radius is estimated at 5.6 percent, and it is statistically significant at the one percent level.
The specifications reported in columns 4–6 of table 3, which use the numbers of
households, normalized by 100, for measuring program frequency in the areas surrounding



    17. We also ran probit estimates of the same models and obtained very similar estimates of the
effects of spillovers. The results are available upon request.
    18. Note that, when we allow for heterogenous effects of program spillovers, the relative OLS
coefficient of the village-level treatment assignment term (β1) decreases only slightly (to 8.1
percent). We argue that this is due to the simultaneous presence of non-evaluation treated
neighboring villages together with the fact that program spillovers accrue exclusively between
beneficiaries. With this view, the estimated own-village effect of the program on school enrollment
would also embed a portion of the program spillovers stemming from the non-evaluation treated
neighbors.

                                                 20
the evaluation villages, give very similar results to the corresponding ones in columns 1–
3.
     Table 4 reports the estimates for the model in equation (4); the effects of program
frequency are captured directly by the number of treatment group villages NT, which, as
discussed above, is the source of variation in local treatment frequency that serves to
identify spillovers in all our specifications. We use two indicator variables that indicate the
presence of one or two or more treatment group villages in the neighborhood. These
estimates also incorporate fully discrete controls for the numbers evaluation and non-
evaluation beneficiary villages. We report and discuss the estimates not only of the
parameters α1 and α2 but also of α3 for the main conditioning variable, which is the number
of evaluation localities in the neighborhood. The regressions further include indicator
variables for each non-evaluation beneficiary village and total numbers of villages (we do
not report the corresponding parameter estimates as these numbers can be very large), as
well as for baseline characteristics observed in October 1997, notably baseline school
enrollment. Figure 2 shows the visual representation of the estimates of the average
spillover effects reported in column 1 of table 4. They indicate that a treatment group
village in the neighborhood increases school participation by 6.1 percent, while two or
more neighboring treatment group villages increase it by 8.0 percent. These estimates show
that spatial spillovers do not increase linearly with the number of treated villages in the
neighborhood. The point estimates reported in column 2 for the differential effect of
spillovers in treatment villages as compared to control villages are larger in magnitude with
increased enrollment rates of, respectively, 10.5 and 15.3 percent with one and two or more
neighboring treatment villages but reveal a similar pattern.19




     19. This non-linear shape of the spillover effects with respect to the frequency of nearby
program beneficiaries can be related to a broad class of models of discrete decisions with strategic
complementarities and/or the presence of threshold effects in the spillover function; see, for
example, Brock and Durlauf (2001) and Glaeser and Scheinkman (2000). These cross-village
effects are of the same magnitude or slightly higher than the ones that have been documented for
the effects of program spillovers within-villages (from beneficiaries to non-beneficiaries) in the same
setting, that is, around five percent (Bobonis and Finan 2009; Lalive and Cattaneo 2009).

                                                  21
                                     Further Evidence

To investigate whether spillovers operate over relatively short or larger distances, table 5
reports the OLS estimates of the model in equation (1) using measures of program
frequency in neighborhoods covering larger distances over and above those of program
frequency in the zero to five kilometer radius. As in table 3, we use the number of villages
(columns 1–4) and eligible households (columns 5–8) as two alternative measures of
program frequency. Columns 1 and 5 use the same baseline specification as columns 1 and
4 of table 3 with the entire sample. Columns 2 and 6 use the restricted sample of children
in treated villages (as do columns 3 and 6 of table 3). For the estimates in columns 3, 4, 7,
and 8, we measure program frequency over a 20-kilometer radius and weight the
observations in each village by the inverse of the distance to the centroid.

   The estimated coefficients for the numbers of treated villages located at a distance
between five and ten kilometers are small and statistically insignificant, whereas the
corresponding estimates at a distance between zero and five kilometers barely change with
respect to those presented in table 3. This suggests the presence of a strong decay rate in
spatial externalities. However, the specifications using the distance-weighted density
measures computed over the 20 kilometer-radius confirm the presence of positive
spillovers on school participation in treatment group localities. Overall, these results
indicate that spillovers operate over relatively short distances. Since we find no evidence
of spillovers of beneficiaries over larger distances, in the rest of the analysis we focus on
those operating over zero to five kilometers.
   As a robustness check, we consider an alternative specification that instruments the
actual treatment frequency in the neighborhood with the randomized treatment frequency.
However, if we control for both the number of evaluation localities and non-evaluation
beneficiary localities, the first stage becomes evidently mechanical with an additional
treatment locality increasing by one the number of beneficiary localities in the
neighborhood. In order to avoid such a mechanical first-stage relationship, we remove from
the specification the variable corresponding to the number of non-evaluation program

                                             22
villages (NNE). Note that we still have to control for the number of neighboring evaluation
villages (NE) in order to account for the fact that the identifying variation is non-zero for
42 percent of the evaluation villages (i.e., those that have at least another evaluation village
in their radius of zero to five kilometers) and in order to assure that the exclusion restriction
is valid (because of the correlation across village neighborhoods between NE and NNE).
    The corresponding estimation results are reported in table 6. The point estimate of the
first-stage parameter for the effect of an additional treatment group village on
neighborhood treatment density is estimated at 1.43 (column 1). The corresponding t-
statistic is 1.97 and the F test of the excluded instrument is 3.9, which is statistically
significant at the five percent level. The reduced form coefficient for the effect of the
number of treated villages in the zero- to five-kilometer radius on secondary school
enrollment is 0.028 (column 2), which is very much in line with the corresponding estimate
reported in column 1 of table 3. Column 3 reports the IV point estimate of the relationship
between the frequency of neighboring program localities and secondary school enrollment,
which is positive but not significantly different from zero. The IV point estimate has a
smaller magnitude than the OLS one reported in column 2, which reflects the larger-than-
one first-stage relationship and is estimated with more noise due to the reduced statistical
power in this specification.


    As a last robustness exercise, we consider alternative measures of program take-up
based on the health component of the program. We use household-level information from
the post-program survey round of October 1998 on the uptake of three screening tests that
form part of the health requirements of the Progresa program: hypertension (blood
pressure test), diabetes (blood sugar test), and cervical cancer (via the PAP smear test).20



    20. The household respondents were asked whether or not any household member had been
screened for these conditions in the previous six months. In order to maintain full comparability with
the estimates of program spillover reported in the paper, we estimate at the household-level the
linear model reported in equation (1) in the paper on the same sample that we consider in the main
empirical analysis. Results (available upon request) are very similar in both magnitude and
precision if we instead consider the larger sample of all program-eligible households in October
1998.

                                                 23
Table 7 reports the OLS estimates of both own-village treatment effects and the spatial
spillover effects stemming from neighboring program villages on the probability that the
households in the sample comply with the health conditionality of the program. The
estimates reveal the presence of a strong effect of the program on the probability that
eligible households comply with its health requirements, as confirmed by the positive and
large marginal effects associated with the variable indicating whether or not the own village
of residence of the households in the sample received the program.21 The estimated
coefficients of cross-village externalities are reported in columns 1, 3, and 5 of table 7.
These are also positive but not significantly different from zero with the exception of the
specification using the uptake of the blood sugar test as dependent variable (column 3),
which features an estimated externalities coefficient that is significant at the ten percent
level.


    We next estimate the heterogenous effect model reported in equation (3). The
corresponding estimates are reported in columns 2, 4, and 6 of table 7. Externalities
coefficients for households residing in treated villages are more precisely estimated and
larger in magnitude when compared to their average counterparts (except for the PAP
smear test) whereas those for control villages cannot be distinguished from zero. An
additional neighboring program village increases compliance with health screening by
roughly ten percent for households who reside in a program village or about half of the
“own-village” treatment effect and a 20–30 percent increase vis-a-vis the corresponding
mean in the control group. These estimates of health spillovers are broadly consistent with
those of the enrollment spillovers reported in table 3 both in terms of incidence (they accrue
exclusively among program participants) and of the magnitude. They are slightly more
imprecise though, possibly due to the smaller sample size resulting from household-level
regressions and one year of program follow-up data.




    21. As we note in section 3.1, the fact that program treatment status varies at the village level
implies that such estimates capture both the direct effect of the program as well as the average
indirect effects, which stem from the treatment of other individuals in the same village.

                                                 24
                                        III. MECHANISMS

We now use additional information gathered from both program operational surveys and
administrative sources in order to shed some light on the interpretation behind the patterns
uncovered in section 3. The finding of spillovers on school enrollment operating over short
distances supports a simple model of peer effects on program take-up decisions of eligible
households.22 As we do not have measures of the occurrences of interactions of
beneficiaries from different neighboring villages, we cannot report direct evidence of this.
Hence, we conduct several indirect checks for the presence of such interactions. On the
other hand, some spatial variations in the local implementation of the program could also
a priori explain the observed relationship between the local density of the treatment and
program impacts. We thus also test for the presence of such spatial variations in the
implementation of the intervention under study.


                    Knowledge Spillovers Among Program Participants


In spite of the emphasis placed on informing the potential participants about the objectives,
design, and requirements of the intervention, concerns have been expressed by those
involved in the initial phases of the implementation regarding the effectiveness of the
diffusion of information about the program among targeted households (Adato et al. 2000).
To further corroborate this anecdotal evidence, we use information from an operational
follow-up survey conducted among eligible households in the evaluation treatment-group
villages in May 1999 (i.e., 14 months after the inception of the program). Program
beneficiaries were asked to identify three sets of benefits distributed by Progresa: (i)
scholarships and school supplies; (ii) food stipends and nutritional supplements; and (iii)
preventive healthcare and health check-ups. Most of the respondents who were to receive
the transfers were mothers. While 98 percent of the respondents were able to spontaneously


    22. Non-market interactions may affect take-up decisions through two channels: information
and social norms. While conceptually different, these two forms of social behaviors can hardly be
distinguished empirically. We thus broadly refer to the influence of others on individual responses
as peer effects.

                                                25
and correctly mention the nutrition component, only 60 percent correctly identified both
the health and education components. Knowledge of the program components was thus
incomplete in treatment villages at that time.
   In such a context of sparse and coarse knowledge about the benefits of the intervention,
information-sharing among potential beneficiaries is likely to have played a role, notably
among the women who are the primary recipients of the transfers and regularly encounter
each other during program operations. When asked, in the same operational follow-up
survey, to mention the most significant changes within their communities, half of the
beneficiaries reported that the program had increased the degree of cooperation among
women.
   For further evidence on this, we estimate the effects of spatial spillovers on those
measures of eligible households’ knowledge of the different program components. Table
8 reports the estimates, which are obtained using the model in equation (1) estimated at the
household-level using the October 1998 data. Having one additional neighboring program
village increases by 4.5 and 8.2 percent, respectively, the share of eligible households that
are aware of the education and health components (columns 1 and 2), and has a smaller
and no significant effect on the share of households aware of the nutritional component
(column 3).


   Given the evidence of program externalities on school participation decisions presented
in section 3, the observed variations of the knowledge of the education component could
reflect increases in school attendance rather than the presence of peer effect among
potential beneficiaries. Yet, the take-up patterns of the program discussed in section 2.2
make it difficult to interpret the evidence of the knowledge indicators of other program
components (such as health benefits) as purely stemming from corresponding variations in
school enrollment among program-eligible children.

                                    Supply-Side Effects

Areas with higher densities of program participants may have benefited from more efficient
program operations or from improvements in the supply of education or health services,
thereby helping some eligible households to comply with the schooling requirements of

                                             26
the program. A related alternative explanation is that the implementation of the program
may have been more efficient when the number of evaluation treatment group villages in
the neighborhood (rather than the total number of beneficiaries) was higher. While both
notions of implementation scale gains seem a priori reasonable, we argue that they are
unlikely to explain our results.
   To examine the presence of differences in implementation and supply, two preliminary
points should be noted. First, any variation in program delivery in a given geographic area
should evenly benefit those program recipients who reside within it. This is at odds with
the evidence reported in column 1 of table 5 that program spillovers appear spatially
concentrated within relatively small areas surrounding the evaluation villages. According
to this line of thought, school supply-side changes would likely affect the enrollment
decisions of both recipients and non-recipients, an idea difficult to reconcile with the
evidence of heterogeneous externalities reported in column 2 of table 3.
   Second, we identify spatial spillovers using only the variation in program frequency
generated by the randomized experiment. This variation is small compared to the overall
scale of the program (as seen in table 1, in a given five-kilometer radius there are on average
ten beneficiary villages but only 0.6 evaluation villages, among which 0.4 are assigned to
the treatment group and 0.2 to the control group). Program frequency is thus not much
different in neighborhoods that have more treatment-group villages compared to those that
have more control-group villages, and the resulting infra-marginal changes in the scale of
the program are unlikely to trigger any supply-side efficiency gain.
   We next run a battery of complementary tests aimed at detecting the presence of
supply-side responses associated with experimental variations in the frequency of the
treatment in the areas surrounding evaluation villages. We begin with two measures of
implementation efficiency at the village-level. According to qualitative interviews with
beneficiaries, local program staff, school teachers, and health staff (see Adato et al. 2000),
one major source of inefficiency in program delivery was the delays in the delivery of the
form for school attendance monitoring (E1 form), and the associated delays in the payment
of scholarships. First, we use program administrative data on the monetary transfers (for
scholarships and school supplies) delivered to eligible households to compute the number
of months from incorporation until the first disbursements were made to the beneficiary

                                              27
households in treated villages.23 Second, we use information from the operational follow-
up survey in order to construct the share of program recipients in treated villages that
received the E1 form as of May 1999.
    In order to maintain full comparability with the estimates of program spillover reported
in the rest of the paper, we estimate at the village-level the linear model reported in equation
(1) using those program implementation measures as dependent variables on the sample of
treated villages that we consider in the main empirical analysis.24 The dependent variables
are time-invariant, and, hence, we match this information with only the first round (1998)
of the data of the program roll-out. As documented in columns 1–3 of table 9, these three
measures of efficiency of program implementation are unrelated to the frequency of the
treatment in the areas surrounding evaluation villages.


    We next use the yearly secondary school census in order to construct school supply
aggregate measures for the 358 evaluation neighborhoods in our sample (with both treated
and control villages as centroid), and estimate at the neighborhoodlevel the linear model
reported in equation (1) over the two years of the program roll-out (1998–1999). In all
specifications, we control for the baseline (1997) value of the dependent variable. The OLS
estimates are reported in panel B of table 9, which are very small in magnitude and not
statistically different from zero.




    23. While food stipends were distributed to all villages assigned to the treatment group at the
same time in March 1998, only 56 percent of the those localities received the first scholarship
transfer in March 1998; 36 percent received them two months later, and the remaining eight percent
six months or more after incorporation into the program. These administrative delays appear
concentrated in some regions, notably in the states of Queretaro and San Luis Potosi. As a further
check, we have re-estimated equation (1) without those two states. Results (available upon
request) are very similar to those reported in table 3.
    24. Results (available upon request) barely change when we consider instead the entire sample
of 320 treated villages. Due to a few missing values in the additional data sources that we employ,
we lose some village-level observations in the regressions displayed in panel A of table 2: three
villages for scholarship disbursements, four villages for school supply disbursements, and seven
villages for the receipt of the school attendance (E1) form.

                                                 28
                                       IV. CONCLUSION

We examined, in the context of the Progresa-Oportunidades conditional cash transfer
program, whether or not the take-up of the schooling component of the program is
influenced by the presence of other beneficiaries in areas comprising several villages. We
found evidence of positive spillovers within networks of beneficiaries spanning those
areas. A higher local frequency of program beneficiaries increases the take-up of the
scholarships for secondary schooling offered by the program and, accordingly, school
enrollment at that level. In contrast, these effects do not affect the schooling decisions of
households in the control-group villages that were not yet incorporated into the program.
    To better understand our findings, we tested and found suggestive evidence for the
presence of knowledge spillovers among program-eligible households. While we could not
directly test for the presence of social interactions, we found that higher treatment densities
in the neighborhoods were associated with increased knowledge among eligible
households of the schooling and health components of the program. We also tested the
alternative hypothesis that the spillover effect that we estimate instead reflects
heterogeneities in direct treatment impacts due to spatial variations in the implementation
of the program. The evidence we obtained is not consistent with this interpretation of our
findings.
    Spillover effects on program take-up have implications for the design and
implementation of social policies in developing countries. The magnitude of the estimated
effect suggests that there can be large gains from the spatial concentration of the target
population of an intervention as local networks of potential beneficiaries can act as social
multipliers in the take-up of the proposed benefits. Spillover effects also have implications
for the evaluation of social policy interventions, notably in settings where a program is
implemented over an extended area and treatment frequency is high. In particular,
capturing those effects across villages so as to recover impact evaluation parameters that
incorporate spillovers requires the analysis of the impacts of the program at the level of
relatively large geographical areas or clusters. The feasibility of this option critically hinges
upon the scale of the program that is being evaluated, and statistical power reasons may
push the researcher to opt for a narrower definition of the evaluation clusters. These


                                               29
considerations can be particularly important for policy interventions that are evaluated at
scale, a setting which likely differs from the evaluation of small pilot programs.

                                       REFERENCES

Adato, M., D. Coady, and M. Ruel. 2000. “An operations evaluation of progresa from the
   perspective of beneficiaries, promotoras, school directors, and health staff.” Technical
   report, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.
Aizer, A., and J. Currie. 2004). ”Networks or neighborhoods? correlations in the use of
   publicly-funded maternity care in California.” Journal of Public Economics 88
   (12): 2573–85.
Akerlof, G.A. 1997. “Social distance and social decisions.” Econometrica 65 (5): 1005–
   28.
Angelucci, M., and G. De Giorgi. 2009. ”Indirect effects of an aid program: How do cash
   transfers affect ineligibles’ consumption?” American Economic Review 99 (1): 486–
   508.
Angelucci, M., G. De Giorgi, M.A. Rangel, and I. Rasul. 2010. ”Family networks and
   school enrollment: Evidence from a randomized social experiment.” Journal of
   Public Economics 94 (3-4): 197–221.
Angelucci, M., G. De Giorgi, and I. Rasul. 2015. Resource sharing within family
   networks: insurance and investment. Working paper.
Baird, S., J.A. Bohren, C. McIntosh, and B. Ozler. 2015. Designing Experiments to
   Measure Spillover Effects, working paper 15-021, Penn Institute for Economic
   Research. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and K. Dhruva. 2010. ”Improving immunization
   coverage in rural India: A clustered randomized controlled evaluation of
   immunization campaigns with and without incentives.” BMJ 340:c2553.
Bertrand, M., E.F.P. Luttmer, and S. Mullainathan. 2000.”Network effects and welfare
   cultures.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (3), 1019–55.
Bobonis, G.J., and F. Finan. 2009. ”Neighborhood peer effects in secondary school
   enrollment decisions.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (4): 695–716.



                                             30
Brock, W.A. and S.N. Durlauf. 2001. ”Discrete Choice with Social Interactions.” Review
   of Economic Studies 68 (2): 235–60.
Crepon, B., E. Duflo, M. Gurgand, R. Rathelot, and P. Zamora. 2013. ”Do labor market
   policies have displacement effects? Evidence from a clustered randomized
   experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (2): 531–80.
Daponte, B.O., S. Sanders, and L. Taylor. 1999. “Why do low-income households not use
   food stamps? Evidence from an experiment.” Journal of Human Resources 34
   (3): 612–28.
Duflo, E., and E. Saez. 2003. ”The role of information and social interactions in
   retirement plan decisions: Evidence from a randomized experiment.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 118 (3): 815–42.
Fiszbein, A., and N. Schady. 2009. Conditional Cash Transfers. Reducing Present and
   Future Poverty. The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Glaeser, E.L., and J. Scheinkman. 2000. Non-Market Interactions, NBER working papers
   8053, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Glewwe, P., and M. Kremer. 2006. Schools, teachers, and education outcomes in
   developing countries, Vol. 2 of Handbook of the Economics of Education. Elsevier,
   chapter 16, 945–1017.
Ichino, N., and M. Schundeln. 2012. ”Deterring or displacing electoral irregularities?
   Spillover effects of observers in a randomized field experiment in Ghana.” Journal of
   Politics 74: 292–307.
Kuhn, P., P. Kooreman, A. Soetevent, and A. Kapteyn. 2011. ”The effects of lottery
   prizes on winners and their neighbors: Evidence from the Dutch postcode lottery.”
   American Economic Review 101 (5): 2226–47.
Lalive, R., and M.A. Cattaneo. 2009. ”Social interactions and schooling decisions.”
   Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (3): 457–77.
Miguel, E., and M. Kremer. 2004. ”Worms: Identifying impacts on education and health
   in the presence of treatment externalities.” Econometrica 72 (1): 159–217.
Moffitt, R.A. 2001. Policy Interventions, Low Level Equilibria, and Social Interactions.
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 45–82.



                                            31
Parker, S.W., L. Rubalcava, and G. Teruel. 2008. “Evaluating Conditional Schooling and
   Health Programs.” Vol. 4 of Handbook of Development Economics. Elsevier,
   chapter 62: 3963–4035.
Schultz, T.P. .2004. ”School subsidies for the poor: Evaluating the Mexican progresa
   poverty program.” Journal of Development Economics 74 (1): 199–250.




                                           32
                                     FIGURES AND TABLES


FIGURE 1. Program Coverage (1998-1999)




Notes: This figure reports the geographic locations of the villages targeted by the program during
the period 1998–1999 in the seven central states of Mexico in which the evaluation of the program
took place. The quadrant in the upper right hand corner displays a close-up view of a region in the
state of Michoacan in which the size of the markers has been adjusted for the relative population
size,   and   five-kilometer   radiuses   are   displayed   around    each    evaluation   village.


Source: list of localities receiving the Progresa-Oportunidades at end of 1998 and 1999, list of
localities selected in the treatment and control group of the randomized evaluation, and 2000
population census.




                                                33
FIGURE 2. Marginal Spillover Effects - Granular Specification




Notes: This figure depicts the OLS coefficients and the associated 95 percent confidence intervals
on school participation decisions of the own village treatment term, along with those for the indicator
variables for having one and two or more neighboring treated villages, respectively. Standard errors
are clustered at the level of groupings of partially overlapping neighborhoods. All specifications
control for baseline school enrollment. The full set of estimated coefficients of equation (4) is
reported in table 4.


Source: evaluation surveys and geo-referenced census of localities and secondary schools. The
sample contains program-eligible children in evaluation villages, observed in October 1998 and
November 1999, who, at baseline, are aged less than 18 and have completed grades 5 or 6 of
primary school and the first grade of secondary school.




                                                  34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
       Neighborhood Eﬀects in Integrated Social Policies
                  Supplemental Appendix
                          Matteo Bobba∗                  J´ emie Gignoux†
                                                          er´



S1       Randomness of the Evaluation Sample
We hereby provide the english translation for a few extracts of an oﬃcial document from the
original evaluation of the program (Progresa, 1997), which clearly suggest that the evaluation
sample was indeed selected randomly among the set of the program eligible localities in the
seven Mexican States in which the program was initially implemented.

       [...]The evaluation sample (cf. BASAL y CONTROL) is constituted of rural
       (i.e. 50-4,999 inhabitants) and marginalized (i.e. high or very high values of
       an underlying proxy-mean poverty score) localities with access to primary and
       secondary schools that are located in Progresa catchment areas in the States of
       Guerrero, Hidalgo, Michoac´                etaro, San Luis Potos´
                                  an, Puebla, Quer´                    ı and Veracruz.
       [...]The sample was randomly drawn from the population of those program eligible
       localities scheduled to be incorporated in 1997, after stratiﬁcation by geographic
       region (which roughly coincide with States) and population size.

    In the regression analysis discussed in the paper, individual school participation decisions
after the program takes place (1998-1999) are aﬀected by the local frequency of program in-
corporated villages over the same period in the areas surroundings their villages of residence.
Hence, beyond the presumed randomness of the evaluation sample vis-a-vis the villages that
were incorporated during the baseline of the program evaluation (1997), we are also inter-
ested in assessing the extent to which the evaluation villages are similar to those that were
incorporated in the program during the subsequent phases of the roll-out of the intervention
in rural areas. Basic socio-demographic variables extracted from the 2000 Mexican popu-
lation census indicate that localities that are lately incorporated into the program are on
average larger and less marginalized (see Panel A of Table S1.1). However, the diﬀerences
in means between incorporation phases are largely attenuated once we restrict the sample
to those localities that are situated in 5km neighborhoods (as deﬁned in the paper) of the
evaluation localities (see panel B of Table S1.1).
   ∗
     Toulouse School of Economics, University of Toulouse Capitole, 21 All´    ee de Brienne 31000 Toulouse
France. E-mail: matteo.bobba@tse-fr.eu.
   †
     French National Institute for Agricultural Research and Paris School of Economics, 48 boulevard Jourdan
75014 Paris France. E-mail: jeremie.gignoux@psemail.eu.


                                                     1
 Table S1.1: Socio-Demographics Characteristics and the Phase of Program Incorporation
 Year                                        1997                1998               1999
                                      Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev.
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)
     Panel A: All Localities in the Seven States in which the Program Evaluation Took Place
 Size size                                  N=2,249            N=11,987            N=6,124

 Poverty mean-score                   0.63        0.65       0.61     0.69        0.09       0.88
 Nb of Households                     70.17      94.71      73.74     99.91      91.35     171.17
 Population (age≤5)                   59.58      83.63      63.99    88.98       71.93     141.81
 Population (6≤age<15)                91.47     124.62      96.64    129.09     108.20     204.99
 Population (age≥15)                  202.9      280.1      207.5    279.6       258.1      489.5
 Presence of secondary school         0.20        0.40       0.19     0.40        0.22       0.42
 % Literate (age≥15)                   0.69       0.13      0.70      0.14       0.75        0.14
 % Children in School (6≤age<15)      0.90        0.09       0.88     0.10        0.87       0.12
 Altitude (meters above see level)    940.2      683.2     1092.7    855.6      1238.5      886.6
 % Population in Workforce             0.43       0.11       0.40      0.13       0.39       0.13

           Panel B: Only Localities in a 5-km Neighborhood of the Evaluation Sample
 Size size                                 N=717            N=3,048             N=829

 Poverty mean-score                   0.66       0.64       0.67       0.72      0.16        0.99
 Nb of Households                     68.32     87.73       63.67     74.21      76.63     200.37
 Population (age≤5)                   57.78     78.32      55.83      68.24     60.02      149.05
 Population (6≤age<15)                90.12     117.9       84.27     97.85      91.07      214.4
 Population (age≥15)                  198.3     261.4      180.9      211.1     216.0       568.6
 Presence of secondary school         0.19       0.40       0.17       0.37      0.20        0.40
 % Literate (age≥15)                   0.68      0.13       0.68      0.15       0.72        0.17
 % Children in School (6≤age<15)      0.90       0.10       0.88       0.10      0.88        0.13
 Altitude (meters above see-level)    900.1     682.8      1215.9     842.9     1448.8      833.4
 % Population in Workforce             0.44      0.12        0.42      0.14       0.42       0.14
   Note: Both Samples of Panel A and Panel B include the 320 evaluation localities that were randomly
   assigned to the treatment group.



    Table S1.2 provides a direct comparison between evaluation localities and the non-
evaluation program beneﬁciary localities in the seven Mexican States from which the eval-
uation sample was drawn and over the period 1997-1999 (see columns 1 and 2). Column 3
reports the t-statistics of the test of no diﬀerences in locality characteristics after controlling
for population strata and State ﬁxed eﬀects (as well as a joint F-test) and ﬁnds the presence
of some unbalances in a few socio-demographic characteristics. In Column 4 we further re-
strict the comparison within the neighboring localities of each evaluation cluster and do not
ﬁnd evidence of any signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two samples.
    To wrap up, in spite of the random assignment of evaluation villages in 1997, there
may be some unbalancedness between the evaluation sample and the non-evaluation sample

                                                 2
of Progresa localities after 1997. However, those seem to be minor within the relatively
homogenous group of neighboring villages that are incorporated in the program over the
period 1998-1999 that we consider in our empirical analysis.


Table S1.2: Comparison of Means between Evaluation and Non-Evaluation Progresa Localities
                                         Evaluation     Non-Evaluation T-test of No Diﬀerence
 Sample size                              N=506           N=20,045     N=20,551 N=4,785
                                            (1)              (2)          (3)          (4)

 Poverty mean-score                          0.47              0.46             0.002        -0.039
                                            (0.73)            (0.79)           [0.971]       [0.112]
 Number of Households                        52.18            79.09             1.875         1.758
                                            (35.20)          (126.4)           [0.382]       [0.164]
 Population (age≤5)                          43.61            66.27             2.459         2.332
                                            (34.89)          (107.9)           [0.079]       [0.063]
 Population (6≤age<15)                       66.81           100.10             3.333         2.086
                                            (51.70)          (156.6)           [0.057]       [0.217]
 Population (age≥15)                        147.78           223.49             4.963         5.090
                                            (101.8)          (359.3)           [0.347]       [0.142]
 Presence of Secondary School                0.17              0.20             0.024         0.011
                                            (0.38)            (0.40)           [0.453]       [0.516]
 % Literate (age≥15)                         0.71              0.71            -0.013         0.005
                                            (0.14)            (0.14)           [0.221]       [0.263]
 % Children in School (6≤age<15)             0.88              0.88            -0.003        -0.002
                                            (0.10)            (0.11)           [0.666]       [0.612]
 Altitude (meters above see level)         1273.63           1116.90          132.739        11.998
                                           (839.7)           (852.9)          [0.060]        [0.153]
 % Population in Workforce                   0.40              0.40            -0.002         0.001
                                            (0.13)            (0.13)           [0.792]       [0.796]
 F Test of Joint Orthogonality                                                  4.375         1.045
 [p-values]                                                                    [0.048]       [0.404]
   Note: Columns 1-2 report means and standard deviations (in parenthesis). Columns 3-4 display the OLS
   coeﬃcients with State ﬁxed eﬀect (Column 3) and Neighborhood ﬁxed eﬀects (Column 4) of the evaluation
   dummy along with the p-values (in brackets) for the null hypothesis of no diﬀerence between evaluation
   and non-evaluation program localities. Population strata are included in both speciﬁcations. Standard
   errors are clustered at the state level in Column 3 and at the neighborhood level in Column 4.



   Turning now to the sample used in the empirical analysis; a direct implication of the pre-
sumed randomness of the evaluation sample is that we should expect no diﬀerences in the
survey characteristics measured in the pre-program year (1997) between evaluation neigh-

                                                  3
borhoods with a diﬀerent number of non-centroid evaluation villages after netting out the
independent eﬀect of the local frequency of neighboring non-evaluation localities. A simple
comparison of means between evaluation neighborhoods with and without non-centroid eval-
uation villages is shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table S1.3. Column 3 reports the eﬀects of
the number of evaluation villages after controlling for the number of non-evaluation villages
in the neighborhood. Overall, the local frequency of evaluation localities in the neighbor-
hoods of the 506 localities that form part to the Progresa evaluation sample does not seem
to be correlated with pre-program observable characteristics at the individual, locality and
neighborhood-level. This conﬁrms that the set of evaluation localities is a random subsample
of beneﬁciary localities incorporated after late 1997.




                                             4
         Table S1.3: Baseline Characteristics within the Evaluation Localities
Neighborhood                        No Evaluation     Some Evaluation        OLS Coeﬃcient of
                                      Localities         Localities                          E)
                                                                            Number of Eval (Nj,5
                                         (1)                (2)                     (3)
School Enrollment                       0.64               0.64                    0.004
                                       (0.48)             (0.48)                  [0.647]
                               Individual and HH Characteristics
Age                                     14.52           14.53                       -0.016
                                       (2.02)          (2.06)                       [0.513]
Female (dummy)                            0.50               0.51                    0.002
                                         (0.50)             (0.50)                  [0.729]
Mother Education (years)                  2.36               2.36                    0.077
                                         (2.33)             (2.35)                  [0.396]
Father Education (years)                  2.20               2.25                    0.085
                                         (2.21)             (2.30)                  [0.139]
                            Centroid Village Characteristics
Share of Program Eligible HHs       0.58              0.60                          -0.008
                                   (0.20)            (0.19)                         [0.409]
Presence of Secondary School              0.26               0.24                   -0.006
                                         (0.44)             (0.43)                  [0.789]
Distance to Nearest City (Km)            106.4               102.9                   4.191
                                        (40.45)             (45.59)                 [0.255]
                     Neighborhood (radius=5km) Characteristics
Number of Secondary Schools       2.88            3.19                               0.037
                                 (2.19)          (1.91)                             [0.800]
Poverty mean-score                        0.41               0.57                    0.042
                                         (0.56)             (0.54)                  [0.151]
Number of Localities (any)               21.03               25.15                  -0.181
                                        (14.00)             (11.21)                 [0.798]
Population density                        5.99               8.41                    0.572
                                         (6.54)             (11.44)                 [0.575]
F Test of Joint Orthogonality                                                        1.099
[p-values]                                                                          [0.357]

  Note: Columns 1-2 report means and standard deviations (in parenthesis). Column 3 displays the
  OLS coeﬃcients of the number of neighboring (within 5km) evaluation localities after controlling for
  the number of neighboring (within 5km) non-evaluation Progresa localities along with the associated
  p-values (in brackets). State ﬁxed eﬀects are included in all speciﬁcations. Standard errors are
  clustered at the level of groupings of partially overlapping neighborhoods.




                                                  5
S2      Consistency of the OLS coeﬃcients When One or
        More Regressor is Endogenous
A general writing of the linear regression model we consider is

                                        y = x1 β1 + x2 β2 + u

where x2 is a matrix of endogenous explanatory variables, i.e. E (x2 u) = 0 and x1 is a matrix
of explanatory variables that are exogenous, i.e. i.e. E (x1 u) = 0. β1 and β2 are (column)
vectors of coeﬃcients and u is a vector of the error terms.
    In our speciﬁc case, x2 is the number of potential beneﬁciary villages NP , while x1 is the
number of actual beneﬁciary villages NB . While NB is correlated with treatment density
and hence potentially associated with unobserved determinants of outcomes captured by the
residual u in an unconditional model, it is not anymore when we control for NP . This is
because the residual variation in N B is then solely determined by the random number of
treatment group villages in the neighborhood. The model we estimate is formally similar to
the general model above, as the same estimates can be obtained using the variables N C and
N P , and N C is exogenous while N P is endogenous; we indeed have:

     y = β1 N B + β2 N P + u = β1 (N P − N C ) + β2 N P + u = −β1 N C + (β1 + β2 )N P + u

   Using the partitioned matrix notation, the vector of OLS coeﬃcients is given by

                                   ˆ1                         −1
                                   β          x1 x 1 x 1 x2        x1
                                   ˆ2   =                             u
                                   β          x2 x1 x 2 x2         x2

Since x2 is random conditional on x1 , it follows that the two set of explanatory variables are
uncorrelated with each others: E (x1 x2 ) = 0. Hence, the variance V (x1 , x2 ) of the full set of
covariates in the right-hand side term converges asymptotically to

                             x1 x1 x1 x2             E (x1 x1 )     0
                                               →
                             x2 x1 x2 x2                 0      E (x2 x2 )

Using the independence of x2 from u, the product of the last two terms converges to

                                         x1             E (x1 u)
                                            u→
                                         x2                0

So the vector of coeﬃcients converges asymptotically to
                              ˆ1
                              β             β1   E (x1 x1 )−1 E (x1 u)
                              ˆ2    →          +
                              β             β2             0

To summarize, the OLS coeﬃcients β    ˆ2 are consistent estimates of the marginal eﬀects of the
exogenous variables, β2 . On the other hand, the OLS coeﬃcients on the endogenous variables
βˆ1 are biased, due for instance to omitted variables, but this bias does not contaminate the


                                                    6
coeﬃcients estimated for the exogenous variables to the extent that those are uncorrelated
with the endogenous variables. In our setting, this is likely the case because the partial
variation in N B (i.e. after netting out the eﬀect of N P ) solely captures the randomized
allocation into treatment of evaluation localities.


Additional References
                                    no Muestra Basal y Control”, Technical Note.
Progresa (1997). “Nota Tecnica: Dise˜




                                            7
