                                                         WPS8162


Policy Research Working Paper                           8162




        Looking into the Performance-Based
               Financing Black Box
  Evidence from an Impact Evaluation in the Health Sector
                      in Cameroon

                                Damien de Walque
                                Paul Jacob Robyn
                                Hamadou Saidou
                                  Gaston Sorgho
                                 Maria Steenland




Development Research Group
Human Development and Public Services Team

Health Nutrition and Population Global Practice Group
August 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8162


  Abstract
  Performance-based financing is a complex health system                             of modern family planning), but not for others, such as
  intervention aimed at improving coverage and quality of                            antenatal care visits and facility-based deliveries. However,
  care. This paper presents the results of an impact evalua-                         for many of those outcomes, the differences between the
  tion in Cameroon that seeks to isolate the role of specific                        performance-based financing group and the additional
  components of the performance-based financing approach                             financing group are not significant. In terms of quality, per-
  on outcomes of interest, such as explicit financial incen-                         formance-based financing was found to have a significant
  tives linked to results, additional resources available at the                     impact on the availability of essential inputs and equipment,
  point of service delivery (not linked to performance), and                         qualified health workers, reduction in formal and informal
  enhanced supervision, coaching, and monitoring. Four                               user fees, and increased satisfaction among patients and
  evaluation groups were established to measure the effects                          providers. However, there was a clear effect of additional
  of each component that was studied. In general, the results                        financing, irrespective of whether it was linked to incen-
  indicate that performance-based financing in Cameroon                              tives, in combination with reinforced supervision through
  is an efficient mechanism to channel payments and fund-                            performance-based financing. This result suggests that
  ing to the provider level, leading to significant increases                        enhanced supervision and monitoring on their own are not
  in utilization in the performance-based financing arm for                          sufficient to improve maternal and child health outcomes.
  several services (child and maternal vaccinations and use



  This paper is a product of the Human Development and Public Services Team, Development Research Group and the
  Health Nutrition and Population Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open
  access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research
  Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at ddewalque@
  worldbank.org, probyn@worldbank.org, saidoutheo@yahoo.fr, gsorgho@worldbank.org, and mws475@mail.harvard.edu.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
Looking into the Performance-Based Financing Black Box: Evidence from an
           Impact Evaluation in the Health Sector in Cameroon*
                 Damien de Walque, Development Research Group, The World Bank
                Paul Jacob Robyn, Health Nutrition and Population, The World Bank
  Hamadou Saidou, Health Nutrition and Population, The World Bank and University of Paris
                                        Dauphine
                  Gaston Sorgho, Health Nutrition and Population, The World Bank
                     Maria Steenland, Department of Global Health and Population
                                   Harvard School of Public Health




Keywords: Performance-based Financing; Health; Africa

JEL classification: I15 J13; O15.
* We are extremely grateful for a fruitful collaboration with the Ministry of Health of Cameroon and in particular
with his Excellency Andre Mama Fouda, Minister, Enandjoum Bwanga, Emannuel Maina Djoulde, Victor Ndiforchu,
and all the Regional Health Delegates, Performance Purchasing Agency Managers and staff and from the North-
West, South-West and East Regions. The baseline and endline data were collected by the Institut de Formation et de
Recherche Démographiques (IFORD) with special thanks to Gervais Beninguisse, Didier Nganawara, Evina Akam
and all staff implementing the baseline and endline surveys. This impact evaluation is funded by the Health Results
Innovation Trust Funds (HRITF) at the World Bank. We are grateful to Emanuela Di Gropello, Guenter Fink, Gyuri
Fritsche, Elisabeth Huybens, Gil Shapira, Jean Claude Taptue Fotso, Robert Soeters and Omer Zhang for useful
comments and discussions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries
they represent.
   1. Introduction

Confronted with slow progress on the health-related Millennium Development Goals (United
Nations Statistical Division, 2015) and the Sustainable Development Goals, various countries
have introduced and experimented with Results-Based Financing (RBF) in the health sector. RBF
is an approach that aims to improve health systems and prioritize health outcomes by using
financial incentives paid after predefined results have been attained and verified. Among the RBF
approaches, Performance-Based Financing (PBF) is a specific supply-side intervention which
comprises a set of health system reforms meant to increase the coverage and quality of essential
health services, as well as efficiency and equity, often with a special focus on maternal and child
health. PBF program models differ but all involve the purchasing of health services using a pre-
defined list of services and prices (Fritsche, Soeters, & Meessen, 2014). Performance-based
financing also includes a strong verification system that relies on systematic and detailed review
of health facility records as well as community-level client tracing whereby reported patients are
asked a series of questions to confirm health care receipt (Fritsche et al., 2014). Many PBF
programs also involve increasing health facility autonomy.

Over time, PBF has been implemented in a growing number of countries. Several studies have
shown a positive impact of PBF on health service coverage, often coupled with improvements in
quality. An early impact evaluation in Rwanda where districts were randomly assigned to
treatment (PBF) and comparison (input financing with matched financial resources) found large
and statistically significant positive impacts on institutional deliveries and preventive care visits
from young children and also on quality of prenatal care (Basinga et al., 2010). After this
promising start, many other quasi-experimental studies have shown similarly positive results
(Gertler & Giovagnoli, 2014; Ir et al., 2015; Zeng, Cros, Wright, & Shepard, 2013) and several
others have shown favorable results for many – though not all – outcomes assessed (Basinga et
al., 2010; Binyaruka et al., 2015; Bonfrer, Soeters, et al., 2014; Bonfrer, Van de Poel, & Van
Doorslaer, 2014; Falisse, Ndayishimiye, Kamenyero, & Bossuyt, 2015). Despite this, other
studies have found only limited positive results and the research community has not reached a
consensus about the effectiveness of PBF at increasing health service coverage (Huillery & Seban,
2014).

While the evidence about the impacts of PBF accumulates, few studies have examined the factors
and mechanisms that influence its impact, an area of substantial theoretical and practical
significance since PBF often involves a package of interventions: linking payment and results,
independent verification of results, managerial autonomy to facilities and enhanced systematic
supervision and coaching of facilities. We designed the impact evaluation of the PBF package in
Cameroon to try to understand better the role of some of these mechanisms. In particular, we tried
to isolate the role of explicit financial incentives as opposed to additional funding not linked to
performance, as well as separating the impact of enhanced supervision and monitoring.
Specifically, the evaluation compared four arms: (1) the standard PBF package (T1), (2) the same
level of financing as T1 but not linked to performance, and with the same levels of supervision,
monitoring, and autonomy as PBF (C1), (3) no additional resources or autonomy, but the same
levels of supervision and monitoring as PBF (C2), and (4) pure comparison (C3).



                                                                                                   2
In general, the results indicate that PBF in Cameroon is an efficient mechanism to bring payments
and funding at the provider level, leading to significant increases in utilization (child and maternal
immunization, family planning, HIV testing) and improvements in structural quality of care.
However, for many of those outcomes, the differences between the PBF group (T1) and the
additional financing group (C1) are not significant. It should be noted that the C1 group offered
all the elements of PBF except the direct link between individual facility performance and
additional financing. There was, however, a clear effect of additional financing, irrespective of
incentives, plus reinforced supervision through PBF instruments (comparing groups T1 and C1
with the C2 group and then C3, the control group), suggesting that enhanced supervision and
monitoring are not sufficient to improve maternal and child health (MCH) outcomes.

We note, however, that we did not identify an impact for some MCH indicators such as skilled
deliveries and ANC visits. It is possible that the supply-side incentives for providers were not
sufficient given existing user fees which might act as a barrier on the demand-side. In addition,
given that these types of services are primarily provided at the health center, outreach and
community-based service delivery was not an option for providers to implement to increase
coverage. In terms of quality of care, most of the positive impacts were observed on structural
quality, presence of qualified staff, and provider and patient satisfaction. However, despite an
increase in providers and supplies available at health facilities, PBF did not increase the
completeness of service provision (content of care) during antenatal care and child health
consultations. But PBF led to a decrease in out-of-pocket payments, in particular unofficial
payments.

Section 2 of this paper presents the context and program design of PBF in Cameroon, sections 3
and 4 respectively describe the methods and results while section 5 discusses study limitations
and the policy implications of the findings.

   2. Context and Design

HEALTH BACKGROUND
Despite being one of the more wealthy countries in the Central Africa region, and the country’s
relatively high health spending of $59 per capita in 2014 (World Health Organization Global
Health Expenditure database, 2016), Cameroon’s health indicators resemble countries that spend
much less on health care (The World Bank, 2016). Cameroon did not achieve Millennium
Development Goals 4 & 5 which called for large reductions in maternal and child mortality.
Moreover, Cameroon is one of the few countries with high maternal mortality where maternal
mortality did not decrease at all between 1990 and 2015 (Alkema et al., 2015). One in every 25
women of reproductive age in Cameroon continues to die from pregnancy-related causes (Institut
National de la Statistique (INS) et ICF International, 2012). Though many factors affect maternal
mortality, one potential explanation for the country’s slow progress in achieving declines in
maternal mortality is that the proportion of women delivering in health facilities has remained
unchanged over much of the last decade. During the last ten years (between 2004 and 2014), the
percentage of deliveries that were assisted by a skilled health professional increased from 61.7
percent to only 64.7 percent (ICF International, 2012; Institut National de la Statistique, 2015).



                                                                                                    3
Like skilled delivery, the percentage of women receiving four or more antenatal care visits,
another health service with the potential to decrease maternal and child mortality, remained
unchanged over the last decade. In 2004, 59.1% of women had received four antenatal visits, the
number recommended by the World Health Organization, compared to 58.8% in 2014 (Institut
National de la Statistique, 2015). Even when women obtain antenatal services, they still may not
receive important service components due to low quality of care. Previous studies have shown
that fewer than half of women are informed about the danger signs to look for during pregnancy,
over 40% did not have the recommended number of tetanus vaccinations during their last
pregnancy (ICF International, 2012), and 25% did not provide a urine sample to test for protein,
a required procedure to test for preeclampsia (The World Bank, 2013).

Child mortality declined in Cameroon by approximately 21% between 1991 and 2014 (ICF
International, 2012; Institut National de la Statistique, 2015; Institut National de la Statistique
(INS) et ICF International, 2012); nonetheless, according to the most recent data approximately 1
in 10 children still dies before their fifth birthday (Alkema et al., 2015; The United Nations
Children's Fund, 2015).

HEALTH FINANCING CHALLENGES IN CAMEROON
Several aspects of the health care financing landscape in Cameroon contribute to the low quality
of primary health care service provision, and sub-optimal coverage of essential maternal and child
health care services. Cameroon spends $10 dollars more than the average for Sub-Saharan Africa
(excluding South Africa) and has similarly high health spending as Senegal and Nigeria (Bove,
Basile., Robyn, & Singh, 2013). However, despite this relatively high level of overall spending,
the share of government spending on health is low and has not reached above 9 percent of the
total budget in the previous 10 years (Bove et al., 2013). Due to these low levels, in 2012 the share
of per capita total health spending paid for by the government was only US $14 (i.e. 21.7 percent).
Much of the remaining 70.4% of health spending is paid for through out-of-pocket users fees
(Ministere de la Sante Publique, 2016). Another important part of the problem is that the
operational level receives a small fraction of the health budget. Although the health sector budget
has more than doubled in recent years, the majority of these resources have been allocated for
administration and infrastructure. The public budget favors central-level administration and
tertiary care, with less than 10% of the budget being allocated to service providers and
deconcentrated levels of the Ministry of Public Health nationwide at the regional, district and
health facility level (The World Bank, 2017). This has resulted in a scarcity of funds to meet
operating expenses incurred in the day-to-day business of a district health system (e.g.,
consumables, drugs, regular maintenance, community outreach, etc.) (Ministere de la Sante
Publique, 2016).

PBF TIMELINE IN CAMEROON

Cameroon’s first experience with PBF began with the Redynamisation des Soins de Sante à l’Est
du Cameroun (REDSSEC) project. In 2006, REDSSEC implemented a pilot PBF program in Faith
Based Organization (FBO) facilities in the East region with support from Cordaid and Catholic
Relief Services. The project began with four FBO facilities in Batouri district, and then expanded
to FBO facilities in Bertoua, Doume and Yokadouma districts through 2011 (Appendix Figure
A1).
                                                                                                   4
In 2008, the World Bank approved a US$25 million loan to the Government of Cameroon through
the Bank’s Health Sector Support Investment Project (HSSIP). In 2011, through support from the
HSSIP, a PBF pilot began in the Littoral region covering four health districts. The program began
in July 2012 in the North West and South West regions, with four districts included in each region.
In October 2012, the program expanded to the East region, covering all 14 health districts in the
region.

Of the 26 health districts throughout Cameroon implementing PBF, 14 districts were included in
the impact evaluation (see Figure 1 and Appendix Figures A2 – A4). The other 12 (four in Littoral
and eight in the East) had already begun implementing some form of PBF before the impact
evaluation baseline survey was conducted, or were added after the baseline survey was conducted.

DESCRIPTION OF THE PBF PROGRAM DESIGN IN CAMEROON
PROGRAM OVERVIEW
The administrative and technical aspects of the PBF program in Cameroon were managed at the
regional level by Performance Purchasing Agencies (PPAs). PPAs are autonomous entities that
have a contractual relationship with the Government of Cameroon who entrusts the agencies with
contracting the health facilities, verification of the data declared by the health facility and
management of funding intended for health care providers through PBF. All PBF health facilities
signed a Performance Contract issued by the PPA which described conditions required to obtain
PBF subsidies. These requirements included efforts to improve management, minimum quality
levels, governance and financial inclusion, and clauses for termination of the contract.
Additionally, PBF facilities prepared quarterly business plans and used frameworks for the health
administration linked to performance payments. All facilities were trained to use the indice tool;
however, use of the indice tool varied among Cameroon PBF facilities.

PBF contracts were signed for a period of three months. Health facilities with performance
contracts were responsible for completing registers and a monthly activity report/declaration form.
This report and registers were used to document reported health service provision and were used
as the primary basis for service verification. A list of the health services subsidized by the
program, and the subsidy amounts is located in Appendix Table A1. A copy of this report was
sent to the PPA each month. After the verification of the quantity of services provided and
declared in the monthly report was completed by reviewing health facility records, the bill of the
health facility was established and paid monthly. The declarations form verified and validated was
used to justify the payment subsidies provided to the health facility.

SERVICE VERIFICATION
Health service verification was completed on a monthly basis by the PPA verification agents. The
verification agents used the facility register and tally sheets to verify that the number of services
reported by the health facility in the payment request form was consistent with the facility
documentation. If the supervisor encountered any errors, these problems were corrected in the
presence of the facility staff, and any fraudulent cases were tracked and documented. As an added
means of quantity verification, a sample of patients for a set of health services targeted by the
program was contacted either by phone or in person by local PPA staff to confirm that they
received the health service reported by the health facility and to assess patient satisfaction. If error
rates for a certain indicator surpassed 10-15% (varying slightly by region), the service was not
                                                                                                      5
paid and 25% of the PBF payment to the health facility was retained. Additionally, the District
Medical Team in collaboration with the Fund Holder Agency assessed the quality of the health
services provided by PBF health facilities. This assessment used a standardized checklist to verify
that a minimum quality level is met, and to calculate a quality score for the health facility ranging
from 0 – 100%. The quality score was used to calculate a quality bonus that is received by the
health facility.1

CALCULATION OF PAYMENTS
The validated quantitative data, and the quality assessment were used to calculate performance
payments for PBF health facilities. The quality bonus provided an increase of up to 30% of the
total payment based on health service quantity. This percentage depended on the health facility
quality score. Quality assessments were conducted quarterly, and focused on facility management,
hygiene and sanitation, as well as specific attributes of service delivery. The services delivery
items included, among many other categories, listing user charges, privacy, the condition of the
waiting area and consultation room, and the correct management of cases. For example, if the
health facility received a 65% quality score, and their total payment amount based on the services
they provided was 597,240 CFA, the quality bonus provided to the health facility would be
calculated as follows: 597,240 x 0.30 x 0.65 = 116,461 CFA, and the total payment to the health
facility would be 597,240 + 116,461 = 713,701 CFA.

Additionally, an equity bonus was included in the calculation of performance payments. The
equity bonus was paid to health facilities that faced serious structural problems making service
provision more challenging. Equity bonuses ranged from 0% to 80% of the basic subsidy. Each
region applied the criteria listed below differently. North West and South West applied the same
scoring; however, few facilities in South West received the equity bonus since almost all facilities
in the region were located in urban areas. The East region had a slightly different scoring approach
but also used the same criteria.

The following issues were considered in the calculation of this bonus:

           Geographical inaccessibility (hard-to-reach) that makes it difficult to retain staff;

           The size of the health area and low population densities that create viability issues
            (high running costs)

           Extreme poverty

The facility management committee had the authority to decide on the allocation of PBF revenue.
These decisions must have been clearly documented in facility business plans.

RESEARCH QUESTIONS OF THE IMPACT EVALUATION




1
 An example of the quality checklist can be found here: Performance Based Financing Implementation Procedures
Manual North-West Region of Cameroon North West Region, Bamenda-Cameroon: Performance Purchasing
Agency; 2012. www.fbrcameroun.org/cside/contents/docs/Procedure_Manual.pdf.

                                                                                                            6
As PBF had never been implemented in Cameroon on any meaningful scale and had never been
systematically evaluated, our larger policy objectives for the impact evaluation are to (a) Identify
the impact of PBF on maternal and child health (MCH) service coverage and quality, and to (b)
Identify key factors responsible for this impact. In doing so, we expect that the results from the
impact evaluation will be useful to designing national PBF policy in Cameroon and will also
contribute to the larger body of knowledge on PBF. Though we are interested in a wide range of
outcomes in this report, we consider the main outcomes in terms of coverage to be ANC including
anti-tetanus vaccination, skilled deliveries, vaccinations and family planning. We used skilled
deliveries for the power calculations to determine the study sample size.

The impact evaluation will focus on the following research questions:

   1. Does the PBF program increase the coverage of MCH services?

   2. Does the PBF program increase the quality of MCH services delivered?

   3. Is it the enhanced monitoring & evaluation and supervision or the link between payments
      and results that leads to improvements observed in quality or coverage?

   4. What is the contribution of enhanced supervision and monitoring to improving MCH
      service coverage and quality in the absence of increased autonomy or additional financial
      resources?

In addition, the impact evaluation will also examine the following research questions that relate
to intermediate outcomes in the hypothesized causal pathway:

   1. Does the PBF program lower informal charges for health services?

   2. Does the PBF program lower formal user charges?

   3. Does the PBF program improve physical and social accessibility of health services?
      Accessibility of health services will be examined in terms of the convenience of facility
      opening hours, availability of services through outreach, client perceptions of convenience
      of accessing health services and client perceptions of health providers’ attitudes towards
      clients.

   4. Does the PBF program lower staff absenteeism?



   3. Methods

TREATMENT GROUPS
Table 1 describes the four study groups formed by randomizing Medicalized Health Centers
(CMAs), or primary health centers with a medical doctor on staff, and Integrated Health Centers
(CSIs) (primary health care centers without a doctor). The randomization for this study was at the
health facility level. From an operational and public health perspective, randomizing at the district
level would have made more sense given the proximity of some facilities. Indeed, the risk with

                                                                                                   7
facility-level randomization is that neighboring facilities from different groups might learn from
each other and apply principles outside their treatment group. However, this was not feasible given
that the Government of Cameroon had already decided and announced which districts would be
included in the PBF pilot. Randomization at the district level was therefore precluded.

Public randomization ceremonies were held in each region between February and June 2012, just
prior to the launching of the PBF program in each region (De Walque, Robyn, & Sorgho, 2013).
All health facility management staff from health facilities in the districts covered by the evaluation
attended the randomization ceremony.

For the purposes of our study, the ‘full’ PBF package of interventions included the following
elements:

   Linking payment and results, including performance bonuses for health workers.
   Independent monitoring of results.
   Systematic supervision of health facilities defined as regular supervision by an external
    supervisor from the district hospital team using a structured checklist and providing immediate
    feedback to facility staff on problems identified and potential solutions to improve service
    delivery. Systematic supervision included monitoring whether the facility is complying with
    national user fee guidelines.
   Limited managerial autonomy to facilities defined as autonomy over use of resources
    combined the ability to hire additional staff using health facility income and managerial
    discretion.

Facilities in group T1 implemented this full PBF package. Facilities assigned to group C1 received
a fixed per capita budgetary supplement that matches the per capita budgetary allocation for T1
facilities. However, this supplement was not linked to performance. C1 facilities received the
same supervision and monitoring and managerial autonomy over the budgetary supplement
received. Both T1 and C1 facility managers had the autonomy to hire staff with their PBF revenues
or budgetary supplement received, and also to fire these staff if necessary. T1 and C1 facility
managers also had the autonomy over how to use these revenues. C2 facilities received no
additional resources but the same supervision and monitoring as T1 and C1 facilities. District-
level supervisors responsible for supervising T1, C1 and C2 facilities used the same tools and
received the same supplementary payments for visits to facilities in these three groups. However,
quality scores were linked to facility payments only in the case of T1 facilities. C3 facilities were
the ‘business as usual’ facilities and did not receive any additional resources or inputs. C2 and C3
facility managers did not have the autonomy to hire/ fire staff or financial autonomy. National
user fee caps, and facility user fee rates, were published on a signboard placed in all study group
health facilities. The IE team also included monitoring of adherence to national guidelines as part
of the monitoring and supervision intervention in T1, C1 and C2 facilities. As the status quo group,
the C3 facilities did not receive this additional monitoring & supervision. A summary table
describing the intervention groups is provided in Appendix Table A2.

The number, type, and percent private of study health facilities in each study district are shown in
Table 2. All public and private health facilities in the 14 study districts that were officially
registered with the Ministry of Public Health were eligible for inclusion in the study. All district
hospitals in 14 health districts were included in the full PBF (i.e., treatment) arm. This is because
                                                                                                    8
district hospitals play a critical role in supervising and acting as source of referral services for all
facilities in the district. District hospitals did supervise and support treatment and comparison
group CMAs and CSIs differently based on the group they are assigned to. Household and facility-
based surveys were implemented in district hospitals and households associated with their
catchment areas2 in the 14 pilot districts to gain insights into the role that district hospitals are
playing in the 4 study groups. However, these data will not be used for making inferences about
the impact of PBF, and are not included in the analyses presented in this report.

DATA SOURCES
The evaluation relied on two main sources of data to answer the impact evaluation research
questions identified:

    1. Household surveys: A household survey implemented at baseline (i.e., before
       implementation of PBF began), and at endline (i.e., after PBF was implemented for two
       years).
    2. Facility-based surveys: A facility-based survey was also implemented at baseline and at
       endline.

Both surveys are described in detail in the Appendix.

STATISTICAL METHODS
FACILITY AND CATCHMENT AREA EXCLUSIONS
Most of the analysis included in this report includes only those health facilities that were surveyed
at both baseline and endline. Similarly, for all of the results coming from the household surveys,
these results include only those villages that were surveyed at baseline and endline. The only
exceptions are the analyses that use data from the direct observation and exit interviews from
ANC and child health consultations. These analyses include all of the women and children who
received these services on the day of the facility survey. The reason that we deviated from the
above stated exclusion criteria is that, especially in the ANC sample, the exclusion results in large
sample size loss. Specifically, the full sample for ANC included data from 733 visits and 118
health facilities while the restricted sample included 561 visits at 46 health facilities.

SPECIFICATIONS
The main difference-in-differences specification that we used in the household data analysis is
displayed below:

     =     +        +      1        +      1       +      2       +        +

Where       is receipt of the health service for woman/pregnancy i in enumeration area j in survey
year t. 	is an enumeration area fixed effect,        is a dummy variable that is equal to 0 in 2012
(baseline) and 1 in 2015 (endline). T1, C1, and C2 are dummy variables that are equal to 1 when
the enumeration area was assigned to each treatment group respectively and zero otherwise. The


2
  Some villages will not fall within the catchment areas of other CSIs and CMAs in the district. Households
in these villages will be excluded from the sample for the impact evaluation.

                                                                                                         9
treatment variable is based on the assigned catchment area where the household is located;
however, this may not have been the health facility where the household sought health care.
    1      ,	    1       ,     	   2       are interaction terms between each of the T1, C1, and
C2 groups and the post indicator. These interaction terms measure the treatment effect in each
group and can be interpreted as the difference in the change in health service use over the study
period between the control group, and each treatment group respectively.              is a vector of
control variables at the individual level (age, marital status, education level, religion, ethnicity,
working status and type of work), and at the household level (number of individuals in the
household, housing type, house ownership, water source, and type of sanitation). Control variables
were included in all analysis of household level data.

For the household survey, a random sample of 16 to 20 households was selected in each health
facility catchment area. The analysis of the household survey in this report starts from the
assumption that household members seek care in the health facility closest to where they live, or
in other words that people living in the catchment area of a facility obtain health care in that
facility. However, it is apparent from the baseline survey data that households do not always seek
care from the closest health facility in their health zone (see Appendix Table A3). We address this
issue in the Appendix section titled Analysis of Household Care Seeking Behavior.

The main specification used in the analysis of facility-level data is presented below:

   =     +          +     1        +     1        +     2        +      +        +

A similar specification was used in most facility level analysis; however, in all analyses involving
direct observation or exit interview data we have used an alternative specification without facility
fixed effects. The alternative specification was chosen after finding that the variable measuring
the duration of ANC visits contained many outliers, and the use of fixed effects produced results
that diverged widely from changes observed descriptively by comparing means. Therefore, this
analysis instead included treatment group dummy variables to control for baseline differences
between groups. For consistency, all analysis of women sampled from antenatal care, and of
caregivers sampled from child health consultations used this alterative specification. Additionally,
sampling for these services was limited in many health facilities because antenatal care is only
provided on certain days of the week, and due to low patient flows in smaller facilities. For this
reason, analysis of patients sampled from health facilities was not restricted to health facilities
represented in both the baseline and endline survey data.

Analysis at the facility level included the following time invariant controls: type of health
facility (public/religious/private) and location of the health facility (urban/rural). Additionally,
when the analysis was at the individual level (i.e. women sampled from ANC visits, care givers
sampled from child health consultations) the following individual level controls were also
included: age, sex, marital status, and education level.

   4. Results

Appendix Tables A8 and A9 display the baseline levels of individual and household level
characteristics from the household survey. Group level means are compared individually using
two-sample statistical testing, and F-tests were conducted to test for overall differences in the four

                                                                                                   10
study groups. All statistical testing adjusted standard errors for clustering. The groups appear
balanced on all of the individual characteristics assessed including age, religion, ethnicity,
educational attainment, literacy, employment and marital status. The study treatment groups were
also generally well balanced on household level characteristics including household composition,
type of household, household ownership, and sanitation type. However, the study groups were not
balanced at baseline on the type of water source used at the household.

Appendix Tables A10 and A11 display facility characteristics and health service coverage at
baseline. The facility sample appears well balanced at baseline on most characteristics assessed;
however, there was a difference between the study groups in the likelihood that the facility had
an incinerator. The sample was well balanced for most services assessed, though we found
statistical differences at baseline for growth monitoring and for documented childhood
vaccination coverage.

COMPARISON OF OPERATIONAL FUNDS AVAILABLE AND SUBSIDY PAYMENTS TO C1 AND T1 AT
ENDLINE

One important feature of the impact evaluation design was that the subsidies provided to control
group 1 (C1) – which were not linked to performance – should be equal to the payment amounts
provided to facilities in the full PBF treatment group. At endline, the health facility survey
collected data on the amount of funding available at the health facilities for operation expenses,
including the amount of revenue collected from cost recovery, funding provided directly by the
Ministry of Health, and subsidies from the PBF program. To verify the equal receipt of financing,
we compared data on total financing available, and subsidy amount received between T1 and C1
health facilities. The first panel of table 3 displays the average amount of health facility revenue
from all of these sources during each trimester of 2014 in T1, the full PBF group, and C1, the
increased financing group. The second panel compares the amount of subsidies received in each
of the two groups. Neither the subsidy amount, nor the total amount of financing available at the
health facility differed statistically between the two groups during any trimester of 2014. We also
sought to assess whether per capita payments were equal between groups, as this was the intention
of the study. However, exact catchment area population numbers are not known. Therefore, we
standardized payments by the number of health workers in each facility as a proxy measure for
catchment area population. Using this proxy measure, we found no differences in payment
amounts between groups (Table 3).

We also confirmed the subsidy data collected in the facility questionnaire by requesting subsidy
data from the regional funds. These data, which represent the payments made by the regional
funds to the health facilities in treatment groups T1 (full PBF) and C1 (additional financing), are
presented in Appendix Figures A5 – A7. These figures also show that the total payments provided
to the health facilities in each treatment group were equal during the entire study period.

While the payment results show that overall the two groups received equivalent financing volumes
for the same number of health facilities (approximately 50 each) during the study period, when
looking at per capita financing we find that the C1 group in fact received higher levels of per
capita financing than the T1 group. This is largely due to the fact that in the South-West region,
while the T1 and C1 groups had the same number of facilities (21 for T1 and 20 for C1), the total
population covered by these health facilities varied substantially. In the T1 group several health
                                                                                                 11
facilities had very large catchment areas, resulting in a target population approximately three times
higher than in the C1 group. As such the per capita payments in the South-West region were three
times higher for the C1 group than the T1 group, which also affects the overall annual per capita
payments (Appendix Figure A8). That being said, the overall payments for each group, when
combining the three regions, shows equal payments across the two groups (Appendix Figure A9).
Populations of catchment areas in Cameroon should also be interpreted with precaution given the
lack of an up-to-date and comprehensive national health map.

FACILITY SURVEY UTILIZATION RESULTS
This section describes the results of PBF on health services provision as recorded in facility
registers. To assess the reliability of these data, we examined the health service counter-
verification data that were collected routinely as part of the PBF program design through
community client satisfaction surveys. Health service verification took place in all PBF health
facilities, as well as in health facilities in control groups C1 (additional financing) and C2
(additional supervision). Thirty-five patients were sampled for 7 health service categories each
quarter. Figure 2 shows the percentage of patients who were reported by health facilities to the
PBF verification terms, who were later confirmed to have received health services at the health
facility. During most quarters of the three-year study period in all three study regions, over 80%
of reported patients were confirmed. The trend in confirmed patients increased slightly over time
in North-West and East, with confirmation rates above 85% in all three regions during the final
year of the study. Though we find reassuringly high quality data among the treatment group health
facilities, it is possible that facilities in the full control group had less incentive to keep records of
all services provided. Given that we did not verify the health service data collected from the full
control group, we cannot investigate this possibility. Therefore, the possibility of incomplete
reporting in the full control remains a limitation of this analysis.

Table 4 displays health service utilization results as assessed in the facility survey. Facility level
provision of health services in the six months before the survey took place was assessed using
patient registers from study health facilities. All data were collected at the monthly level;
therefore, the interaction term coefficients represent differences between groups in the change in
monthly services provided. Provision of skilled delivery did not increase in the control group
during the study period. Relative to the control there were no statistical differences in mean
monthly provision of skilled delivery in the full PBF and the additional supervision group;
however, there was a relative increase of approximately 2 monthly deliveries in the additional
financing group (additional financing 1.855, p-value = 0.071). The overall change between 2012
and 2015 in antenatal care provision in study health facilities was positive, but was not statistically
significant. Relative to the control group there was an increase in antenatal care in all three
treatment groups; however, none of these differences were statistically significant (Table 4).

Comparing the six-months before the baseline, and the six months before the endline survey,
provision of tetanus toxoid vaccine declined by a monthly average of almost 17 vaccinations in
control facilities each month (Table 4, column 3). Compared to the change observed in the control
group, there was a positive and statistically significant difference in the PBF and additional
financing groups (PBF 21.521, p-value = 0.001; additional financing 15.989, p-value = 0.014).
Compared to control facilities, facilities with additional supervision provided on average
approximately nine more tetanus vaccines monthly to pregnant women, but this difference was
                                                                                                       12
not statistically significant. Like tetanus vaccine, there was a statistically significant decline in
postnatal care provision in the control group over the study period. On average, approximately
four fewer monthly postnatal care visits were provided in control health facilities at endline
compared to baseline. Though the interaction term was positive, there was no statistical difference
between the additional supervision group and the control group. However, the change in monthly
provision of postnatal care in facilities in the PBF group and the additional financing group was
greater than the change in the control group (PBF 4.309, p-value = 0.059, additional financing
5.513, p-value = 0.016) (Table 4, column 4).

Table 4 column 5 presents the results of the effect of PBF on modern contraception. Modern
contraception included women provided contraceptive implants, injectables, oral contraceptive
pills, and the intrauterine device. There was little change in the control facilities in monthly
modern contraceptive provision. In the PBF group, there was an increase of just over nine women
each month on top of the small change in the control group who were provided modern family
planning (9.240, p-value < 0.001). The change in modern contraceptive delivery in the additional
financing group is greater than the small change in the control group with approximately six more
women per month provided family planning (5.794, p-value = 0.001) in each health facility. The
change in the additional supervision group was not statistically different from the change in the
control group. This strong effect of PBF and additional financing on family planning in the facility
register data differs from the null finding we found in the household data. The difference in the
findings between data sources could be explained by several factors. One possibility is that the
household survey oversampled recently pregnant women (because having a least one recently
pregnant womanin the household was an inclusion criteria). It is possible that the need for modern
family planning is less important in this population of women among whom many have recently
shown a willingness to have children. In addition, there is some evidence that women might have
been uncomfortable disclosing their use of family planning in the household survey. For example,
we find that 47% of women report that their husbands are against use of FP to avoid pregnancy,
and these women may not have been comfortable discussing family planning in their household.

Table 4, columns 6 – 8 display the results of the impact of PBF on provision of childhood vaccines.
In general vaccine provision in the six months before the baseline declined as compared to
provision in the six months before the endline, as demonstrated by the negative and statistically
significant coefficients on the post indicators for all three vaccine outcomes in the table below.
This decline has been explained by Ministry of Health officials as resulting from country level
stock-outs during the months before the endline. Despite these large declines, the facility results
for vaccine provision may not be inconsistent with the household vaccine coverage results, which
showed large increases over time, and a particularly large change in the PBF group. According to
the recommended vaccine schedule, most childhood vaccines should be received between birth
and 12 months of age. To avoid including infants who, due to their age, should not yet have
finished their vaccine schedule, household level coverage only included children between 12 – 23
months old. Consequently, the children included in the household data would have received
vaccinations prior to the months covered in the facility level data at endline (i.e. before the vaccine
stock-out). Both sets of results show that the PBF group, and to a lesser degree, the additional
financing group, performed much better than the control group. Therefore, the findings from the
household and facility data showing large and statistically significant differences between groups

                                                                                                    13
are consistent, and we believe that the level changes can be explained by a country level shock
affecting vaccine availability that affected the facility, but not the household data.

Facility-level provision of the third dose of polio vaccine decreased by approximately five
vaccines per month in the control group (Table 4, column 6). There was an increase of 4.583 final
polio vaccinations relative to the control group in the PBF group, and this difference was
statistically significant (p=0.035). The coefficient on the interaction term was also positive in the
additional financing group but the difference was not statistically significant, and there was no
difference between the control and the additional supervision groups. There was a large and
statistically significant decline in meningitis vaccination provision over the study period (-45.970,
p-value < 0.001). Of the three treatment groups, only the change in the additional financing group
was statistically different from the control group (21.931, p-value=0.050). Finally, in the control
group measles vaccine provision declined by an average of approximately four children per month
over the study period. There was no difference between the change observed in the control group,
and the changes in the treatment groups (Table 4, column 8).

Facility register data also contained data documenting facility provision of HIV-related services
(Table 4, columns 9 – 11). We found a large and statistically significant effect of both PBF and
additional financing on HIV testing. An average of 61 more patients were tested for HIV in PBF
facilities than control facilities, and 51 more patients were tested monthly in the additional
financing arm compared to the control. There was very little change in HIV testing in the
additional supervision group, and the effect of PBF was greater than the effect of additional
supervision. Though there was a small increase in PMTCT in all of the treatment groups relative
to the full control, none of these differences were statistically significant, and there was no
difference between the effect of PBF and the other treatment groups. Similarly, there was no
difference in the change in ART provision between the treatment groups and the full control.

HOUSEHOLD SURVEY UTILIZATION RESULTS
Table 5 displays the difference-in-differences regression results for the study outcomes related to
health care received during pregnancy as assessed in the household survey interviewing women
with recent pregnancies or birth experiences. In this table, the post indicator can be interpreted as
the change in the outcome over the study period in the control group. Each of the interaction terms
can be interpreted as the difference between the change observed in each treatment group
respectively compared to the change in the control group. Table 5 shows that overall few treatment
effects were observed for study outcomes related to care during pregnancy in the household survey
data. Among women who had been pregnant in the 24 months before the survey, there was an
overall increase of approximately five percentage points in delivery with a skilled birth attendant.
There was no difference between the control group and the PBF group, or the group that received
additional financing in the change in skilled delivery over the study period. However, skilled
delivery declined (-0.050*, p-value = 0.087) in the group receiving only improved supervision
relative to the control group.

The change between 2012 and 2015 in the percentage of women who received at least two
antenatal care visits was not statistically significant in the control group. Similar to delivery care,
there was no difference between the change in the control group and the PBF and additional
financing groups but the change among women in the improved supervision group was less than
                                                                                                    14
the change observed in the full control group (-0.044**, p-value = 0.022) (Table 5, column 2).
There was very little change over the study period in receipt of tetanus vaccine during pregnancy,
and there was no difference in the change in vaccine receipt between the three treatment groups,
and the control group (Table 5, column 3). Postnatal care receipt increased by over ten percentage
points over the study period in control group (0.105, p-value = 0.001). Compared to the control
group, there was a smaller increase over time in postnatal care in the three treatment groups;
however, this difference was not statistically significant in the PBF group and the additional
financing group. Postnatal care receipt increased by seven percentage points less in the improved
supervision group (C2) than in the control group, and this difference was statistically significant
(-0.070, p-value = 0.075) (Table 5, column 4). Results from testing the equality of coefficients
show that for skilled delivery the additional financing intervention outperformed the PBF group.
For antenatal care, facilities with the PBF intervention performed better than those facilities with
only additional supervision.

To further investigate the influence of health care bypassing behavior, we conducted additional
analyses for key indicators dividing the sample into high and low bypass strata. We specifically
tested whether the effect of the treatment groups differed in catchment areas where a larger
proportion of women sought care outside of their treatment group health facility at baseline. To
do this, we generated a binary variable = 1 if the women went to her assigned health facility at
baseline and = 0 if she did not, and collapsed the data at the health facility level taking the mean
of the bypass indicator variable. We then merged this variable onto the original file so that for
each woman in the data set we know the proportion of women in her catchment area who went to
their assigned facility at baseline. Then we divided the sample into high bypassing (above the
median) and low bypassing (below the median), conducted the analysis in the separate groups,
and compared the coefficients on the three interaction terms between groups. We included
antenatal care, skilled delivery and postnatal care in this analysis.

The hypothesis behind these additional analyses is that if there are spillovers, we should see larger
treatment effects in areas with low bypass rates. The only difference in the results between high
and low bypassing areas was that the effect of additional financing was negative (-0.108) in the
high bypassing group and positive in the low bypassing group (0.045), and this difference was
statistically significant (p=0.058) (results shown in Appendix Table A7). Otherwise the impacts
of the different interventions tested did not vary according to whether health care bypassing
behavior was high or moderate at baseline. This analysis further suggests that the bypassing
behavior observed in Cameroon, while substantial, did not significantly bias our impact measures.

Non-pregnant fertile women of reproductive age (15 – 49 years) with a current sexual partner
were asked whether they were using any form on contraception in the household survey. Modern
contraception included the intrauterine device, injectables, implants, oral pills, diaphragm,
foam/jelly & lactational amenorrhea. The percentage of women of reproductive age who used any
form of modern contraception, excluding condoms, did not increase between 2012 and 2015 in
the control group (Table 5, column 5). The changes observed in the treatment groups did not differ
statistically from the change in the control group, and there was no difference between the
treatment groups.



                                                                                                  15
Mothers or primary care givers of all children under five years of age were asked about their
child’s vaccination history. For all children with a vaccine card, study enumerators recorded all
documented vaccinations and their respective receipt dates. Mothers/primary caretakers were also
asked to report any vaccinations that were not recorded in the vaccine card. For these questions,
enumerators asked a separate question for each vaccine type that referenced the vaccine name and
also gave an indication of its method of administration (i.e. for polio “that is drops in the mouth”)
as a guide for respondents. Only children between 12 – 23 months of age were included in these
analyses. Both outcomes include the following vaccines: oral polio vaccine, yellow fever,
diphtheria and whooping cough (DTC), measles, and Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG). Table 6
column 1 shows that among children with a vaccine card, there was an almost 13 percentage point
increase in full vaccination over the study period (0.127, p-value = 0.080). In the PBF group, there
was a further 17 percentage point increase in full vaccination (0.170, p-value = 0.076). There was
no difference between the control group, and the additional funding and additional supervision
groups in full vaccination as documented in vaccination records. The second vaccination outcome
included both documented vaccine receipt as well as any self-reported vaccines. This outcome
displayed a similarly large increase in the control group (0.108, p-value = 0.039). Additionally,
there was a further 16.4 percentage point increase in full vaccination over the study period in the
PBF group (p-value = 0.019). Finally, neither the additional funding, nor the additional
supervision group showed an increase in full vaccination beyond the increase in the control group.
The p-values directly comparing the PBF group with the other groups (C1 and C2) further indicate
that the PBF group outperformed the three other study groups (Table 6, column 2).

The next two outcomes assessed from the household survey were growth monitoring in the month
before the survey, and having slept under a bednet the night before the survey. Both outcomes
were assessed among children under five years of age; however, children who were less than 12
months old were not included in the growth monitoring analysis. There was no change in growth
monitoring during the study period in the control group. Similarly, growth monitoring did not
increase in the PBF and the additional supervision groups. However, growth monitoring increased
by approximately 3 percentage points more in the group that received additional funding (0.031*,
p-value = 0.071) than the control group (Table 6, column 3). The proportion of children who slept
under a bednet the night before the survey declined by approximately 18 percentage points during
the study period (-0.186, p-value = 0.000) (Table 6, column 4). A similar decline was observed in
all the treatment groups as shown by the small and non-statistically significant coefficients on the
interaction terms. It should be noted that neither growth monitoring nor bednet distribution were
included in the package of services incentivized in the PBF program.

ANTHROPOMETRICS
The height and weight of all children under 5 years of age were recorded during both baseline and
endline surveys. Though nutrition indicators were not incentivized in the Cameroon PBF program
until 2015, we used the height and weight data collected in the household survey to assess the
effect of PBF on child nutrition outcomes. Using the WHO child growth standard’s Stata package,
we calculated a z-score for child height-for-age, weight-for-age, and weight-for-height. These z-
scores represent the location where each child falls according to international standards defining
healthy child development. Using these scores, we calculated the prevalence of stunting (height-
for-age of less than -2 standard deviations from the mean), underweight (weight-for-age of less

                                                                                                  16
than -2 standard deviations from the mean) and wasting (weight-for-age of less than -3 standard
deviations from the mean). As shown in table 6, columns 5 – 7, there was no difference between
the changes in prevalence of stunting, underweight, and wasting in the treatment groups and the
control groups. While there was no change over time in stunting and underweight, the prevalence
of wasting increased at endline compared to baseline.

HEALTH CARE SPENDING
All household members were asked if they had been sick in the four weeks before the survey.
Mothers or caregivers responded on behalf of household children. All respondents who had been
sick were asked if they had gone to any health facility, health personnel or traditional healer to
seek care for this illness. Respondents were then asked how much the household spent out-of-
pocket for the treatment of this recent illness. Table 7 presents the results for several different
types of reported spending. Neither the change in the control group on spending for official
provider fees, nor the differences between the treatment groups and the control group were
statistically significant (Table 7, column 1). There was an increase of approximately 2,052 CFA
($3.31) in the amount of unofficial provider fees paid in the control group between 2012 and 2015.
The difference between the PBF group and the control group in the change over the study period
was -2,254 CFA ($3.64), and this difference was statistically significant. Relative to the control
group, unofficial payments also declined in the additional financing group and the additional
supervision group; however, these differences were not statistically significant (Table 7, column
2). There was a non-significant increase of approximately 1,048.64 CFA ($1.69) in laboratory and
x-ray fees over time in the control group. Compared to the control group, laboratory and x-rays
fees declined by 1,473.44 CFA ($2.38), and this difference was statistically significant (p-value =
0.060) (Table 7, column 3). Finally, transportation fees did not change between 2012 and 2015 in
the control group. There was a statistically significant difference between the control group, and
the additional financing group with a decrease of 495.14 or $0.80 (Table 7, column 4).

Health spending was also assessed in the exit interview surveys conducted among women who
had received prenatal care, and the caregivers of children under five years of age who visited the
health facility for a child health consultation. Table 8 displays these results, even though reports
by patients about health spending might be more reliable when given in the privacy of the
household (household survey) than during exit interviews which take place in or close to the health
facility compound, especially for reports about unofficial payments to providers. There were no
changes over time, and no statistically significant differences between groups in unofficial
provider fees, medicine fees, and total fees for antenatal care. The change in official provider fees
for antenatal care was -1,025.34 CFA ($1.68) lower in the PBF group compared to the control
group, and this difference was statistically significant (p-value = 0.083). Relative to the control
group, the change in the additional financing group in official provider fees was 1,824.81 CFA
($2.98) higher (p-value = 0.038). Spending on official provider fees was significantly lower in the
PBF groups than in the two treatment groups. Additionally, there was a statistically significant
increase in the additional financing group and the additional supervision group in total fees for
antenatal care. There were no changes over time, or differences between groups in any of the
spending outcomes (official provider fee, unofficial provider fee, medicine fees, and total fees)
for child health consultations.


                                                                                                  17
PATIENT SATISFACTION
SATISFACTION WITH ANTENATAL CARE
Table 9 provides an overview of participants in the ANC exit interviews at baseline. The average
age of respondents was just over 25 years, 79 percent of respondents were married at the time of
the interview, and 65 percent were literate. The intervention arms were well balanced across all
of these dimensions. There is, however, evidence of differences in education. In particular, women
attending facilities in the additional financing arm were significantly more likely to have attended
higher education than were women attending other facilities (p=0.07).

Women were asked a series of 12 questions related to their satisfaction with individual elements
of their visits including, for example, their satisfaction with costs, wait times, and health worker
communication. For each, a statement was read, and women were asked if they agreed, were
neutral, or they disagreed. Binary variables were created by coding responses as “1” if a woman
agreed, and “0” otherwise. Overall satisfaction scores were calculated by averaging over these 12
components. An overall score of “1” indicates that a woman agreed with all 12 questions, while
a score of “0” indicates that she either disagreed or was neutral on all 12 questions.

The impact of the interventions on overall satisfaction is shown in Table 10. There is no indication
that satisfaction changed over time in the control group (β = 0.006, p = 0.847). Relative to the
pure control, the PBF group was associated with an 8.6 percentage point increase in satisfaction
(p = 0.077). The results suggest a stronger effect in the full PBF than in the additional supervision
group (10.5-percentage point increase) (Table 10, column 1).

Table 10 also shows the breakdown of the 12 individual components of satisfaction. Regression
results indicate the percentage point increase or decrease in probability that a respondent in a
given intervention group will agree with a statement, relative to the pure control, after adjusting
for individual-level indicators (age, literacy, marital status, and education level) and facility-level
indicators (type of health facility public/private/religious, urban/rural).

For the first three dependent variables reporting whether women found the fees reasonable, while
few of the results meet the 10 percent cutoff for statistical significance, women in the PBF group
are consistently more likely to say that fees are reasonable than either the full control or partial
treatment groups. The only statistically significant difference among these fee-related variables
was that women in the PBF group were more likely to agree that medicine fees were reasonable
than women in the additional financing and improved supervision groups (Table 10, column 4).
There were no differences between groups in the likelihood that women agreed with the statement
that health workers did not ask for additional presents or payments (Table 10, column 5).

Focusing on reported facility cleanliness, women in the PBF and the additional financing group
both reported significantly higher levels of agreement than in the pure control group, although
these scores were not significantly different from one another (Table 10, column 6). Although not
meeting the 10 percent cut-off, this pattern was also seen in response to wait times, where the PBF
group was associated with 16.1-percentage point increase over the pure control, compared to a
decrease of 5.5-percentage points in the supervision only group. The pattern is slightly different
in response to the question on privacy – while the additional supervision group continued to
underperform relative to the pure control, the point estimate of the difference between the PBF

                                                                                                    18
and pure control is almost 0, while the additional financing group reported the highest rate of
satisfaction. However, none of these estimates achieve statistical significance (Table 10, columns
7 & 8). The results for the adequacy of hours are consistent with the pattern observed earlier.
Compared to the control group, PBF results in a large and statistically significant 15.4-percentage
point increase satisfaction with the facility’s hours, while the additional supervision is associated
with a non-significant reduction in satisfaction relative to the pure control. As indicated by the p-
value on PBF versus the improved supervision, PBF performed consistently and significantly
better than the improved supervision group on facility cleanliness, and adequacy of hours (Table
10, column 6 & 9).

Women attending facilities receiving the full PBF intervention reported significantly higher levels
of satisfaction with health worker communication than did women attending control clinics
(β=0.106, p<0.05), but there was no evidence of an impact of PBF on the courteousness of health
staff, time with health workers, or the ease of getting prescribed medicines (Table 10, columns 10
– 13). Women attending facilities receiving additional financing reported significantly higher
levels of satisfaction with the amount of time they spent with health workers than women in
control clinics (β=0.139, p<0.1). This increase in the additional financing group was greater than
the change in the PBF group (which was negative relative to the control group).

SATISFACTION WITH CHILD HEALTH CONSULTATIONS (< 5 YEARS OLD)
Table 11 provides an overview of participants in the child health consultation exit interviews at
baseline. The mean age of children attending facilities in the PBF arm was 23.7 months, which is
older, on average, than those attending facilities in other arms (p<0.05). The youngest group was
those attending facilities in the additional financing arm (mean age: 14.2 months). The
intervention arms are well balanced on gender, with females accounting for approximately 51
percent of children attending the facilities.

Looking at the caretaker characteristics, those in the control group were less likely to be single
(16 percent, compared to a sample mean of 20 percent), while those in the PBF group were least
likely to be married (60 percent, compared to a sample mean of 73 percent). Few (3 percent,
overall) were divorced or widowed, and the treatment arms were well balanced on literacy and
education. Approximately 74 percent of the caretakers were literate (low: 69 percent in the
improved supervision arm; high: 77 percent in the additional financing and pure control arms).
The majority of women had some education, with most stopping during primary school (39
percent) or secondary level 1 (30 percent).

Caretakers were asked a series of twelve questions related to their satisfaction with individual
elements of visits. These questions were the same as those asked following antenatal visits and
included, for example, their satisfaction with costs, wait times, and health worker communication.
For each, a statement was read and women were asked if they agreed, were neutral, or they
disagreed. Binary variables were created by coding responses as “1” if the caretaker agreed, and
“0” otherwise. Overall satisfaction scores were calculated by averaging over these 12 components.
An overall score of “1” indicates that a woman agreed with all twelve questions, while a score of
“0” indicates that she either disagreed or was neutral on all 12 questions.

We find evidence that PBF had a positive impact on overall satisfaction with child health services
(Table 12, column 1). Relative to the pure control, the PBF was associated with a statistically
                                                                                                  19
significant 9.9-percentage point increase in satisfaction (p<0.05). As was the case with the ANC
exit interviews, we find a stronger effect in the full PBF than in the additional financing group
(5.4 percentage point increase relative to full control) or supervision group (2.2-percentage point
increase), and neither of the partial treatments achieves statistical significance at the 10 percent
cutoff. While PBF and the additional financing group are not statistically significantly different
from one another, the 7.7-percentage point difference in reported satisfaction between the PBF
and the enhanced supervision (C2) group is statistically significant (p<0.10).

The remaining columns in 12 show the breakdown of the twelve individual components of
satisfaction. Point estimates indicate the percentage point increase or decrease in probability that
a respondent in a given intervention group will agree with a given statement, relative to the pure
control, after adjusting for individual-level indicators (age, literacy, marital status, and education
level) and facility-level indicators (availability of electricity, availability of piped water,
availability of latrine, facility open 24 hours, type of health facility, urban/rural status, and number
of health workers employed at the facility).

Focusing on the costs associated with care, all three groups are associated with statistically
significantly higher satisfaction with laboratory fees relative to the pure control (Table 12, column
3). However, they are not significantly different from one another. The additional financing
control had the highest (non-significant 11.1-percentage point) estimated impact on satisfaction
with medicine costs; however, none of the differences between the control and treatment groups
were statistically significant for this outcome (Table 12, column 4). There was no difference
between any of the intervention arms, and the control group in satisfaction with registration fees,
and informal payments (Table 12, columns 2 & 5).

PBF is associated with a large and statistically significant impact on satisfaction with the health
facility cleanliness (β=0.227, p=0.090). Neither the additional financing nor the additional
supervision intervention groups (C1 and C2) performed better on cleanliness at endline than they
did at baseline (Table 12, column 6). Focusing on waiting times, all of the intervention arms
appear to result in improvements over the control group, although none of the differences were
statistically significant (Table 12, column 7). All of the arms also resulted in increased satisfaction
with the privacy at health facilities, and the very large point estimate on the PBF (33.6 percentage
points) is significant at p<0.01 (Table 12, column 8). Satisfaction with the opening hours did not
change over time in any of the treatment groups, but the change in the PBF group was greater than
the change in the additional supervision group (Table 12, column 9).

Moving to health worker characteristics, PBF does not appear to have had any impact on health
staff courteousness (β = -0.012), and the point estimates on the two partial treatments indicate a
negative impact on health worker courteousness, relative to the pure control (Table 12, column
10). All three intervention groups have negative, but not statistically significant, point estimates
on satisfaction with the time spent with health workers, compared to the pure control (Table 12,
column 12). By contrast, all three were associated with positive but non-statistically significant
impacts on the ease of getting prescribed medications (Table 12, column 13). Overall, standard
errors are large relative to point estimates and, across these variables, no statistically significant
differences could be seen between groups, either between the pure control and the three
intervention groups or between the different intervention arms themselves.

                                                                                                     20
HEALTH WORKER SATISFACTION AND MOTIVATION
In all, 434 health workers were interviewed at baseline. Key characteristics are described in Table
13. The mean age of health workers was approximately 39 years and, on average, workers had
been employed at the facility for between 4.4 (improved supervision) and 6.2 years (control;
statistically different with p=0.05). Approximately two-thirds of health workers were female, and
75 percent had received either basic or level 2 secondary education. Just under half of workers
were employed by the Ministry of health, with the remaining employed by religiously affiliated
health facilities (19 percent), the facility (16 percent), or other employers (20 percent).

Health workers were read a series of statements relating to their wellbeing over the two weeks
prior to the survey. These statements were taken from the World Health Organization’s (WHO)
Well-being Index (Appendix Section WHO Being Index) and included, for example, “In the last
two weeks, I have felt active and vigorous.” For each question, health workers were asked to
indicate whether the statement described their state most of the time, more than half the time, less
than half the time, only rarely, or never. For the purposes of analysis, these data were recoded into
binary indicators. Responses were coded as “0” if the health worker replied half the time or less,
and “1” otherwise. Thus, point estimates on the postXintervention arms indicate the percentage
point increase or decrease in probability that a respondent in a given intervention group reported
that a given statement was true at least half the time, relative to the pure control, after adjusting
for individual-level indicators (age, sex, marital status, and education level) and facility-level
indicators (type of health facility, urban/rural status).

Overall, the data do not provide strong evidence that PBF affected attributes included in the
WHO’s wellbeing index (Table 14). Point estimates are generally small relative to standard errors,
and there are no statistical differences between the pure control and the other intervention groups.
However, the change in index score for three items – Active and energetic in the last 2 weeks,
Refreshed and rested in the morning in the last 2 weeks, and Days filled with interesting things in
the last 2 weeks was lower in the PBF group than the additional financing group.

Health workers were also asked a series of 26 questions related to their satisfaction with working
conditions. These questions covered a range of topics, including relationships with individuals
within and outside of the health facility, facility infrastructure and readiness to deliver services,
salary and benefits, and their overall capacity to provide high-quality health services. For each
question, a score of “1” indicates satisfaction, while a “0” indicates that a health worker reported
either indifference or dissatisfaction. Point estimates, thus, indicate the percentage point increase
or decrease in probability that a respondent in a given intervention group is satisfied with a
particular issue, relative to the pure control, after adjusting for individual-level indicators (age,
sex, marital status, and education level) and facility-level indicators (availability of electricity,
availability of piped water, availability of latrine, facility open 24 hours, type of health facility,
urban/rural status, and number of health workers employed at the facility).

There is little evidence of impact on working relationships (Table 15). The additional financing
arm had the largest estimated impact on the relationship between the facility and District or
Ministry of Health staff, but at 12.7 percentage points, this did not meet the 10-percent cutoff for
significance. The PBF point estimate for an impact on the relationship with District or Ministry
of Health staff is also positive and fairly large (β=0.103), but not statistically significant. The

                                                                                                   21
impact on intra-facility working relationships was estimated to be negative, though not
statistically significant, in all treatment groups. Satisfaction with working relationships between
management and staff within the facilities declined in both the PBF and the supervision arms.
Additionally, working relationships with management staff improved in C1 compared to the PBF
group. There was no difference between the change in the control group and the change in the
intervention groups in satisfaction with collaboration with the regional health delegation, or in the
quality of the management of the health facility.

Similarly, there is no strong evidence of an impact either on the relationships between the facility
and local leaders or on health workers’ perceptions of their own status within the community
(Table 15, columns 6 & 7). In both cases, we report a negative but not statistically significant
effect of both the PBF and the improved supervision interventions. The point estimates within the
financing arms are positive and, in the case of relationships with local leaders, relatively large at
9.3 percentage points, but they are not statistically significant. There was also no evidence of a
difference in impact between the intervention arms.

By contrast, we see a large and consistent impact on health workers’ satisfaction with the quantity
and quality of equipment and other supplies at health facilities, shown in Table 16. Both the PBF
and the additional financing arms result in similarly large and highly significant improvements in
these measures: an approximately 19 percentage point increase in reported satisfaction with the
quantity of equipment (p<0.05), approximately 26 percentage point increase in reported
satisfaction with the quality of equipment (p<0.05), and a 33 to 40 percentage point increase in
satisfaction with the availability of other supplies at the health facilities within these two arms
(p<0.01). By contrast, there was less evidence of an impact in the improved supervision arm.
While point estimates are positive, they are not statistically significant at the 10 percent cut-off
level. There is also less evidence for an effect on the quality and quantity of medicines. Although
the two arms that include additional revenue – the PBF and the financing only arms – both result
in positive point estimates, they do not achieve statistical significance.

Table 16 also provides an overview of reported satisfaction with the physical condition of health
facilities. Health workers in the PBF arm were 31 percentage points more likely to be satisfied
with the physical condition of the health facility building, relative to the pure control (p<0.01).
While both the financing and the improved supervision arms had positive point values (10.6
percentage points and 9.6 percentage points, respectively), neither was statistically significant at
the 10 percent cut-off, and workers in the full PBF arm were more likely to express satisfaction
than were workers in either the additional financing (p<0.05) or the improved supervision
(p<0.10) arms.

Despite increased satisfaction with both the physical infrastructure and the quantity and quality
of equipment, PBF did not have a statistically significant impact on health workers’ perceptions
of their ability to provide high-quality care. The effects associated with the two partial treatment
arms also failed to achieve statistical significance (Table 16, column 7).

The interventions including financial support also appear to have positively impacted satisfaction
with salary and benefits (Table 17). Health workers in the PBF arm were 9.1 percentage points
more likely to express satisfaction with their salary and 18.3 percentage points more likely to
express satisfaction with their benefits (although only the latter was statistically significant
                                                                                                  22
(p<0.05)). Effects were even stronger in the additional financing group. Health workers at
facilities receiving additional financing were 13.4 percentage points more likely to be satisfied
with their salary (p< 0.10) and 28.7 percentage points more likely to be satisfied with benefits
(p<0.01). These effects are not seen in the improved supervision arm. While the point estimates
associated with supervision are positive, they are relatively small and are not statistically
significant. Satisfaction with living accommodations improved somewhat in all three groups, with
point estimates suggesting that health workers were 10 to 16 percentage points more likely to
express satisfaction after the pilot. However, these impacts are not statistically significant in any
of the three groups.

The point estimates of PBF’s impact on opportunities to discuss issues with supervisors,
supervisors’ recognition of good work, opportunities to be rewarded for hard work, and
opportunities for promotion were all negative (β=-0.08, -0.04, -0.02 and -0.11, respectively),
although none were statistically significant (Table 17, columns 4 – 7). The estimated impact of
the improved supervision arm was also generally negative and, with a point estimate of -25.1
percentage points, the impact of the improved supervision on opportunities for promotion was
statistically significant (p<0.05). The estimated impact of the financing arm was positive, but was
only statistically significant for the opportunity to be rewarded for hard work. The improvement
in the financing arm was greater than the change in the in the PBF group for this outcome, and for
opportunities for promotion.

As shown in Table 17, the PBF intervention had a small but negative estimated impact on reported
opportunities to upgrade skills through training and a small but positive estimated impact on
reported opportunities to use skills on the job (neither measure met statistical significance). Point
estimates for both measures were positive in the additional financing arm, and the financing
appears to have positively impacted satisfaction with opportunities to use skills on the job (β
=0.194, p< 0.10). The point estimates associated with the improved supervision arm to either use
or upgrade skills did not meet the 10 percent cut-off for statistical significance.

Satisfaction with safety and security in the community and with available schooling for children
were unchanged by the interventions. The point estimate in the PBF group was large at 13.9
percentage points, but did not reach statistical significance. The point estimates for the other two
treatment groups were small and non-significant (Table 17, columns 10 & 11).

Health workers were also asked about their satisfaction with their jobs, overall. While all three
interventions had positive point estimates, none met the 10 percent cut-off for statistical
significance. Relative to the pure control, the largest impact was seen in the PBF arm, with health
workers 10.5 percent more likely to express satisfaction, followed by the supervision only group
(5.3 percent more likely to express satisfaction), followed by the financing only group (4.8 percent
more likely) (Table 17, column 12).

HEALTH WORKER AVAILABILITY IN THE HEALTH FACILITY
The facility survey asked the head of the health facility, or the most informed staff member, to list
the names of the all of the health workers employed at the health facility. This information was
recorded onto the staff roster. The staff roster also collected information on the post occupied by
each health worker and on whether they were present on the day of data collection. Table 18,

                                                                                                  23
column 1 presents results from analysis of the number of nurses present at the health facility on
the day of data collection. There was a small and non-significant increase in the number of nurses
present over the study period. The increase in the number of nurses in the PBF group was greater
than in the full control group (p-value = 0.01). Adding the coefficient on the interaction term of
PBF and post to the coefficient on the post indicator (0.191+1.222=1.413) indicates that there was
an average increase of almost 1.5 nurses present in PBF facilities over the study period. The
coefficients on the two other treatment groups – additional financing and additional supervision
– were not statistically significant; however, there was a larger increase in the full PBF group
compared to the change in the additional supervision group.

DRUGS AND EQUIPMENT IN THE HEALTH FACILITY
A composite indicator was created to assess any impact on the availability of basic clinical
equipment. The indicator included information on the presence of a clock, a child weighing scale,
height measure, tape measure, adult weighing scale, blood pressure instrument, thermometer,
stethoscope, fetoscope, otoscope, flashlight, stretcher, and wheelchair. Scores indicate the
proportion of these thirteen pieces of equipment that was available at a given facility and range
from 0 to 1. Point estimates indicate the estimated impact on this score.

Both the PBF and the additional financing intervention arms resulted in large and statistically
significant improvements in the availability of equipment. Facilities in the PBF arm had a 10.0
percentage point increase over that seen in the control (p<0.05), while those in the additional
financing arm had an increase of 12.5 percentage points over the control (p < 0.01). This increase
was not seen in the improved supervision arm; while the point estimate was positive, it was small
and not statistically significant. There was no measurable difference in the impacts of the PBF
and financing only arms, but there was statistically significant difference between the PBF
intervention and improved supervision (p<0.05) (Table 18, column 2).

Table 18, column 3 shows the interventions’ impact on the availability of vaccination equipment,
which includes a thermometer for the vaccine fridge, a cold box or vaccine carrier, a deep freezer,
a refrigerator and ice packs. There is no evidence of a differential impact in any of the three arms.
The point estimates are all very small, with large standard errors.

Table 18, column 4 shows the impact on delivery equipment, which includes the following:
delivery bed, partograph, delivery light, aspirator, newborn resuscitation bag, newborn eye drops
or ointment, scissors, umbilical cord clamp or sterile tape/tie, suturing material, examination
gloves, sterile cotton gauze, hand soap or detergent, hand scrubbing brush, sterile tray, plastic
container with plastic liner for the placenta, plastic container with a plastic liner for medical waste,
adult stethoscope, Pinard or fetal stethoscope, blood pressure instrument, kidney basin, protective
apron and plastic draw sheet, baby scale, needle holder, syringes and disposable needles, 16- or
18-guage needles, speculum, clamps, hand or foot operated suction pump, vacuum extractor, and
a uterine curette. Both the PBF and the additional financing interventions had large and positive
impacts on the availability of delivery equipment. Scores in the PBF arm improved by 21
percentage points more than did those in the control and those in the additional financing arm
increased by 18.9 percentage points relative to the control. While there was a positive point
estimate on the impact of the improved supervision intervention group, the difference (estimated
at 8.2 percentage points) does not meet the cut-off for statistical significance. The impacts of the
                                                                                                     24
PBF and financing arms are not statistically significantly different from one another. However,
the impact of PBF is significantly larger than that seen in the improved supervision arm (p<0.10).

Table 18, column 5 shows the impacts on an index of general medicines, including paracetamol,
amoxicillin tabs or syrup, ORS, iron tabs, and cotrimoxazole. While all the point estimates for the
intervention arms are positive, they are small relative to their standard errors and no there is no
evidence of an impact, relative to either the pure control or one of the other intervention groups.

The same is true for family planning methods, shown in Table 18, column 6. The index is
comprised of condoms, oral contraceptive tablets, Depot Medroxyprogesterone Acetate (DMPA),
and implants. The estimated impact for PBF, in particular, is large at 16.8 percentage points and
statistically significant (p < 0.10). The point estimates indicating the effect of the other two
different treatment arms are also positive, though they are not large enough to pass the test of
statistical significance. Also, the effect in the PBF group was not statistically different from the
effects observed in the other treatment groups.

Table 18, column 7 assesses the impact of the interventions on the availability of malaria
medicines, including Coartem, ACT lumefantrine artesunate tablet, ACT lumefantrine artesunate
syrup, and sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine. There is no evidence of any effect on malaria treatment,
as indicated by the very small point estimates and large standard errors. Table 18, column 8
provides an overview of the estimated impact on the availability of vaccines, including Bacille
Calmette-Guerin (BCG), Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV), tetanus toxoid, Diptheria Tetanus and
Pertussis (DTP), Hepatitis B (HBV), measles, Hemophilus influenza B (Hib), DPT, Hepatitis and
Hemophilus influenza (Pentavalent). While the point estimates for both the PBF and the financing
arms were positive, indicating an approximately 13 and 11-percentage point increase respectively
over the control, neither of these met the 10 percent cut-off for statistical significance. While still
positive, the point value for the improved supervision arm was smaller, at 5.3 percentage points,
and also failed to meet the cut-off for statistical significance.

THE QUALITY OF CONSULTATIONS FOR CHILDREN UNDER 5 YEARS OF AGE
Enumerators observed a total of 575 child health consultations. For each, enumerators compared
the exchange against a standardized checklist and noted whether the health worker performed the
following nine routine activities: greeted the patient, washed hands, asked age, duration of the
complaint, if the child is able to drink or breastfeed, if the child vomits everything, if the child is
lethargic, if the child took any medicine and if the child had diarrhea. An overall quality score
was calculated for each visit by calculating the proportion of these activities that was conducted.

As shown in Table 19 column 1, there is no evidence of impact in any of the three intervention
groups. Both the PBF and the improved supervision groups have small but negative point
estimates with large standard errors and, while the additional financing group has a positive
estimated impact (4 percentage points), this too fails to meet the cut-off for statistical significance.

THE QUALITY OF ANTENATAL CARE
Enumerators observed 729 ANC consultations. They compared each exchange against a
standardized checklist and noted whether the health worker performed the following eleven


                                                                                                     25
routine activities: took a background, 3 asked about past issues, 4 asked about current issues, 5
provided iron supplementation, gave advice about warning signs,6 helped to prepare for the birth,7
checked HIV status, tested for syphilis, provided malaria prophylaxis, discussed appropriate
nutrition, and checked the following vital signs: blood pressure, weight, conjunctiva, hemoglobin,
rhesus, urine glucose, uterine size, fetal heartbeat and fetal presentation. As with the child health
consultations, these data were used to calculate aggregate quality scores. National protocols
provide guidelines for care that are specific to the number of prior visits and gestational age of the
pregnant women. As not all activities are appropriate for all consultation, the quality indices were
adjusted to reflect variations by gestational age (<32 weeks, 32 to 35 weeks, and >35 weeks) and
whether or not the patient was experiencing her first pregnancy. Results are presented in Table 19
column 2.

We see a strong positive trend in the quality of ANC over time. On average, consultation scores
improved by improved by 12.9 percentage points between baseline and endline (p<0.05). As
shown in Table 19 column 2, there were no differences in any of the treatment groups in the
change in ANC quality relative to the full control.

    5. Discussion and Conclusions

In order to distinguish the influence of the different components of the PBF reform, this evaluation
compared four arms: (1) the standard PBF package, (2) the same level of financing but not linked
to performance, and with the same levels of supervision, monitoring, and autonomy as PBF, (3)
no additional resources or autonomy, but the same levels of supervision and monitoring as PBF,
and (4) pure comparison.

Overall, the impact evaluation results reveal significant increases in the PBF arm for several
indicators (child and mother vaccinations, use of modern family planning), but not for others, such
as antenatal care visits and in-facility deliveries. Structural quality as measured by equipment
availability, staff presence and staff satisfaction, improved in the PBF group. This finding is
consistent with evidence from Malawi showing increases in functional equipment and essential
drug stocks for maternal and newborn health services as a result of PBF (Brenner et al., 2017;



3
 A composite score ranging from 0 to 1 indicating whether the worker asked about the patient’s age, medicines, and
date of last menstruation.
4
 A composite score ranging from 0 to 1 indicating whether the worker asked whether the patient had any prior
deliveries, stillbirths, neonatal deaths, abortions, heavy bleeding during or after delivery, or assisted delivery.
5
  A composite score ranging from 0 to 1 indicating whether the worker asked whether the patient had any bleeding,
fever, headache or blurred vision, swollen face or hands, tiredness or breathlessness, felt the baby move, or if the
client noticed any other symptoms or problems related to the pregnancy.
6
 A composite score ranging from 0 to 1 indicating whether the worker warned the patient to watch for vaginal
bleeding, fever, excessive tiredness or breathlessness, swollen hands and face, and severe headache or swollen vision.
7
  A composite score ranging from 0 to 1 indicating whether the worker advised the client to prepare for the birth,
including arranging money and transportation, advised to have skilled assistance at delivery, discussed what items to
have on hand, emphasized the importance of immunization and the importance of exclusive breastfeeding.

                                                                                                                   26
Kambala et al., 2017). However, despite an increase in providers and supplies available at health
facilities, PBF did not increase the completeness of service provision during antenatal care and
child health consultations. Importantly, out-of-pocket health expenditures decreased for
households in the PBF arm, including unofficial payments and this decrease in revenue did not
come at the cost of process quality: there were no negative spillover effects on completeness of
services and advice provided during antenatal visits and consultations for children under 5.
Perhaps not surprisingly, then, given decreased out of pocket costs, and improvements in
structural and process quality, client satisfaction also increased for medical consultations for
children younger than 5.

While some – but not all - of the improvements measured for PBF were also observed in the
additional financing arm C1, few improvements were observed in the group C2 offering enhanced
supervision without additional financing or financial incentives. The comparison between the PBF
and the C1 group is delicate because the two interventions share many similarities: same
supervision and monitoring mechanisms, same level of managerial autonomy and increased
financing. The only difference was that in the PBF group (T1) the additional financing was linked
to the performance of the individual facility while in the C1 group it was linked to the average
performance of the PBF facilities in the same district. It is possible that this distinction might not
have been salient enough among the health facility management and staff for them to act upon it
and modify their practice, explaining overall similar results.

The lower impacts obtained in the C2 group however suggest that reinforced supervision is not
sufficient to change behaviors and improve outcomes. Additional financing appears to be required
and its impact seems in some instances stronger when linked to results as in PBF.

This study has several limitations that we have tried to acknowledge in this report. The
randomization for this study was at the health facility level. This is beneficial from the point of
view of statistical power. From an operational and public health perspective, however,
randomizing at the district level would have made more sense given the proximity of some
facilities. Indeed, the risk with facility-level randomization is that neighboring facilities from
different groups might learn from each other or from supervising staff and apply principles outside
their treatment group. However, this was not feasible given that the Government of Cameroon
had already decided and announced which districts would be included in the PBF pilot.
Randomization at the district level was therefore not an option.

We have analyzed in detail the phenomenon of health care bypassing behavior whereby
households look for health care beyond the closest health facility. We found that health care
shopping behavior by households was widespread in Cameroon at baseline in 2012 and continues
to be widespread at endline in 2015, but does not appear to be a consequence of the introduction
of PBF. Overall, the results do not suggest that the health care seeking behavior is driven or even
significantly influenced by the introduction of PBF or the other interventions in C1 and C2
limiting the concerns for systematic bias. However, this bypassing behavior likely leads to
estimates which are below the true causal effect of the intervention. This is a substantial limitation
of the household survey analysis that needs to be kept in mind.

While overall we found that the results from the household survey and the health facility survey
analyses were consistent, for example on the absence of impacts for the ANC and skilled delivery
                                                                                                   27
indicators and the presence of positive impact on immunizations, we also noted some
discrepancies. In some cases, because of the nature of the information collected, one of the two
data collection methods might be superior. For example, patients might be more open about
reporting unofficial payments in a household survey than during an exit interview conducted
within or in the vicinity of the facility. In contrast, women might be reluctant to report family
planning utilization at home and therefore facility-level data for this indicator might be more
reliable.

Another potential limitation is that the differences between the three intervention study groups
were sometimes subtle. This was certainly the case, as discussed above, between the PBF group
and the C1 group that offered all the elements of PBF except the direct link between individual
facility performance and additional financing. 8 It is not obvious that all these differences in
intervention design have been fully grasped by staff and management. We should also
acknowledge that the monitoring of adherence to national guidelines done as part of the
monitoring and supervision intervention in T1, C1 and C2 facilities was not ideal from an
evaluation point of view because it means that all three treatment groups receive a separate
intervention which the control group does not receive. This is obviously not something that could
have easily been avoided from an implementation perspective, and it seems likely that the impact
of these protocols is small.

Finally, this report relies on quantitative household and health facility surveys. A companion
qualitative study has been conducted and its analysis is ongoing. The qualitative analysis will help
understand and interpret some of the impacts measured – or their absence – and will shed light on
possible mechanisms.

From a policy point of view, these impact evaluation results suggest the following lessons. In
general, PBF is an effective mechanism to bring payments and funding at the provider level,
leading to significant increases in coverage (child and maternal immunization, family planning,
HIV testing) and improvements in structural quality of care. It also leads to a decrease in out-of-
pocket payments, in particular unofficial payments. For many of those outcomes, the differences
between the PBF group (T1) and the additional financing group (C1) are not significant. It should
be noted that the C1 group offered all the elements of PBF except the direct link between
individual facility performance and additional financing. It is not obvious these differences in
intervention design have been salient enough for staff and management. There was, however, a
clear effect for the importance of additional financing plus reinforced supervision through PBF
instruments (comparing groups T1 and C1 vs groups C2 and C3). Enhanced supervision and
monitoring are not sufficient to improve MCH outcomes.

Given the way the public budget for health in Cameroon is currently organized and allocated, the
results from the evaluation suggest that several modifications in the structure and prioritization of
public financing would lead to improved health service delivery outcomes in the country. First,



8
  In appendix tables A12-A15, we present results from a specification where we pooled the T1 and C1 group into one
group, to see whether this specification – which is not as per the initial evaluation design – would yield different
results. Compared to the main tables 4-7, this new specification does not yield qualitatively different results.

                                                                                                                 28
the public budget should be distributed more equitably among the different levels of institutions,
especially in favor of levels of care that are closest to the user and where cost-effective care is
provided, such as primary, preventive, and community health services, enabling them to operate
more efficiently and provide more attractive and higher quality services. Second, the use of global
budgets for health facilities (by creating a single line for each entity instead of multiple lines for
different activities, as is currently the case) should also be considered. To accompany these global
budgets for each entity, these health facilities should be empowered for the proper management
of their structures and must have the management autonomy to use these resources in order to
solve their problems with strategies that are developed locally, for the specific context of each
health facility. In order to avoid leakages (the 2009 PETS found that less than 50% of the resources
destined to primary care facilities (CSI and CMA) actually arrived at the facility), fund transfers
to peripheral-level providers should be completed through a direct transfer to the health facilities'
bank accounts, which will avoid the loss of resources along the way.

To provide more equitable allocations of the public budget, Cameroon could consider
implementing an intra-regional budget allocation system to deploy resources where the need is
greatest, as PBF does with the existing Equity Bonus. According to key principles of the
Performance Based Financing (PBF) program (see below), health facilities in the PBF areas retain
all their income at the level of their structures and do not transfer a percentage of their revenues
to the central level. A method to improve the effectiveness of the allocation and to strengthen the
capacity of health service providers to provide high quality care would be to eliminate any transfer
of providers' revenues to the central government level, as is currently the case outside PBF zones.

The absence of resources targeted towards high-impact, cost-effective services, may also explain
the persistence of poor health outcomes in Cameroon. Using strategic purchasing, as is done in
PBF where cost-effective services (prevention, promotion) receive higher per-service subsidies
than curative services, could be scaled-up through the public budget to prioritize the
implementation of high-impact interventions at health facilities. This approach would require a
shift from the funding of these health facilities to a service or performance-based payments,
replacing the current system that focuses exclusively on infrastructure-related operating costs (or
the appropriations allocated in the previous year).
The absence of impacts for some MCH indicators such as skilled deliveries and ANC visits was
surprising. It is possible that the supply-side incentives for providers were not sufficient given
existing user fees which might act as a barrier on the demand-side. A policy discussion about
combining demand-side and supply-side incentives would be useful. In terms of quality of care,
most of the positive impacts were observed on structural quality. However, despite an increase in
providers and supplies available at health facilities, PBF did not increase the completeness of
service provision (content of care) during antenatal care and child health consultations. Further
reflection and efforts should be devoted to identify mechanisms to incentivize or otherwise
improve the content of care beyond equipment, supplies and staff availability.




                                                                                                   29
                                            References



Alkema, L., Broaddus, E., Chou, D., Hogan, D., Mathers, C., Moller, A.-B., . . . Zhang, S.
       (2015). Trends in Maternal Mortality: 1990 to 2015 Estimates by WHO, UNICEF,
       UNFPA, World Bank Group and the United Nations Population Division In W. H.
       Organization (Ed.): World Health Organization
Basinga, P., Gertler, P. J., Binagwaho, A., Soucat, A. L. B., Sturdy, J. R., & Vermeersch, C. M.
       J. (2010). Paying Primary Health Care Centers for Performance in Rwanda. Policy
       Research Working Papers.
Binyaruka, P., Patouillard, E., Powell-Jackson, T., Greco, G., Maestad, O., & Borghi, J. (2015).
       Effect of Paying for Performance on Utilisation, Quality, and User Costs of Health
       Services in Tanzania: A Controlled Before and After Study. PLoS One, 10(8), e0135013.
       doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135013
Bonfrer, I., Soeters, R., Van de Poel, E., Basenya, O., Longin, G., van de Looij, F., & van
       Doorslaer, E. (2014). Introduction of performance-based financing in Burundi was
       associated with improvements in care and quality. Health Affairs, 33(12), 2179-2187.
Bonfrer, I., Van de Poel, E., & Van Doorslaer, E. (2014). The effects of performance incentives
       on the utilization and quality of maternal and child care in Burundi. Social Science &
       Medicine, 123, 96-104.
Bove, A., Basile., P., Robyn, P. J., & Singh, R. (2013). Towards Greater Equity: A Special
       Focus on Health. Cameroon Economic Update In T. W. Bank (Ed.). Washington DC:
       The World Bank.
Brenner, S., Wilhelm, D., Lohmann, J., Kambala, C., Chinkhumba, J., Muula, A. S., & De, M.
       (2017). Implementation research to improve quality of maternal and newborn health
       care, Malawi. Bulletin of the World Health Organization.
De Walque, D., Robyn, P. J., & Sorgho, G. (2013). Public randomization ceremonies. The
       World Bank Development Impact Blog. Retrieved December 18, 2016, from
       http://blogs.worldbank.org/impactevaluations/public-randomization-ceremonies
Falisse, J. B., Ndayishimiye, J., Kamenyero, V., & Bossuyt, M. (2015). Performance-based
        financing in the context of selective free health-care: an evaluation of its effects on the
        use of primary health-care services in Burundi using routine data. Health Policy Plan,
        30(10), 1251-1260. doi: 10.1093/heapol/czu132
Fritsche, G. B., Soeters, R., & Meessen, B. (2014). Performance-based financing toolkit: World
        Bank Publications.
Gertler, P. J., & Giovagnoli, P. I. (2014). Rewarding provider performance to enable a healthy
        start to life: evidence from Argentina's Plan Nacer. World Bank Policy Research
        Working Paper(6884).
Huillery, E., & Seban, J. (2014). Performance-Based Financing, Motivation and Final Output in
        the Health Sector: Experimental Evidence from the Democratic Republic of Congo.
        Retrieved from http://econ.sciences-
       po.fr/sites/default/files/file/elise/paper_DRC_July2014_AER.pdf
ICF International. (2012). The DHS Program STATcompiler. Retrieved June 10, 2015, from
       http://www.statcompiler.com
Institut National de la Statistique. (2015). Enquête par grappes à indicateurs multiples (MICS5),
         2014, Rapport de résultats clés. Yaoundé, Cameroun: Institut National de la Statistique.
Institut National de la Statistique (INS) et ICF International. (2012). Enquête Démographique et
         de Santé et à Indicateurs Multiples du Cameroun 2011. In I. International (Ed.).
         Calverton, Maryland, USA: ICF International
Ir, P., Korachais, C., Chheng, K., Horemans, D., Van Damme, W., & Meessen, B. (2015).
         Boosting facility deliveries with results-based financing: a mixed-methods evaluation of
                                                                                                30
       the government midwifery incentive scheme in Cambodia. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth,
       15, 170. doi: 10.1186/s12884-015-0589-x
Kambala, C., Lohmann, J., Mazalale, J., Brenner, S., Sarker, M., Muula, A. S., & De Allegri, M.
       (2017). Perceptions of quality across the maternal care continuum in the context of a
       health financing intervention: Evidence from a mixed methods study in rural Malawi.
       BMC health services research, 17(1), 392.
Ministere de la Sante Publique. (2016). Analyse Situationnelle du financement de la santé au
       Cameroun: Stratégie de Financement de la Santé 2017-2021. In M. d. l. S. Publique
       (Ed.). Yaounde, Cameroon.
The United Nations Children's Fund. (2015). Enquête par grappes à indicateurs multiples
       (MICS5) 2014 Rapport de résultats clés. In T. U. N. C. s. Fund (Ed.), Multiple Indicator
       Cluster Survey (MICS).
The World Bank. (2013). Cameroon Performance-based Financing: Results from the health
       facility baseline survey: Results from the health facility baseline survey. In T. W. Bank
       (Ed.). Washington DC: The World Bank.
The World Bank. (2016). World Development Indicators. from The World Bank
The World Bank. (2017). Cameroon Public Expenditure Review.
United Nations Statistical Division. (2015). Millennium Development Indicators: Country and
       Regional Progress Snapshots. from
       http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/Resources/Static/Products/Progress2015/Snapshots/CMR.pdf
World Health Organization Global Health Expenditure database. (2016). Health expenditure per
      capita (current US$). (December 8). http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.PCAP
Zeng, W., Cros, M., Wright, K. D., & Shepard, D. S. (2013). Impact of performance-based
      financing on primary health care services in Haiti. Health Policy Plan, 28(6), 596-605.
      doi: 10.1093/heapol/czs099




                                                                                              31
Figure 1: Cameroon PBF project and Impact Evaluation map




                                                           32
FIGURE 2: PERCENT OF REPORTED PATIENTS CONFIRMED DURING VERIFICATION
                             100
                                                                                                98
                                            94
                                                                                                89
                                             83                                                86
                             80
               Percent (%)           81


                             60


                             40
                                   Sept. Dec. Feb. May. Sept. Dec. Mar. Jun. Sept. Dec. Mar. Jun.
                                   2012 2012 2013 2013 2013 2013 2014 2014 2014 2014 2015 2015

                                                 North-West    Est      South-West




                                                                                                     33
TABLE 1: IMPACT EVALUATION STUDY GROUPS
 T1: PBF with health worker performance bonuses   C1: Same per capita financial resources as PBF but
                                                  not linked to performance; Same supervision and
                                                  monitoring and managerial autonomy as T1
 C2: No additional resources but same supervision C3: Status quo
 and monitoring as PBF arms and T1 and C1
*See Appendix Table 1 for detailed description




                                                                                                       34
TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF HEALTH FACILITIES INCLUDED IN THE IMPACT EVALUATION
   District                                    Number of health facilities

                          CSI      CMA      District   Confessional    For-     Total   Private
                         Public    Public   Hospital   CSI/ CMA/      profit/
                                                        Hospital      Para-              (%)
                                                                      public

   Abong-Mbang             14        2         1            4           2        23      27%

   Doume                    9        1         1            2           1        14      23%

   Lomie                    7        2         1            2           0        12      18%

   Messamena                9        1         1            2           0        13      17%

   Nguelemendouka           5        0         1            1           0        7       17%

   Kette                    9        0         1            0           0        10      0%

   Total in East           53        6         6           11           3        79      19%

   Kumbo East              17        2         1            6           4        30      34%

   Nkambe                  11        2         1            4           2        20      32%

   Ndop                    12        2         1            8           4        27      46%

   Fundong                  9        3         1           12           3        28      56%

   Total in North West     49        9         4           30           13      105      43%

   Mamfe                   11        1         1            1           0        14      8%

   Kumba                   10        1         1            5           1        18      35%

   Buea                    10        3         1            0           9        23      41%

   Limbe                   10        1         1            1           7        20      42%

   Total in South West     41        6         4            7           17       75      34%

   Pilot Zone total        143      21        14           48           33      259      33%




                                                                                                  35
TABLE 3: OPERATIONAL FINANCING AVAILABLE AT THE HEALTH FACILITY AND PBF PAYMENTS ASSESSED AT
ENDLINE
Total (cost recovery, Ministry of health, subsidies)
                                      T1 (full PBF)             C1 (increased financing) p-value
Q1-2014 received                         3420226                        4163127          0.5281
Q2-2014 received                         3339472                        4044135          0.5143
Q3-2014 received                         3799585                        4395996           0.748
Q4-2014 received                         3876873                        3873040          0.9979
n                                           53                             48              101
Subsidies                                   T1                             C1            p-value
Q1-2014 received                         1322834                        1725858          0.2009
Q2-2014 received                         1241536                        1751481          0.1805
Q3-2014 received                         1757934                        1401405          0.5654
Q4-2014 received                         1428642                        1264029          0.7897
n                                           53                             48              101
                                    Standardized by number of health workers
                                      T1 (full PBF)             C1 (increased financing) p-value
Q1-2014 received                          587480                         559007          0.7962
Q2-2014 received                          442595                         550209          0.2212
Q3-2014 received                          436623                         471578          0.6895
Q4-2014 received                          467895                         528527          0.5869
n                                           49                             43
Subsidies
Q1-2014 received                          295233                         391902          0.2906
Q2-2014 received                          242738                         361116          0.1223
Q3-2014 received                          238236                         260399          0.7039
Q4-2014 received                          212285                         312874          0.2159
n                                           49                             43




                                                                                             36
TABLE 4: PROVISION OF REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH SERVICES†

Panel A                      (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)

                                                            Tetanus
                          Skilled                        vaccine during               Modern      Third dose of
                          delivery           ANC           pregnancy Postnatal care contraception polio vaccine

Post indicator              0.514            3.213         -16.881***         -3.802*            0.679          -5.280***
                           [0.798]          [3.932]           [5.563]         [2.175]           [1.002]          [1.983]
PBF/Post interact           1.374            3.007          21.521***          4.309*          9.240***          4.583**
                           [1.011]          [7.641]           [6.145]         [2.269]           [2.529]          [2.162]
Control 1/Post             1.855*            1.545           15.989**         5.513**          5.794***           2.765
interact                   [1.021]          [5.407]           [6.450]         [2.262]           [1.746]          [2.389]
Control 2/Post              0.047            3.993             8.707            3.515            3.321            1.081
interact                   [1.358]          [5.441]           [7.692]         [2.499]           [2.061]          [3.953]
p-value PBF vs. C1          0.581            0.841             0.183            0.190            0.205            0.252
p-value PBF vs. C2          0.289            0.894            0.031             0.570            0.046            0.322
p-value PBF vs. C3          0.176            0.694            0.001             0.059           <0.001            0.035
Baseline mean C3            7.76             20.57            32.84             10.22             3.02            23.90
N                           2182             2220              2220             2220             2220              2220
Panel B                      (7)               (8)              (9)              (10)             (11)
                         Meningitis         Measles        HIV testing        PMTCT              ART
Post indicator                 i                 i
                         -45.970***         -3.736*           4.239             -3.552          1.021*
                           [9.769]          [2.249]          [3.031]           [3.323]          [0.609]
PBF/Post interact          19.041             3.758         61.115***           2.084            -1.455
                          [13.471]          [2.552]          [17.817]          [4.011]          [0.888]
Control 1/Post            21.931*             1.892         51.466***           2.372            -0.671
interact                  [11.131]          [2.700]          [13.668]          [3.189]          [0.573]
Control 2/Post              8.47             -0.740            6.596            1.648            -0.681
interact                  [13.547]          [3.546]           [5.757]          [3.156]          [0.595]
p-value PBF vs. C1         0.753             0.337             0.656            0.905            0.235
p-value PBF vs. C2          0.387            0.135            0.003             0.851            0.252
p-value PBF vs. C3          0.159            0.143            0.001             0.604            0.103
Baseline mean C3            46.65            20.90             9.98             9.86             0.012
N                           2220             2220              2220             2220             2220
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on reproductive health service
provision reported in facility registers. Monthly number of services provided during the six months before the baseline and
endline surveys used as the dependent variable. Regression models adjusted for facility controls (type of health facility
public/private/religious, urban/rural). Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level.

                                                                                                                              37
TABLE 5: COVERAGE OF REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH SERVICES† AND PROVISION OF MODERN FAMILY PLANNING‡

                               (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)

                                         At least two ANC Tetanus vaccine                                     Modern
                        Skilled delivery       visits     during pregnancy             Postnatal care       contraception

Post indicator             0.053***                0.022               0.001             0.105***                0.002
                            [0.019]              [0.014]              [0.019]             [0.031]              [0.044]
PBF/Post interact            -0.043                0.010               0.024               -0.029               -0.037
                            [0.028]              [0.020]              [0.023]             [0.041]              [0.054]
Control 1/Post                0.020               -0.024               0.003               -0.019               -0.054
interact                    [0.032]              [0.019]              [0.025]             [0.041]              [0.055]
Control 2/Post              -0.050*             -0.044**                0.01              -0.070*                0.000
interact                    [0.029]              [0.019]              [0.023]             [0.039]              [0.053]
p-value PBF vs. C1            0.055                0.111               0.369                0.798                0.731
p-value PBF vs. C2           0.828                0.010                0.520               0.277                0.429
p-value PBF vs. C3           0.117                0.617                0.306               0.484                0.486
Baseline mean C3              0.784               0.894                0.878               0.323                0.180
N                             5858                5974                 5975                 5966                4498
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on reproductive health service use
among female respondents included in the household survey who had been pregnant in the previous 24 months. ‡ Results from
difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on modern contraceptive use among female
respondents of reproductive age (15 – 49) included in the household survey. Regression models adjusted for individual (age,
marital status, education level, religion, ethnicity, working status and type of work) and household control variables (number
of individuals in the household, housing type, house ownership, water source, and type of sanitation). Standard errors were
clustered at the health facility level.




                                                                                                                            38
TABLE 6: FULL VACCINATION COVERAGE, GROWTH MONITORING, BEDNET USE, STUNTING, UNDERWEIGHT
AND WASTING AMONG CHILDREN†

                                 (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)

                                                            Growth
                               Fully       Fully           monitorin
                             vaccinated vaccinated          g in the
                            documented by vaccine             last          Slept
                             by vaccine card or self-                      under a                      Under-
                                card       report            month         bednet        Stunting       weight         Wasted

Post indicator                 0.127*        0.108**         -0.014      -0.181***        -0.008         -0.010       0.047**
                               [0.072]       [0.052]        [0.013]       [0.025]        [0.025]        [0.022]       [0.021]
PBF/Post interact              0.170*        0.164**         -0.002        0.001          0.008          0.046         -0.004
                               [0.095]       [0.069]        [0.017]       [0.042]        [0.033]        [0.028]       [0.028]
Control 1/Post interact         -0.054        -0.015        0.031*         -0.005         0.010          0.043         -0.029
                               [0.092]       [0.065]        [0.017]       [0.038]        [0.037]        [0.032]       [0.029]
Control 2/Post interact          0.018         0.029          0.022        0.003          0.037          0.018         -0.028
                               [0.092]       [0.073]        [0.019]       [0.036]        [0.033]        [0.028]       [0.027]
p-value PBF vs. C1               0.009         0.003          0.047         0.893          0.957          0.907         0.381
p-value PBF vs. C2              0.075         0.052          0.215          0.967         0.338          0.272          0.328
p-value PBF vs. C3              0.076         0.019          0.930          0.979         0.810          0.104          0.876
Baseline mean C3                0.599         0.645          0.048          0.809         0.444          0.147          0.067
N                               1569           2448          7055          10107           8711          8672           8480
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on child vaccination among children
(12 – 23 months), growth monitoring in the last month among children (12 – 59 months), having slept under a bednet the night
before the survey and on child anthropometric outcomes (stunting, underweight and wasting) among children under 5 years of
age included in the household survey. Regression model adjusted for individual (age, father in the household, religion, ethnicity)
and household control variables (number of individuals in the household, housing type, house ownership, water source, and
type of sanitation). Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level.




                                                                                                                                39
Table 7: Health care spending as reported in household data†
                                   (1)                    (2)                       (3)                      (4)
                            Official provider     Unofficial provider
                                   fee                    fee              Lab and x-ray fees       Transportation fees
Post indicator                   1811.58                2052.12*                 1048.64                    123.03
                                [1475.25]              [1057.18]                 [711.54]                 [201.09]
PBF/Post interact                -1495.83              -2254.12*                -1473.44*                  -455.41
                                [1538.26]              [1305.64]                 [779.60]                 [288.36]
Control 1/Post interact           -334.73               -2736.04                 -521.02                 -495.14**
                                [1506.73]              [1778.02]                 [868.01]                 [241.38]
Control 2/Post interact          -1378.05               -1422.67                  -639.27                  -368.79
                                [3969.75]              [1244.33]                 [885.00]                 [236.41]
p-value PBF vs. C1                 0.191                  0.750                    0.051                     0.880
p-value PBF vs. C2                0.974                  0.392                    0.128                    0.732
p-value PBF vs. C3                0.332                  0.086                    0.060                    0.116
Baseline mean C3                 1689.22                2183.33                  1603.09                   910.30
N                                 2374                   2261                     2292                      2365
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on health care spending in the last 4
weeks among respondents in the household survey. Regression model adjusted for individual (age, sex) and household control
variables (number of individuals in the household, housing type, house ownership, water source, and type of sanitation).
Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level.




                                                                                                                         40
TABLE 8: HEALTH SPENDING FOR ANC AND CHILD HEALTH CONSULTATIONS
                                     ANC†                          Child health consultations‡
                       (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)
                    Official Unofficial                    Official Unofficia
                    provider provider Medicines            provider l provider Medicine
                       fee       fee      fees  Total fees    fee        fee        s fees   Total fees
Post indicator       472.17   -217.86   -695.08   319.34    -14.37     -34.34      227.67        403.6
                    [438.97] [199.56] [647.31] [1608.44] [57.05]      [20.87]     [559.02] [887.20]
PBF/Post interact -1025.34* 136.57       701.7   2501.29     79.17      36.22      679.38      1545.01
                    [585.71] [231.57] [708.71] [2637.04] [133.41] [26.31]         [729.58] [1282.14]
Control 1/Post     1824.81** 312.76     1260.72 4445.44*     43.76      12.05      442.13         636
interact            [867.46] [278.58]   [825.5] [2460.9] [113.03] [32.24]         [819.08] [1283.09]
Control 2/Post       -67.28   203.69    2374.42 5178.78** 53.25        -22.76       14.41       731.23
interact            [483.70] [191.43] [1813.13] [2560.66] [89.29]     [60.83]     [786.80] [1105.73]
p-value PBF vs. C1    0.001    0.373     0.392     0.490     0.814      0.400       0.758        0.485
p-value PBF vs. C2    0.015    0.555     0.337     0.351     0.862      0.307       0.408        0.499
p-value PBF vs. C3   0.058     0.556     0.324    0.354     0.554      0.171        0.353       0.230
Baseline mean C3     604.91    232.79   1881.96 5239.51     286.79     85.57      2105.00      2921.51
N                      725      730       652       724       613        612         556          609
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on spending for antenatal care among
respondents to antenatal care exit interviews. Regression model adjusted for individual (age, literacy, education level, and
marital status) and facility variables (type of health facility, urban/rural). Standard errors were clustered at the health facility
level. ‡ Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on spending for child health
consultations among respondents to child health care exit interviews. Regression model adjusted for individual (age, literacy,
education level, and marital status) and facility variables (type of health facility, urban/rural). Standard errors were clustered at
the health facility level in all regressions.




                                                                                                                                  41
TABLE 9: SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS OF WOMEN INCLUDED IN THE ANTENATAL CARE EXIT INTERVIEWS AS
BASELINE*
                   Mean Mean Mean Mean
                                               Mean p-value p-value p-value p-value
                    T1      C1      C2    C3    total T1/C3 C1/C3 C2/C3 F-test       N
Age                      25.82    24.95     25.26    24.93     25.25       0.33   0.99   0.78   0.71   258
Currently married         0.74     0.81      0.83     0.79     0.79        0.57   0.73   0.53   0.77   258
Literate                  0.82     0.72      0.70     0.65     0.72        0.05   0.51   0.64   0.21   256
No education              0.08     0.13      0.10     0.10     0.10        0.68   0.63   0.96   0.84   258
Primary education         0.55     0.39      0.51     0.43     0.47        0.25   0.73   0.42   0.49   258
Secondary education       0.33     0.27      0.33     0.38     0.33        0.62   0.32   0.63   0.80   258
Secondary education
level 2                   0.05     0.06      0.04     0.08     0.06        0.36   0.67   0.37   0.76   258
Higher education          0.00     0.15      0.01     0.02     0.04        0.30   0.05   0.93   0.07   258
* Standard errors adjusted for facility-level clustering of observations




                                                                                                             42
 TABLE 10: SATISFACTION WITH              ANTENATAL CARE CONSULTATIONS REPORTED DURING FACILITY EXIT
 INTERVIEWS†
       Panel A              (1)                 (2)         (3)               (4)             (5)           (6)          (7)
                         Overall          Reasonable     Reasonable      Reasonable           No          Clean       Reasonable
                       satisfaction       registration    lab fees        medicine      additional        health       wait time
                           score               fees                          fees        payment         facility
 Post indicator           0.006               0.055         0.074           0.088           0.010        -0.045         -0.009
                         [0.034]            [0.097]       [0.075]         [0.090]         [0.060]       [0.075]         [0.079]
 PBF/Post interact       0.086*               0.037         0.154           0.190          -0.043       0.241**           0.161
                         [0.048]            [0.128]       [0.113]         [0.134]         [0.078]       [0.111]         [0.115]
 Control        1/Post     0.051             -0.051        -0.051          -0.069           0.067       0.228**           0.014
 interact                [0.044]            [0.142]       [0.129]         [0.121]         [0.092]       [0.106]         [0.129]
 Control        2/Post    -0.019             -0.085        -0.027          -0.127          -0.020         0.002          -0.055
 interact                [0.049]            [0.127]       [0.127]         [0.118]         [0.087]       [0.111]         [0.134]
 p-value PBF vs. C1       0.419              0.523         0.129           0.044           0.230          0.903          0.269
 p-value PBF vs. C2       0.036              0.309         0.185           0.015           0.776          0.040          0.127
 p-value PBF vs. C3       0.077              0.774         0.176           0.158           0.586          0.032          0.163
 Baseline mean C3          0.853              0.804         0.782           0.754          0.885         0 .787          0 .738
 N                          730                669           665             689             723           730             727
       Panel B              (8)                 (9)          (10)            (11)            (12)          (13)
                         Enough            Adequate      Courteous          Good        Sufficient      Easy to
                         privacy              hours      health staff      health        visit time         get
                       during visit                                        worker       with health    prescribed
                                                                         communic         worker       medicines
                                                                            ation
 Post indicator               -0.025         -0.026         -0.041         -0.031           0.055          0.018
                             [0.061]        [0.041]        [0.036]        [0.024]         [0.052]        [0.068]
 PBF/Post interact            0.042         0.154**          0.037        0.106**          -0.045          0.000
                             [0.086]        [0.071]        [0.063]        [0.050]         [0.074]        [0.079]
 Control      1/Post           0.149          0.032          0.070          0.039         0.139*           0.041
 interact                    [0.093]        [0.055]        [0.053]        [0.052]         [0.080]        [0.085]
 Control      2/Post          -0.010         -0.079          0.019          0.101           0.030         -0.040
 interact                    [0.098]        [0.062]        [0.051]        [0.077]         [0.101]        [0.075]
 p-value PBF vs. C1           0.254          0.073          0.599          0.308           0.026          0.488
 p-value PBF vs. C2           0.605          0.002          0.783          0.961           0.443          0.402
 p-value PBF vs. C3           0.629          0.033          0.556          0.038           0.544          0.997
 Baseline mean C3             0 .902          0.900         0 .967         0 .951          0 .852         0 .883
 N                              728            724            730            725             728            716
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on satisfaction with antenatal care
components reported by patients during facility exit interviews. Regression models adjusted for individual (age, literacy, marital
status, education level) and facility-level control variables (type of health facility public/private/religious, urban/rural).
Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level.




                                                                                                                               43
TABLE 11: SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS OF CHILDREN AND MOTHERS INCLUDED IN CHILD HEALTH CONSULTATION
EXIT INTERVIEWS AT BASELINE*
                         Mean Mean Mean Mean Mean p-value p-value p-value p-value
                           T1         C1       C2        C3      total T1/C3 C1/C3 C2/C3 F-test  N
Child characteristics
Age in months            23.66 14.15 22.45 18.00 20.01                   0.08 0.27  0.17 0.04   185
Female                    0.58       0.40     0.54      0.49     0.51    0.33 0.43  0.65 0.48   188
Caretaker characteristics
Single                    0.35       0.20     0.26      0.16     0.25    0.04 0.69  0.27 0.18   187
Currently married         0.60       0.77     0.74      0.80     0.73    0.03 0.79  0.51 0.16   187
Divorced or widowed       0.04       0.03     0.00      0.04     0.03    0.97 0.78  0.16 0.16   187
Literate                  0.75       0.77     0.69      0.77     0.74    0.84 0.98  0.33 0.77   190
No education              0.06       0.11     0.17      0.08     0.11    0.74 0.66  0.16 0.34   187
Primary education         0.38       0.37     0.43      0.38     0.39    0.96 0.94  0.59 0.93   187
Secondary education
level 1                   0.27       0.26     0.30      0.38     0.30    0.26 0.25  0.36 0.59   187
Secondary education
level 2                   0.21       0.17     0.07      0.12     0.14    0.20 0.52  0.43 0.24   187
Higher education          0.08       0.09     0.04      0.04     0.06    0.40 0.46  0.94 0.71   187
* Standard errors adjusted for facility-level clustering of observations




                                                                                                44
 TABLE 12: SATISFACTION WITH CHILD HEALTH CONSULTATIONS REPORTED DURING FACILITY EXIT INTERVIEWS†
       Panel A              (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)
                         Overall    Reasonable Reasonable Reasonable          No       Clean   Reasonable
                       satisfaction registration  lab fees     medicine additional     health   wait time
                           score         fees                     fees   payment      facility
 Post indicator           -0.036      -0.054       -0.143       -0.045     -0.004     -0.141    -0.111**
                         [0.026]      [0.061]     [0.118]      [0.067]    [0.055]    [0.099]     [0.055]
 PBF/Post interact      0.099***        0.112     0.347**        0.043     -0.007    0.227*       0.110
                         [0.037]      [0.101]     [0.175]      [0.124]    [0.117]    [0.133]     [0.097]
 Control        1/Post    0.054         0.019      0.331*        0.111     -0.020      0.136      0.143
 interact                [0.040]      [0.076]     [0.167]      [0.103]    [0.077]    [0.118]     [0.097]
 Control        2/Post    0.022         0.074     0.420**        0.033     -0.055     -0.049      0.021
 interact                [0.045]      [0.080]     [0.166]      [0.120]    [0.090]    [0.131]     [0.100]
 p-value PBF vs. C1       0.280        0.325       0.925        0.595      0.908       0.403      0.777
 p-value PBF vs. C2       0.092        0.709       0.685        0.945      0.696       0.019      0.442
 p-value PBF vs. C3       0.009        0.268       0.050        0.731      0.953       0.090      0.259
 Baseline mean C3          0.881        0.957       0.846        0.854      0.904      0.868      0.943
 N                          614          488         369          544        605        612        608
       Panel B              (8)           (9)        (10)         (11)       (12)       (13)
                         Enough      Adequate    Courteous       Good   Sufficient   Easy to
                         privacy        hours    health staff   health   visit time      get
                       during visit                             worker  with health prescribed
                                                              communic    worker    medicines
                                                                 ation
 Post indicator           -0.098      -0.046        0.062        0.017      0.091     -0.002
                         [0.098]      [0.052]     [0.062]      [0.073]    [0.066]    [0.059]
 PBF/Post interact      0.336***        0.085      -0.012        0.053     -0.094      0.055
                         [0.124]      [0.068]     [0.079]      [0.092]    [0.087]    [0.082]
 Control        1/Post    0.202         0.036      -0.080       -0.080     -0.018      0.068
 interact                [0.131]      [0.068]     [0.077]      [0.105]    [0.111]    [0.087]
 Control        2/Post    0.093        -0.116      -0.101        0.055     -0.031      0.112
 interact                [0.115]      [0.081]     [0.082]      [0.103]    [0.104]    [0.106]
 p-value PBF vs. C1       0.256        0.427       0.323        0.170      0.461       0.890
 p-value PBF vs. C2       0.021        0.007       0.214        0.988      0.507       0.594
 p-value PBF vs. C3       0.007        0.210       0.876        0.566      0.279       0.498
 Baseline mean C3         0.774         0.942       0.887       0.830      0.830       0.925
 N                          612          608         613          606        609        610
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on satisfaction with child health
consultations reported by mothers during facility exit interviews. Regression models adjusted for individual (child age, child
sex, maternal literacy, marital status, education level) and facility-level control variables (type of health facility
public/private/religious, urban/rural). Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level.




                                                                                                                           45
TABLE 13: SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS OF HEALTH WORKERS IN STUDY HEALTH FACILITIES AT BASELINE*
                    Mean Mean Mean Mean
                                               Mean p-value p-value p-value p-value
                     T1     C1      C2    C3   total T1/C3 C1/C3 C2/C3 F-test        N
Provider age               38.72   41.31   37.18   38.67    38.96    0.98   0.11   0.36   0.14   434
Years employed        at
facility                   5.43    4.50    4.35     6.24    5.13     0.39   0.06   0.05   0.14   428
Provider sex               0.66    0.68    0.66     0.69    0.67     0.75   0.94   0.68   0.97   434
Primary education          0.23    0.15    0.13     0.22    0.18     0.86   0.19   0.08   0.15   434
Secondary education        0.31    0.36    0.44     0.44    0.39     0.04   0.25   0.92   0.12   434
Secondary education
level 2             0.40           0.41    0.34     0.30    0.36     0.15   0.12   0.53   0.33   434
Higher education           0.06    0.07    0.06     0.04    0.06     0.46   0.28   0.41   0.69   434
Employed by MOH            0.45    0.44    0.49     0.45    0.46     0.98   0.91   0.67   0.95   433
Religious employer         0.13    0.25    0.20     0.17    0.19     0.61   0.38   0.71   0.49   433
Employed by facility       0.19    0.09    0.15     0.20    0.16     0.88   0.12   0.47   0.39   433
Other employer             0.23    0.21    0.16     0.18    0.20     0.48   0.63   0.73   0.68   433
* Standard errors adjusted for facility-level clustering of observations




                                                                                                       46
TABLE 14: WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION WELL-BEING INDEX†
                            (1)            (2)             (3)                                      (4)             (5)
                     Happy and in a     Calm and       Active and                            Refreshed and Days filled with
                      good mood in    relaxed in the energetic in the                         rested in the    interesting
                     the last 2 weeks last 2 weeks    last 2 weeks                           morning in the things in the last
                                                                                              last 2 weeks      2 weeks
Post indicator                      -0.025               -0.128                0.055              -0.069           0.081
                                   [0.057]              [0.084]              [0.063]             [0.090]         [0.086]
PBF/Post interact                    0.044                0.016               -0.117              -0.053          -0.157
                                   [0.082]              [0.108]              [0.074]             [0.108]         [0.112]
Control 1/Post interact             -0.009                0.094                0.022               0.134           0.062
                                   [0.087]              [0.114]              [0.079]             [0.113]         [0.116]
Control 2/Post interact             -0.039                0.037               -0.123               0.058          -0.096
                                   [0.080]              [0.113]              [0.076]             [0.120]         [0.106]
p-value PBF vs. C1                   0.569                0.451                0.025               0.037           0.047
p-value PBF vs. C2                   0.332                0.835                0.906               0.254           0.528
p-value PBF vs. C3                   0.592                0.885                0.117               0.624           0.163
Baseline mean C3                     0.816                0.684                0.776               0.643           0.582
N                                     991                  991                  990                 991             991
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on WHO well-being index items
reported by health workers. Regression models adjusted for individual (age, sex, marital status, education level) and facility-
level control variables (type of health facility public/private/religious, urban/rural). Standard errors were clustered at the health
facility level.




                                                                                                                                  47
TABLE 15: INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL WORKING RELATIONSHIPS †
                             (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)          (6)                    (7)
                         Working       Working        Working Collaboration Quality of the      The               Your level
                       relationships relationships relationships  with the   management relationship               of respect
                       with District/ with other        with      Regional   of the health between the               in the
                        Ministry of facility staff Management      Health   facility by the    health             community
                        Health staff                staff within Delegation management facility and
                                                     the health              staff within      local
                                                       facility               the health    traditional
                                                                                facility      leaders
Post indicator            -0.038          0.074          0.034          0.172          0.057           0.030          0.001
                          [0.085]        [0.087]        [0.072]        [0.148]        [0.084]        [0.089]        [0.053]
PBF/Post interact          0.103         -0.029         -0.172*        -0.006         -0.089          -0.002         -0.034
                          [0.106]        [0.104]        [0.093]        [0.178]        [0.123]        [0.104]        [0.065]
Control 1/Post             0.127         -0.049          0.003          0.054          0.063           0.093          0.002
interact                  [0.109]        [0.105]        [0.096]        [0.182]        [0.120]        [0.118]        [0.074]
Control 2/Post            -0.003         -0.129         -0.184*        -0.162         -0.057          -0.074         -0.027
interact                  [0.125]        [0.106]        [0.095]        [0.198]        [0.129]        [0.112]        [0.069]
p-value PBF vs. C1         0.800          0.818          0.045          0.677          0.199           0.320          0.568
p-value PBF vs. C2         0.342          0.259          0.895          0.332          0.808           0.392          0.899
p-value PBF vs. C3         0.333          0.780          0.067          0.973          0.471           0.981          0.604
Baseline mean C3           0.793          0.763          0 .758         0.475          0.591           0.648          0.847
N                           840            946            938            655            961             908            987
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on internal and external relationships.
Regression models adjusted for individual (age, sex, marital status, education level) and facility-level control variables (type
of health facility public/private/religious, urban/rural). Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level.




                                                                                                                              48
TABLE 16: HEALTH WORKER SATISFACTION WITH SUPPLY AVAILABILITY AND PHYSICAL CONDITION OF HEALTH
FACILITIES†
                           (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)
                      Quantity of Quality of Quantity of Quality and Availability         The        Your
                       medicine     medicine equipment          physical     of other  physical   ability to
                      available in available in in the health condition of supplies in condition   provide
                       the health the health       facility    equipment the health      of the       high
                         facility    facility                 in the health facility     health   quality of
                                                                 facility               facility care given
                                                                                       building  the current
                                                                                                   working
                                                                                                 conditions
                                                                                                     in the
                                                                                                   facility
Post indicator            0.092        0.070        0.032         0.022       -0.032    -0.084       0.069
                        [0.081]      [0.067]       [0.060]       [0.071]     [0.100]    [0.078]    [0.074]
PBF/Post interact         0.071        0.001      0.190**       0.256**     0.404***   0.306***     -0.009
                        [0.114]      [0.096]       [0.095]       [0.109]     [0.120]    [0.111]    [0.097]
Control 1/Post            0.176        0.050      0.210**       0.247**     0.332***     0.106       0.123
interact                [0.111]      [0.096]       [0.090]       [0.101]     [0.121]    [0.099]    [0.103]
Control 2/Post            0.025       -0.058        0.122         0.080        0.170     0.096      -0.129
interact                [0.119]      [0.104]       [0.094]       [0.107]     [0.131]    [0.118]    [0.116]
p-value PBF vs.           0.340        0.602        0.845         0.931        0.455
C1                                                                                       0.036       0.184
p-value PBF vs.           0.701        0.568        0.512         0.124        0.034
C2                                                                                       0.074       0.287
p-value PBF vs.           0.536        0.990        0.048         0.020        0.001
C3                                                                                       0.006       0.926
Baseline mean C3          0.505        0.763        0.196         0.278       0.531      0 .449      0.526
N                          960          984          988           987          982       990         988
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on the quantity and quality of health
supplies, medicine and equipment in the health facility, the physical condition of the health facility and ability to provide high
quality care given health facility conditions reported by health workers. Regression models adjusted for individual (age, sex,
marital status, education level) and facility-level control variables (type of health facility public/private/religious, urban/rural).
Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level.




                                                                                                                                  49
 TABLE 17: HEALTH WORKER SATISFACTION WITH FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL BENEFITS†
 Panel A               (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)                                            (6)
                            Your salary     Your benefits        Living             Your             Your              Your
                                               (such as       accommodati       opportunity        immediate      opportunity to
                                               housing,           ons            to discuss       supervisor's     be rewarded
                                                travel                          work issues      recognition of      for hard
                                             allowance,                          with your         your good          work,
                                                bonus                           immediate            work         financially or
                                              including                          supervisor                         otherwise
                                            performance
                                             bonus, etc.)
 Post indicator               0.036             -0.048            0.128             0.054            -0.008           0.066
                             [0.036]           [0.059]           [0.084]          [0.067]           [0.077]          [0.063]
 PBF/Post interact            0.091            0.183**            0.138            -0.081            -0.034          -0.019
                             [0.061]           [0.075]           [0.109]          [0.095]           [0.098]          [0.107]
 Control 1/Post              0.134*           0.287***            0.096             0.004             0.066          0.185*
 interact                    [0.069]           [0.083]           [0.109]          [0.097]           [0.101]          [0.102]
 Control 2/Post               0.053              0.037            0.159            -0.061            -0.016          -0.113
 interact                    [0.061]           [0.098]           [0.117]          [0.103]           [0.107]          [0.115]
 p-value PBF vs. C1           0.572             0.170             0.675            0.386             0.249            0.096
 p-value PBF vs. C2           0.587             0.113             0.845            0.848             0.841            0.477
 p-value PBF vs. C3           0.138              0.016            0.207             0.396             0.729           0.861
 Baseline mean C3             0.055              0.133            0.299             0.663             0.765           0.302
 N                             943                862              972               980               975             971
 Panel B                       (7)                (8)              (9)               (10)              (11)            (12)
                               Your              Your              The           Safety and        Available      Overall, how
                          opportunities     opportunities     opportunities    security in the   schooling for     satisfied are
                          for promotion      to upgrade        to use your      community        your children    you with your
                                             your skills      skills in your                                           job?
                                                 and                job
                                             knowledge
                                               through
                                               training
 Post indicator               0.137**            0.116            -0.013            0.093            -0.026          0.183**
                              [0.062]          [0.082]           [0.072]          [0.083]           [0.115]          [0.085]
 PBF/Post interact             -0.113           -0.025             0.007            0.139             0.027           0.105
                              [0.092]          [0.108]           [0.094]          [0.106]           [0.160]          [0.113]
 Control 1/Post                 0.085            0.050           0.194*            -0.036            -0.006           0.048
 interact                     [0.087]          [0.115]           [0.103]          [0.102]           [0.171]          [0.113]
 Control 2/Post              -0.251**           -0.075             0.007           -0.003            -0.044           0.053
 interact                     [0.100]          [0.121]           [0.118]          [0.107]           [0.172]          [0.114]
 p-value PBF vs. C1            0.033            0.497             0.047            0.045             0.841            0.608
 p-value PBF vs. C2            0.189            0.666             0.999            0.124             0.672            0.639
 p-value PBF vs. C3            0.222            0.819             0.937            0.189             0.866            0.355
 Baseline mean C3               0.152            0.309             0.694            0.619             0.347           0.337
 N                               918              967               989              984               726             986
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on health worker satisfaction with
financial and non-financial benefits. Regression models adjusted for individual (age, sex, marital status, education level) and
facility-level control variables (type of health facility public/private/religious, urban/rural). Standard errors were clustered at
the health facility level.



                                                                                                                                50
 TABLE 18: NURSES, BASIC CLINICAL EQUIPMENT AND MEDICINES AVAILABLE AT HEALTH FACILITIES†
                                     (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)
                             Number of nurses   Basic clinical   Vaccination         Delivery
                                  present        equipment       equipment          equipment
 Post indicator                    0.191            0.030          0.102**             0.016
                                  [0.344]         [0.035]          [0.046]            [0.047]
 PBF/Post interact               1.222***         0.100**           -0.013          0.209***
                                  [0.468]         [0.043]          [0.063]            [0.064]
 Control 1/Post interact           0.738         0.125***            0.021          0.189***
                                  [0.475]         [0.043]          [0.060]            [0.060]
 Control 2/Post interact           -0.172           0.024           -0.037             0.082
                                  [0.475]         [0.044]          [0.070]            [0.070]
 p-value PBF vs. C1                0.291           0.488            0.563              0.729
 p-value PBF vs. C2                0.003           0.043            0.724              0.061
 p-value PBF vs. C3                0.010           0.021            0.842              0.001
 Baseline mean C3                  2.725           0.679            0.702              0.535
               N                    369              370              370               370
                                     (5)             (6)              (7)               (8)
                             General medicines Family planning Malaria treatment Vaccines available
                                                  methods         medicines
 Post indicator                    0.045          -0.105*           -0.048           -0.116**
                                  [0.039]         [0.063]          [0.063]            [0.057]
 PBF/Post interact                 0.064           0.168*           -0.014             0.131
                                  [0.058]         [0.091]          [0.080]            [0.088]
 Control 1/Post interact           0.089            0.078           -0.028             0.113
                                  [0.063]         [0.097]          [0.083]            [0.091]
 Control 2/Post interact           0.050            0.100            0.021             0.053
                                  [0.064]         [0.097]          [0.093]            [0.093]
 p-value PBF vs. C1                0.701           0.361            0.844              0.850
 p-value PBF vs. C2                0.830           0.491            0.672              0.432
 p-value PBF vs. C3                0.270           0.067            0.864              0.136
 Baseline mean C3                  0.768           0.482            0 .646             0.530
 N                                  370              370              370               370
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on the number of nurses present on
the day of the survey, basic clinical equipment and medicines available at the health facility. Regression model adjusted for
facility-level control variables (type of health facility public/private/religious, urban/rural). Standard errors were clustered at
the health facility level.




                                                                                                                                51
 TABLE 19: OVERALL QUALITY SCORE OF CHILD HEALTH† AND ANC CONSULTATIONS‡
                                                           (1)                   (2)
                                               Child health consultations ANC consultations
 Post indicator                                          0.030               0.129***
                                                        [0.041]               [0.029]
 PBF/Post interact                                       -0.021               -0.056
                                                        [0.055]               [0.042]
 Control 1/Post interact                                 0.044                 0.015
                                                        [0.056]               [0.045]
 Control 2/Post interact                                 -0.029               -0.042
                                                        [0.058]               [0.042]
 p-value PBF vs. C1                                      0.230                 0.131
 p-value PBF vs. C2                                       0.888                0.742
 p-value PBF vs. C3                                      0.705                 0.191
 Baseline mean in C3                                      0.511                0.592
 N                                                         575                  729
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on the overall quality score from child
health consultations from direct observation of child health consultations. Regression model adjusted for individual child-level
variables (age, sex), maternal variables (marital status, education level) and facility-level control variables (type of health
facility public/private/religious, urban/rural). ‡Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect
of PBF on the overall quality score from antenatal care consultations from direct observation. Regression model adjusted for
individual variables (age, literacy, education, marital status), and facility-level control variables (type of health facility
public/private/religious, urban/rural). In addition to the standard controls, also controlled for whether it is the first pregnancy
(Y/N) and where in the pregnancy the woman is (<32 weeks, 32-35 weeks, >35 weeks). Standard errors were clustered at the
health facility level.




                                                                                                                                52
APPENDIX
FIGURE A1: TIMELINE OF PBF IMPLEMENTATION IN CAMEROON


 2006              2008              2011               July 2012        October 2012
 •REDSSEC          •WB               •PBF pre-pilot     •Program         •PBF
  implemented       approved $25      began in           began in         exapnded to
  PBF pilot in      million to        Littoral in        North West       East region
  East region in    Cameroon          four health        and South        covering all
  faith based       for Health        districts          West regions,    14 districts
  organizations     Sector                               with four
  in three          Support                              districts
  districts         Investment                           included in
                    Project                              each region
                    (HSSIP)




                                                                                         53
REGIONAL HEALTH FACILITY MAPS
FIGURE A2




                                54
FIGURE A3




            55
FIGURE A4




            56
OUTPUT INDICATORS FOR THE MINIMUM PACKAGE OF HEALTH
TABLE A1: PBF SUBSIDY TABLE

N°          Curative Care                        Definition                      Support documents for data            Unit cost
                                                                                            collection                 in FCFA
1    Out Patient Consultations     Number of persons consulting the          Outpatient consultation register or      200
     (new cases): Nurse            health center with a new episode of       register used for curative care
                                   illness (consulted by nurses)             consultations
2    Out Patient Consultations     Number of persons consulting the          Outpatient consultation register or      650
     (new cases): Doctor           health center with a new episode of       register used for curative care
                                   illness (consulted by Medical             consultations
                                   Doctors)
3    Out Patient Consultations of Number of persons consulting the           Outpatient consultation register or      1000
     epidemics (new cases):        health center with a new epidemic         register used for curative care
     Doctor or nurse (free)        case (consulted by Medical Doctors or     consultations or special epidemics
                                   nurses)                                   registers
4    Hospital bed days             Total Number of days spent by all the     Inpatient (hospitalization register of   400
     (observation/Hospitalization) inpatients in the health center (for      the health facility
                                   observation or awaiting referral)
                                   period limited to a maximum of 48
                                   hours
5    Hospital bed days             Total Number of days spent by all the     Inpatient (hospitalization register of   1500
     (observation/Hospitalization) inpatients epidemic cases in the health   the health facility
     for epidemic cases (free)     center (for observation or awaiting
                                   referral) period limited to a maximum
                                   of 48 hours
6    Minor surgery cases           Total number of New cases of minor        Minor surgery register                   1500
                                   surgery treated in the health facility
                                   (incision of abscesses, wound sutures,
                                   circumcisions etc.)
7    Referral received in the      Total number of referred patients who Referral register of the health center, 1500
     hospital                      are received at the referral hospital referral forms at the level of the
                                                                         Hospital, consultation registers of the
                                                                         hospital, Hospitalization registers
     Preventive Services/Care
8    Children Completely  Children 0-11 months who received                  Vaccination register of the health       2500
     Vaccinated           all of the following vaccines (BCG,                facility
                          Pentavalent 1, Pentavalent 2,
                          Pentavalent 3 yellow fever and
                          measles)
9 VAT2 or VAT3 or VAT4 or Total number of women who received                 ANC Register and/or VAT                  1500
   VAT 5                  either VAT2 or VAT3 or VAT4 or                     vaccination register
                          VAT5
10 Home visits            Number of homes visited which had :                Home visits register signed by the   2500
                          appropriate collection and disposal of             Health committee representatives and
                          household refuge; a latrine in good                the village chiefs or quarter heads


                                                                                                                               57
                                  state ; appropriate use of mosquito
                                  bed nets and use of portable water.

11 Vitamin A supplementation      Number of children 6 to 59 months         Vit A supplementation register,    20
   (distribution)                 who received Vit A                        Vaccination Register
12 HIV positive Pregnant          Number of HIV positive Pregnant           PMTCT Register                     7000
   Women put on ARV               Women put on ARV prophylactic
   prophylactic treatment         treatment according to the national
                                  PMTCT protocol in the month
13 Newborn management of a        Number of babies born of HIV              PMTCT Register                     7000
   baby born of an HIV            positive mothers who are placed on
   positive mother.               PMTCT protocol in the month
                                  according to National directive
14 Voluntary Counseling and       Number of people who came to the          VCT Register                       1000
   Testing for HIV/AIDS           health facility for HIV/AIDS
                                  voluntary counseling and testing and
                                  who collected their results
15 Cases of STIs treated          Number of new cases of STIs               Outpatient consultation register   400
                                  diagnosed and correctly treated in the
                                  month according to national protocols
                                  (Syndromic approach)
16 Cases of TB diagnosed          Number of new cases diagnosed             TB and Lab registers               10,000
   positive by Microscopy         positive by Microscopy in the health
                                  facility
17 Cases of TB treated and        Total number of positive TB cases on      TB register, Lab register          20,000
   healed                         treatment who were completely
                                  healed in the month
     Reproductive Health
18 Normal Assisted Delivery      Total number of normal deliveries          Deliveries Register (Maternity     2500
                                 carried out by qualified (or skilled)      Register)
                                 staff (nurses) in the facility in the
                                 month
19   FP : New or old acceptants Total number of both old and new            Family Planning Register           1200
     on oral pills of injections acceptants of family planning who are
                                 currently on oral pills or injections
20   FP : Implants and IUD       Number of new cases of Implants            Family planning register           3000
                                 and/or IUD carried out in the month
21   Post abortive Curettage     Total number of new cases of               Maternity and theater register     3500
     (spontaneous or induced)    curettage (post abortive) carried out in
                                 the facility in the month
22   ANC1 or ANC2 or ANC3 or Total number of pregnant women who             ANC Register                       500
     ANC4                        consulted the health facility in the
                                 month either for ANC1 or ANC2 or
                                 ANC3 or ANC4
23   IPT1 or IPT2 or IPT3        Total number of pregnant women who         ANC Register                       500
                                 consulted the ANC service of the
                                 facility in the month and who took
                                 either IPT1 or IPT2 or IPT3


                                                                                                                        58
TABLE A2: INTERVENTION GROUP COMPARISON TABLE
                    T1                           C1                         C2                       C3
                    Complete PBF with            PBF with subsidies that    Only supervision         Status quo
                    performance bonuses for      are not linked to          without bonuses or
                    medical personnel            performance                autonomy

Contract            Classic PBF contract         Contract stipulating the   Contract stipulating     No contract
                                                 conditions of PBF for      technical support in the
                                                 verification and           form of supervision
                                                 supervision
Business plan       Yes                           Yes                       Simple business plan     No business plan
                                                                            focused on intensified
                                                                            supervision
Quality evaluation Quality evaluation and      Quality evaluation with      Quality evaluation with Quality evaluation
                   feedback with quality taken feedback as in T1, but no    feedback as in T1       with written
                   into account in bonus       effect on payment                                    feedback twice a
                   payment                                                                          year

Review/verification Review and verification of Review and verification of Review and verification Single quarterly
of service amounts service quantities          service quantities         of service quantities   statement without
                                                                                                  verification of the
                                                                                                  quantity of services
                                                                                                  produced
Payment             Payments tied to           Payments not tied to       No payment              No payment
                    performance                performance
                     Management autonomy with Management autonomy         No management           No management
Management          control over all revenues. with control over all      autonomy, continuation autonomy,
autonomy                                       revenues.                  the status quo system continuation the
                                                                                                  status quo system
Monthly activity
report submitted    Yes                          Yes                        Yes                      Yes
to district




                                                                                                                         59
HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS
The impact evaluation adapted the Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF) survey instruments for this
impact evaluation. Household surveys were conducted in each of the 14 districts included in the impact evaluation.
To select the households to be surveyed, a catchment area was first established for each of the 245 primary care
facilities. GIS mapping was conducted before the baseline survey to define realistic catchment areas for health
facilities. GIS mapping was necessary because the government does not have a clearly defined health map with
specific catchment areas. The government defines instead “Health Areas” (similar to sub-districts) that often include
several facilities. As such it was necessary to define “zones of responsibility” for each facility. This GIS mapping
defined ‘true’ catchment areas by taking into account physical features (like terrain or water bodies) and roads that
influence travel time and thereby potentially affect health facility choice. One village from each health facility
catchment area was randomly selected for the household survey. Regional maps of the study health facilities are
presented in Appendix Figures A2 – A4.

A village household listing exercise was first conducted to identify all village households. At baseline 16 of the
households identified in the listing exercise were randomly selected to be surveyed in each village. The survey team
attempted to revisit all baseline households at endline. However, many baseline households could not be located or
were no longer eligible at endline. When this occurred, baseline households were replaced using the nearest
neighbor as recorded in the listing exercise. An additional four households were added to the household sampling
roster at endline such that a total of 20 households were sampled in each village for the endline survey. In both
rounds, the primary inclusion criteria for the household survey was that the household must have contained at least
one woman who had been pregnant in the 24 months preceding the survey. Though the sample was meant to be a
panel, with repeat sampling of the same households at baseline and endline, only a small proportion of households
sampled at endline were also sampled at baseline. For instance, only 29% of the 4,813 households from which the
6,275 pregnant women surveyed at endline resided were also sampled at baseline. Therefore, the surveys are
analyzed as repeated cross-sectional surveys rather than panel data in this report.

The household survey was administered to all members of the household who were present on the day of data
collection. Demographic data including educational attainment and labor force participation was collected from all
adult members of the household. Data on recent illness and health care use in the past four weeks were collected
from all household members, with primary care givers providing information about child health. Household level
data on housing characteristics, household assets and household level income were provided by the head of
household. Additionally, the household survey contained separate modules for women of reproductive age (15 – 49
years), women who had been pregnant in the 24 months before the survey, and for children under five years of age.
The main health themes covered in these modules included:

       Health behaviors for MCH services
       Health seeking behaviors, barriers to use and health service use
       Household health expenditures
       General perceptions of health service quality

In addition, the survey teams weighed and measured the height of all children aged under 5 years present in the
household during the survey team’s visit.




                                                                                                                  60
FACILITY-BASED SURVEY
The facility survey was conducted in all the CMAs, CSIs and District Hospitals in the 14 districts included in the
impact evaluation. All facility team visits were unannounced. The facility-based survey included multiple
components. The sample of health workers, patient-provider observations and client exit interviews was selected to
enable findings from these three components to be linked.

FACILITY ASSESSMENT MODULE
The facility assessment module collected data on key aspects of facility functioning and structural aspects of quality
of care. The individual in charge of the health facility at the time when the survey team visited the health facility
was asked to be the respondent for this survey module. The main themes that were covered by the facility assessment
included:

   Facility staffing, including staff on duty at the time of the survey team’s visit and staff present at the time of the
    survey team’s visit
   Facility infrastructure and equipment
   Availability of drugs, consumables and supplies at the health facility
   Supervision
   Record keeping and reporting to the Health Management Information System
   Facility management
   Official user charges at the facility
   Revenues obtained at the health facility, and how revenues have been used

HEALTH WORKER INTERVIEW MODULE
For health facilities with more than five health workers, a list of all clinical staff who worked in the area of maternal
and child health providing prenatal or under five consultations was obtained. If this list contained more than five
people, study enumerators interviewed a random sample of these health workers. If the list contained fewer than
five people, all clinical personnel working in maternal and child health were interviewed. The interviews focused
on the following areas:

   Role and responsibilities of the interviewed health worker
   Compensation, including delays in salary payments
   Staff satisfaction and motivation

OBSERVATIONS OF PATIENT-PROVIDER INTERACTION MODULE
While the health worker interview module collects information on what health workers know, the purpose of this
module is to gather information on what health workers actually do with their patients.

A member of the survey team observed consultations with a systematic random sample of patients under five
presenting with a new condition (i.e., not for follow-up visits or routine) and new ANC clients. The observer used
a structured format to note whether key desired actions were carried out. In the case of patients under five, the
instruments were focused on whether IMCI protocols are followed. For ANC clients, the instruments examined
whether key desired actions (including counseling) were carried out. As primary care facilities do not offer ANC
services on all days of the week – typically these are offered 2 days each week – the ANC module was not conducted
at all health facilities. During the baseline survey, 5 under-5 and 5 ANC observations were conducted at each facility


                                                                                                                       61
where these modules are implemented. After finding that many health facilities did not offer ANC on the day of the
survey at baseline, during the endline survey enumerators were asked to interview as many women receiving ANC
on the day of the survey as possible to increase the sample size. All health workers selected for patient-provider
observations will be included in the health worker interview sample.

PATIENT EXIT INTERVIEWS
Enumerators conducted an exit interview with all patients whose consultation was observed as part of the study
procedures. If the patient was a child, the child’s caregiver was interviewed. The under-fives included in the patient
exit sample were the same children whose consultation with a provider was observed. In addition to this, exit
interviews were conducted with all ANC clients whose consultation with a provider was observed.




                                                                                                                   62
ANALYSIS OF HOUSEHOLD CARE SEEKING BEHAVIOR
For the household survey, a random sample of 16 to 20 households was selected in each health facility catchment
area. The analysis of the household survey in this report starts from the assumption that household members seek
care in the health facility closest to where they live, or in other words that people living in the catchment area of a
facility obtain health care in that facility.

However, it is apparent from the baseline survey data that households do not always seek care from the closest
health facility in their health zone (appendix table 8). The household survey analysis assigns a treatment group
(PBF, C1, C2 or C3), to each household in the study, which represents the treatment assignment of the closest health
facility to the sampled household. Additionally, both the baseline and the endline household survey included
information about the name of the health facility where the household sought reproductive health care. Using this
information, we created a variable that measures whether women sought care in a health facility consistent with
their assigned treatment group, a health facility assigned to another treatment group, a non-randomized hospital, or
a health facility outside of the study area. At baseline, for antenatal care, for example, 44.8% of women sought care
in a health facility assigned to their own treatment group, but 11.1% sought care in a higher level hospital (not
included in the randomization conducted for the impact evaluation) and 22.2% sought care in other health facilities
beyond their own health zone (18.7% in other facilities assigned to other treatment groups in our study sample and
3.2% in facilities not included in the study sample). Another 7.8% did not seek any antenatal care and we are missing
information about the service location for the remaining 15.7%. If we focus on women for whom we have
information about the service location, 52.3% sought care in in their “assigned” treatment group, and if we further
exclude women who did not seek any antenatal care, this percentage increases to 57.6%. This “health care shopping”
behavior whereby households bypass the closest health facility is also present for deliveries and postnatal care: at
baseline, focusing on women for whom we have information about the service location and who sought care in a
facility, only 51.9% delivered, and only 56.1% sought postnatal care in a facility with their corresponding treatment
group.

At endline, those percentages are slightly higher, but not very substantially: focusing again on women for whom
we have information about the service location and who sought care in a facility, 60.9% obtained antenatal care,
55% delivered, and 60.6% sought postnatal care in a facility assigned to their treatment group.

When the household is indeed seeking care in a health facility that is consistent with their assigned treatment group,
this assignment is correctly done. However, when the household seeks care in another facility, this assignment
between household and study group is potentially erroneous, leading to measurement error. This measurement error
would introduce statistical noise in the analysis and reduce our capacity to measure potential impacts of the
interventions (attenuation bias). Another interpretation of these patterns is to see it as non-compliance with assigned
treatments. The ITT model estimated remains valid. The causal estimates the ITT model creates may however not
fully capture the causal effect of the treatment relative to a “clean” control, but rather measure the causal impact of
having a treated facility closer compared to people living further away from a treated facility. These estimates are
likely below the true causal effect of the intervention. This is a substantial limitation of the household survey
analysis that needs to be kept in mind.

The statistical analysis and interpretation of the household survey would be further complicated if this health care
“shopping” behavior was driven or reinforced by the introduction of PBF or the interventions implemented in C1
(additional financing) and C2 (enhanced supervision). If this was the case, this could introduce a bias in the estimates
going further than the attenuation bias described above. Appendix tables 9 to 11 investigate whether the

                                                                                                                     63
implementation of PBF or the other interventions have directly influenced household’s health care seeking
behaviors. For antenatal care, deliveries and postnatal care, they report results from multinomial logit difference-
in-differences regression models where the four options for the household are: not seeking care, seeking care at the
assigned facility, i.e. the closest one in the health zone, seeking care in an unassigned facility, i.e. another facility
of the same level potentially randomized into a different impact evaluation group, and seeking care at a non-
randomized facility, generally a higher level hospital which was not included in the randomization.

Overall, the results do not suggest that the health care seeking behavior is driven or even significantly influenced
by the introduction of PBF or the other interventions in C1 and C2. We also conducted this analysis using OLS with
a binary outcome equal to 1 if the respondent sought care in a health facility in their assigned treatment group, and
zero otherwise. We found no evidence that health care shopping was affected by PBF in this analysis, consistent
with the results from the multinomial logit (Appendix Tables A4 – A6). Health care shopping behavior by
households was widespread in Cameroon at baseline in 2012 and continues to be widespread at endline in 2015,
but does not appear to be a consequence of the introduction of PBF. We therefore decided to keep the presentation
of the household survey results in which the analysis assumes that household members seek care in the health
facility closest to where they live. We recognize that this assumption is not always verified and that therefore the
results might suffer from attenuation bias. In addition to the fact that overall we did not find significant evidence
that health care seeking behavior was influenced by the introduction of PBF, the following other considerations
motivated our choice:

    1) In many cases, the data collected about which health facility was visited allowed us to find out whether the
       visited facility was the closest one, but in case it was not, did not allow us to ascertain to which study group
       the visited facility pertained.

    2) When we could ascertain to which study group the visited facility pertained, such bypassing behavior is
       clearly endogenous and assigning to the household bypassing its closest facility the study group of the
       facility actually visited would lead to endogeneity bias.

    3) The results from the household survey analysis are broadly consistent with the results from the health
       facility survey analysis, which are not affected by the measurement error introduced by the health care
       shopping behavior of households.

    4) The health care shopping behavior prevalent in Cameroon is likely present in many other countries. Our
       analysis uses the same assumptions and methods as the other impact evaluation reports including
       household survey results. However, to our knowledge, the household survey analysis in Cameroon is, so
       far, the only one to have explicitly collected or used detailed information about the name of the facility
       visited by the household sought care. We are therefore in a position to better acknowledge this study
       limitation and document how our household survey results are potentially affected by this health care
       bypassing behavior.




                                                                                                                      64
APPENDIX TABLE A3: HEALTH CARE SEEKING BEHAVIOR†
                                                                 Antenatal        Delivery      Postnatal
Baseline                                                            care            care           care
                                                                  N      %        N      %      N       %
Did not receive the health service                               214 7.78        585 21.26    1,825 66.34
Received the health service in assigned treatment group         1,231 44.75      951 34.57     440 15.99
Received the health service in different treatment group         514 18.68       361 13.12     154      5.6
Received the health service in a facility outside the study area 88      3.2      72 2.62       44      1.6
Received the health service in a non-randomized hospital         304 11.05       304 11.05     138 5.02
Missing data on service location                                 398 15.73       332 19.03     141 15.38
N                                                               2,751           2,751         2,751

                                                                  Antenatal       Delivery      Postnatal
Endline                                                              care           care          care
                                                                   N      %       N      %      N      %
Did not receive the health service                                226 6.82       582 17.57    1,954 59
Received the health service in assigned treatment group          1,626 49.09    1,358 41       705 21.29
Received the health service in different treatment group          435 13.13      395 11.93     177 5.34
Received the health service in a facility outside the study area 315 9.51        200 6.04      102 3.08
Received the health service in a non-randomized hospital          292 8.82       321 9.69      171 5.16
Missing data on service location                                  414 13.43      261 12.58     194 14.38
N                                                                3,312          3,312         3,312
†Percentages calculated from household survey data among sampled women who had been pregnant in the 24 months
before the survey.




                                                                                                          65
APPENDIX TABLE A4: HEALTH CARE SHOPPING FOR ANTENATAL CARE†
                           (1)               (2)              (3)                                                       (4)
                                     ANC in assigned ANC in unassigned                                              ANC in
                                      treatment group treatment group                                            non-randomized
                        No ANC             facility        facility                                                  facility
Post indicator           0.001              0.040          -0.060*                                                   -0.014
                        [0.014]           [0.045]          [0.033]                                                   [0.018]
PBF/Post interact        0.012              0.065           -0.021                                                    -0.019
                        [0.018]           [0.055]          [0.039]                                                   [0.024]
Control 1/Post           -0.004             0.016            0.045                                                    -0.015
interact                [0.018]           [0.054]          [0.038]                                                   [0.023]
Control 2/Post           0.015             -0.017            0.005                                                     0.016
interact                [0.020]           [0.057]          [0.041]                                                   [0.023]
N                         5407              5407             5407                                                      5407
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from multinomial logistic difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on facility bypassing
for reproductive health care. Regression model adjusted for individual (age, marital status, education level, religion, ethnicity,
working status and type of work), household control variables (number of individuals in the household, housing type, house
ownership, water source, and type of sanitation) and facility-level control variables at baseline (type of health facility, urban/rural).
Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level.



APPENDIX TABLE A5: HEALTH CARE SHOPPING FOR SKILLED DELIVERY†
                            (1)                (2)                (3)                                                    (4)
                                        Skilled delivery Skilled delivery
                                           in assigned     in unassigned                                         Skilled delivery
                                        treatment group  treatment group                                       in non-randomized
                    No skilled delivery      facility          facility                                               facility
Post indicator           -0.036*              0.064           -0.060**                                                -0.001
                         [0.020]             [0.040]           [0.030]                                               [0.017]
PBF/Post interact         0.018               0.038             0.042                                                 -0.038
                         [0.028]             [0.050]           [0.033]                                               [0.025]
Control 1/Post            -0.000              0.003            0.072**                                                -0.012
interact                 [0.030]             [0.050]           [0.034]                                               [0.023]
Control 2/Post            0.016               0.004             0.039                                                 -0.018
interact                 [0.028]             [0.048]           [0.037]                                               [0.022]
N                          5419               5419              5419                                                   5419
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from multinomial logistic difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on facility bypassing
for reproductive health care. Regression model adjusted for individual (age, marital status, education level, religion, ethnicity,
working status and type of work), household control variables (number of individuals in the household, housing type, house
ownership, water source, and type of sanitation) and facility-level control variables at baseline (type of health facility, urban/rural).
Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level.




                                                                                                                                     66
APPENDIX TABLE A6: HEALTH CARE SHOPPING FOR POSTNATAL CARE†
                            (1)                (2)               (3)                                                     (4)
                                                         Postnatal care in
                                       Postnatal care in    unassigned                                          Postnatal care in
                                      assigned treatment treatment group                                        non-randomized
                    No postnatal care    group facility       facility                                              facility
Post indicator          -0.059**            0.047*           -0.031**                                                 0.005
                         [0.025]            [0.027]           [0.016]                                               [0.010]
PBF/Post interact         -0.030            0.056*            0.030*                                                 -0.018
                         [0.032]            [0.033]           [0.018]                                               [0.014]
Control 1/Post            0.013              -0.015           0.041**                                                -0.006
interact                 [0.030]            [0.031]           [0.019]                                               [0.012]
Control 2/Post            0.014               0.010            0.014                                                 -0.006
interact                 [0.031]            [0.032]           [0.019]                                               [0.013]
N                          5634               5634             5634                                                   5634
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from multinomial logistic difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on facility bypassing
for reproductive health care. Regression model adjusted for individual (age, marital status, education level, religion, ethnicity,
working status and type of work), household control variables (number of individuals in the household, housing type, house
ownership, water source, and type of sanitation) and facility-level control variables at baseline (type of health facility, urban/rural).
Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level.




                                                                                                                                     67
APPENDIX TABLE A7: RESULTS OF HOUSEHOLD ANALYSIS WITH STRATIFICATION ON BASELINE
FACILITY BYPASSING

                        Skilled delivery                     ANC                        Postnatal care
                    Above      Below               Above     Below             Above        Below
                    median    median               median    median            median       median

                                            p-                          p-
                        β1       β2        value      β1       β2      value       β1         β2         p-value
Post indicator      0.080***    0.022                0.033    0.017            0.149***      0.036
                     [0.029]   [0.020]             [0.021]   [0.018]            [0.043]     [0.047]
PBF/Post interact     -0.060   -0.027                0.030   -0.024              -0.034     -0.008
                     [0.042]   [0.034]     0.515   [0.030]   [0.024]   0.149    [0.052]     [0.077]      0.779
Control 1/Post        0.037    -0.004               -0.040   -0.004            -0.108**      0.045
interact             [0.052]   [0.034]     0.495   [0.025]   [0.029]   0.334    [0.054]     [0.063]      0.058
Control 2/Post      -0.091**   -0.018              -0.051*   -0.040              -0.085     -0.056
interact             [0.039]   [0.039]     0.172   [0.026]   [0.028]   0.762    [0.053]     [0.057]      0.702
p-value PBF vs.                                                                   0.102      0.485
C1                   0.069     0.565               0.016     0.489
p-value PBF vs.                                                                 0.254       0.511
C2                   0.443     0.841               0.007     0.552
p-value PBF vs.                                                                 0.516       0.914
C3                   0.149     0.431               0.315     0.326
                     2797      3128                3301      2872               3455         2447




                                                                                                              68
BALANCE AT BASELINE TABLES
APPENDIX TABLE A8:     INDIVIDUAL LEVEL CHARACTERISTICS OF HOUSEHOLD MEMBERS SAMPLED AT
BASELINE*
Individual all         Mean    Mean    Mean    Mean    Mean      p-value    p-value    p-value      F-
household members        T1      C1      C2      C3     total     T1/C3     C1/C3      C2/C3     statistic     N
Age                    18.41   18.76   18.00   18.35   18.37    0.846      0.197      0.245      0.155       19232
Catholic               0.44    0.37    0.32    0.36    0.37     0.140      0.858      0.416      0.150       19196
Protestant             0.36    0.40    0.42    0.43    0.40     0.099      0.498      0.701      0.379       19196
Other religion         0.15    0.15    0.13    0.14    0.14     0.582      0.701      0.886      0.875       19196
Muslim                 0.05    0.08    0.13    0.07    0.09     0.437      0.696      0.114      0.143       19196
Kom                    0.08    0.08    0.05    0.14    0.09     0.307      0.317      0.111      0.460       19178
Banso                  0.06    0.12    0.09    0.05    0.08     0.844      0.194      0.435      0.559       19178
Other ethnicity        0.86    0.80    0.86    0.81    0.83     0.444      0.951      0.439      0.726       19178

Adults > 18 years
Years of school        5.65 5.70 5.57 5.52 5.61 0.481                   0.353         0.779      0.785       6807
Literacy               0.74 0.75 0.72 0.73 0.73 0.793                   0.580         0.857      0.882       7991
Any school             0.88 0.87 0.87 0.85 0.87 0.299                   0.636         0.651      0.775       7984
Work                   0.74 0.72 0.73 0.71 0.73 0.283                   0.936         0.432      0.609       7812
Agricultural work      0.60 0.57 0.58 0.58 0.58 0.704                   0.858         0.953      0.945       5698
Work in retail         0.14 0.16 0.16 0.15 0.15 0.593                   0.903         0.899      0.891       5698
Other type of work     0.19 0.19 0.19 0.19 0.19 0.882                   0.871         0.860      0.998       7737
Never married          0.17 0.18 0.18 0.18 0.18 0.505                   0.959         0.838      0.895       8038
Monogamous
marriage               0.45 0.46 0.47 0.45 0.46 0.905                   0.853         0.663      0.939       8038
Polygamous marriage 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.07 0.07 0.681                      0.783         0.665      0.865       8038
In union               0.21 0.17 0.17 0.19 0.18 0.584                   0.616         0.692      0.708       8038
Divorced or widowed 0.11 0.11 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.839                      0.520         0.647      0.754       8038
* Standard errors were adjusted for facility-level clustering of observations




                                                                                                                    69
APPENDIX TABLE A9: HOUSEHOLD LEVEL CHARACTERISTICS OF HOUSEHOLDS SAMPLED AT BASELINE*
                     Mean Mean Mean Mean Mean p-value p-value p-value     F-
Household              T1   C1   C2   C3 total T1/C3 C1/C3 C2/C3 statistic        N
Total number of
individuals in the
household            5.61 5.47 5.57 5.64 5.57 0.895      0.328  0.696  0.769   3457
Number of women 15
- 49                 1.39 1.33 1.35 1.39 1.37 0.894      0.145  0.309  0.357   3457
Number of kids under
5                    1.52 1.48 1.58 1.55 1.53 0.491      0.156  0.654  0.288   3457
House with multiple
flats                0.07 0.09 0.08 0.09 0.08 0.517      0.715  0.813  0.841   3457
Building with
apartments           0.10 0.10 0.11 0.09 0.10 0.685      0.750  0.518  0.932   3454
Compound             0.26 0.22 0.27 0.26 0.25 0.967      0.381  0.882  0.710   3113
House                0.25 0.22 0.23 0.23 0.23 0.391      0.878  0.758  0.775   3457
Shack                0.03 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.526      0.069  0.967  0.281   3457
Other housing type 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.547        0.205  0.218  0.520   3455
Owner occupied
dwelling - with
mortgages            0.04 0.04 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.925      0.924  0.462  0.813   3457
Owner occupied
dwelling - without
mortgages            0.65 0.60 0.62 0.64 0.63 0.895      0.409  0.738  0.767   3457
Rented housing (not
tied to the job)     0.14 0.16 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.750      0.807  0.980  0.957   3457
Housing rent free
(other owner)        0.10 0.13 0.14 0.11 0.12 0.326      0.401  0.299  0.099   3457
Other housing
payment type         0.05 0.06 0.05 0.03 0.05 0.550      0.342  0.570  0.783   3043
Piped water into the
dwelling             0.03 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.978      0.482  0.966  0.689   3457
Piped water into
yard/plot            0.09 0.07 0.07 0.06 0.07 0.328      0.788  0.885  0.754   3457
Piped water from
public tap/standpipe 0.33 0.37 0.34 0.28 0.33 0.348      0.131  0.277  0.452   3457
Water from a well or
borehole             0.06 0.09 0.14 0.07 0.09 0.718      0.567  0.055  0.146   3457
Water from a
protected well       0.05 0.03 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.876      0.403  0.413  0.438   3457

                                                                                   70
                        Mean Mean Mean Mean Mean p-value p-value p-value F-
Household                T1   C1   C2   C3 total T1/C3 C1/C3 C2/C3 statistic                      N
Water from an
unprotected well        0.06 0.05 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.546                  0.829   0.443   0.865   3457
Water from a
protected spring        0.08 0.09 0.07 0.09 0.08 0.742                  0.966   0.565   0.915   3457
Water from an
unprotected spring      0.22 0.19 0.14 0.25 0.20 0.487                  0.167   0.010   0.050   3457
Surface water puddles
lakes rivers            0.09 0.08 0.07 0.12 0.09 0.429                  0.333   0.165   0.580   3457
Latrine pit with a slab 0.30 0.33 0.31 0.26 0.30 0.410                  0.118   0.307   0.456   3455
Latrine pit without a
slab                    0.59 0.58 0.56 0.61 0.59 0.748                  0.602   0.427   0.878   3455
Other sanitation type 0.11 0.09 0.13 0.13 0.11 0.594                    0.206   0.995   0.364   3455
* Standard errors were adjusted for facility-level clustering of observations




                                                                                                       71
APPENDIX TABLE A10: FACILITY LEVEL CHARACTERISTICS AT BASELINE*
                        Mean Mean Mean Mean Mean p-value p-value                 p-value  F-
Facility                 T1     C1      C2       C3       total T1/C3 C1/C3      C2/C3 statistic    N
Number of beds in the
health facility        8.07 9.98 11.70 9.26             9.84    0.453 0.788     0.226   0.244      185
Electricity in the
health facility        0.70 0.78 0.69          0.77     0.73    0.410 0.914     0.363   0.626      206
Piped water in the
health facility        0.40 0.38 0.35          0.35     0.37    0.665 0.792     0.927   0.947      206
Facility has an
incinerator            0.08 0.22 0.24          0.23     0.19    0.033 0.914     0.932   0.027      206
Latrine in the health
facility               0.85 0.84 0.85          0.79     0.83    0.457 0.540     0.409   0.853      206
Facility open 24 hours 0.66 0.72 0.64          0.71     0.68    0.607 0.899     0.439   0.775      206
Water towel and soap
in Examination Room 0.46 0.43 0.47             0.45     0.45    0.897 0.858     0.805   0.976      199
Secure Box for Sharps 0.80 0.86 0.80           0.83     0.82    0.708 0.715     0.668   0.832      200
User Fees for
Consultation Posted 0.38 0.32 0.36             0.35     0.35    0.810 0.723     0.921   0.939      206
User Fees for
Laboratory Services
Posted                 0.34 0.35 0.37          0.23     0.32    0.257 0.225     0.154   0.460      195
Child Weighing Scale 0.87 0.88 0.94            0.83     0.88    0.595 0.460     0.069   0.222      202
Height Measure         0.41 0.43 0.45          0.53     0.46    0.253 0.303     0.430   0.663      191
Tape Measure           0.96 0.98 1.00          0.96     0.98    0.903 0.539     0.153   0.167      204
Blood Pressure
Instrument             0.86 0.90 0.87          0.85     0.87    0.836 0.468     0.777   0.895      199
Thermometer            0.98 0.94 0.95          1.00     0.97    0.317 0.079     0.079   0.067      204
Stethoscope            0.96 0.92 0.91          0.91     0.93    0.353 0.951     0.918   0.630      202
Lab services           0.74 0.80 0.82          0.77     0.78    0.686 0.727     0.557   0.760      206
Blood test             0.34 0.42 0.48          0.54     0.45    0.084 0.314     0.574   0.347      159
Malaria test           0.97 1.00 0.91          0.97     0.96    0.970 0.317     0.223   0.101      160
TB test                0.13 0.28 0.20          0.19     0.20    0.501 0.375     0.864   0.461      159
HIV test               0.11 0.23 0.18          0.22     0.18    0.194 0.880     0.703   0.402      158
Facility provided
immunization           0.98 0.96 0.95          0.98     0.97    0.944 0.582     0.366   0.734      206
Facility provides ANC 0.98 0.98 0.98           1.00     0.99    0.318 0.317     0.318   0.392      206
* Standard errors were adjusted for facility-level clustering of observations




                                                                                                         72
APPENDIX TABLE A11: BASELINE HEALTH SERVICE COVERAGE
                                                                            F-
Health service           Mean Mean Mean Mean Mean p-value p-value p-value statisti
coverage                  T1    C1   C2   C3  total T1/C3 C1/C3 C2/C3        c     N
Skilled delivery        0.77  0.75 0.78 0.76 0.77   0.864 0.920 0.790 0.981 2878
At least two ANC
visits                  0.86    0.90      0.91     0.87     0.88    0.604 0.216   0.140   0.164   2969
Tetanus vaccination
during ANC              0.86    0.88      0.86     0.86     0.87    0.881 0.428   0.830   0.862   2971
Postnatal care          0.34    0.31      0.34     0.31     0.33    0.323 0.847   0.347   0.674   2966
Use of modern
contraception           0.36    0.30      0.30     0.35    0.33     0.837 0.234   0.137   0.180   2029
Full vaccination
(documented)            0.52    0.61      0.54     0.58     0.56    0.079 0.840   0.795   0.234   796
Full vaccination
documented/self-
report                  0.53    0.66      0.59     0.62     0.60    0.355 0.593   0.495   0.497   1201
Growth monitoring       0.04    0.04      0.05     0.04     0.04    0.085 0.542   0.530   0.137   3541
Bed net use (< 5 yrs) 0.74      0.80      0.81     0.80    0.79     0.883 0.828   0.771   0.972   5786
* Standard errors were adjusted for facility-level clustering of observations




                                                                                                         73
FINANCING FIGURES


FIGURE A5: TOTAL PAYMENT PROVIDED TO T1 AND C1 HEALTH FACILITIES IN NORTH WEST

                  250,000,000
                  200,000,000
                  150,000,000
            CFA




                  100,000,000
                   50,000,000
                              0
                                    July -        2013         2014      January -
                                   December                             June 2015
                                     2012           Total T1




FIGURE A6: TOTAL PAYMENTS PROVIDED TO T1 AND C1 HEALTH FACILITIES IN SOUTH-WEST

                200,000,000

                160,000,000

                120,000,000
          CFA




                 80,000,000

                 40,000,000

                          0
                         July - December 2012 2013        2014 January - June 2015
                                                 Total T1

FIGURE A7: TOTAL PAYMENTS PROVIDED TO T1 AND C1 HEALTH FACILITIES IN EAST

                  70,000,000
                  60,000,000
                  50,000,000
                  40,000,000
            CFA




                  30,000,000
                  20,000,000
                  10,000,000
                           0
                                  July-December      2013              2014          January-June
                                       2012                                              2015

                                              Total T1      Total C1



                                                                                                    74
APPENDIX FIGURE A8: PER CAPITA SUBSIDY PAYMENTS, T1 AND C1 FACILITIES, $US

                  2.50

                  2.00

                  1.50
            USD



                  1.00

                  0.50

                  0.00
                             July-Dec 2012          2013                2014    Jan-June 2015

                                             Per capita T1   Per capita C1


APPENDIX FIGURE A9: TOTAL SUBSIDY PAYMENTS, T1 AND C1 FACILITIES, $US

                  800,000

                  700,000

                  600,000

                  500,000
            USD




                  400,000

                  300,000

                  200,000

                  100,000

                         0
                               July-Dec 2012          2013               2014   Jan-June 2015

                                                  Total T1   Total C1




                                                                                                75
PRINCIPAL RESULTS COMBINING GROUPS T1 & C1
Table A12: Coverage of reproductive health services† and provision of modern family planning‡
                               (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                           Tetanus
                            Skilled      At least two vaccine during                      Modern
                           delivery       ANC visits      pregnancy     Postnatal care contraception
Post indicator             0.052***          0.022           0.001        0.105***          0.002
                            [0.019]         [0.014]         [0.019]        [0.031]         [0.044]
PBF & T1/Post interact       -0.013          -0.006          0.014          -0.024          -0.045
                            [0.025]         [0.017]         [0.021]        [0.036]         [0.049]
Control 2/Post interact     -0.050*        -0.044**          0.010         -0.070*           0.000
                            [0.029]         [0.019]         [0.023]        [0.039]         [0.053]
p-value PBF/T1 vs. C2         0.174           0.031          0.841           0.154           0.274
p-value PBF/T1 vs. C3         0.600           0.711          0.503           0.504           0.352
Baseline mean C3              0.784           0.894          0.878          0.323           0.180
N                             5858            5974           5975            5966            4498
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on reproductive health service
use among female respondents included in the household survey who had been pregnant in the previous 24 months. ‡
Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on modern contraceptive use
among female respondents of reproductive age (15 – 49) included in the household survey. Regression models adjusted
for individual (age, marital status, education level, religion, ethnicity, working status and type of work) and household
control variables (number of individuals in the household, housing type, house ownership, water source, and type of
sanitation). Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level.




                                                                                                                      76
Table A13: Full vaccination coverage, growth monitoring, bednet use, stunting, underweight and wasting
among children†
                             (1)       (2)       (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
                           Fully
                        vaccinated Fully       Growth
                        documente vaccinated monitori
                            d by   by vaccine ng in the       Slept
                          vaccine    card or     last       under a                 Under-
                            card   self-report month        bednet      Stunting weight       Wasted
Post indicator            0.126*    0.107**    -0.014     -0.181***      -0.008     -0.010   0.047**
                          [0.072]    [0.052]   [0.013]      [0.025]     [0.025]    [0.022]    [0.021]
PBF & T1/Post interact     0.056      0.076     0.014        -0.002       0.009     0.044*     -0.016
                          [0.085]    [0.061]   [0.015]      [0.034]     [0.030]    [0.026]    [0.025]
Control 2/Post interact    0.019      0.029     0.022        0.003        0.037      0.018     -0.028
                          [0.092]    [0.073]   [0.019]      [0.036]     [0.033]    [0.028]    [0.027]
p-value PBF/T1 vs. C2      0.611      0.445     0.655         0.894       0.315      0.255      0.561
p-value PBF/T1 vs. C3      0.508      0.214     0.348         0.959       0.772      0.087      0.524
Baseline mean C3           0.599      0.645     0.048         0.809       0.444      0.147      0.067
N                          1569       2448      7055         10107        8711       8672       8480
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on child vaccination among
children (12 – 23 months), growth monitoring in the last month among children (12 – 59 months), having slept under
a bednet the night before the survey and on child anthropometric outcomes (stunting, underweight and wasting) among
children under 5 years of age included in the household survey. Regression model adjusted for individual (age, father
in the household, religion, ethnicity) and household control variables (number of individuals in the household, housing
type, house ownership, water source, and type of sanitation). Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level




                                                                                                                      77
Table A14: Provision of reproductive and child health services†
Panel A                         (1)         (2)            (3)                  (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                       Tetanus
                                                        vaccine                            Modern     Third dose
                            Skilled                     during              Postnatal    contraceptio of polio
                            delivery       ANC        pregnancy                care            n       vaccine
Post indicator                0.516        3.209     -16.895***              -3.799*        0.670     -5.284***
                            [0.797]      [3.934]        [5.563]              [2.175]       [1.006]     [1.984]
PBF & T1/Post interact       1.602*        2.303     18.858***              4.888**       7.581***      3.708*
                            [0.918]      [5.581]        [5.945]              [2.219]       [1.728]     [2.134]
Control 2/Post interact       0.041        4.014         8.783                3.498         3.369        1.106
                            [1.357]      [5.438]        [7.694]              [2.498]       [2.061]     [3.952]
p-value PBF/T1 vs. C2         0.177        0.733         0.079                0.277         0.063        0.459
p-value PBF/T1 vs. C3         0.083        0.680         0.002                0.029        <0.001        0.084
Baseline mean C3               7.76        20.57         32.84                10.22          3.02       23.90
N                             2182         2220          2220                 2220          2220         2220
Panel B                         (7)         (8)            (9)                 (10)          (11)
                          Meningitis    Measles
                            vaccine     vaccine      HIV testing             PMTCT            ART
Post indicator            -45.963***    -3.741*          4.214                -3.551        1.023*
                            [9.769]      [2.250]        [3.068]              [3.323]        [0.610]
PBF & T1/Post interact      20.432*        2.860     56.470***                 2.223         -1.077
                           [11.522]      [2.441]       [11.762]              [3.431]        [0.679]
Control 2/Post interact      8.430        -0.714         6.730                 1.644         -0.692
                           [13.555]      [3.546]        [5.773]              [3.161]        [0.596]
p-value PBF/T1 vs. C2         0.249        0.221        <0.001                 0.703          0.322
p-value PBF/T1 vs. C3         0.078        0.243        <0.001                 0.518          0.114
Baseline mean C3              46.65        20.90          9.98                 9.86          0.012
N                             2220         2220          2220                  2220           2220
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on reproductive health service
provision reported in facility registers. Monthly number of services provided during the six months before the baseline
and endline surveys used as the dependent variable. Regression models adjusted for facility controls (type of health
facility public/private/religious, urban/rural). Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level.




                                                                                                                    78
Table A15: Health care spending as reported in household data†
                                  (1)                 (2)                        (3)                   (4)
                          Official provider       Unofficial                                    Transportation
                                  fee            provider fee           Lab and x-ray fees            fees
Post indicator                  1801.95            2054.42*                  1040.46                123.38
                              [1473.53]           [1057.44]                  [711.56]              [200.81]
PBF & T1/Post interact          -913.24           -2494.01*                 -1002.42              -475.05**
                              [1458.26]           [1363.51]                  [792.18]              [231.22]
Control 2/Post interact        -1369.69            -1424.04                   -631.38               -369.07
                              [3966.29]           [1244.36]                  [884.46]              [236.28]
p-value PBF/T1 vs. C2            0.903               0.307                     0.505                 0.580
p-value PBF/T1 vs. C3            0.532               0.069                     0.207                 0.041
Baseline mean C3                1689.22             2183.33                  1603.09                910.30
N                                2374                2261                      2292                  2365
* = p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p< 0.01
† Results from difference-in-differences regression models examining the effect of PBF on health care spending in
the last 4 weeks among respondents in the household survey. Regression model adjusted for individual (age, sex)
and household control variables (number of individuals in the household, housing type, house ownership, water
source, and type of sanitation). Standard errors were clustered at the health facility level




                                                                                                                 79
WHO WELL-BEING INDEX
    (8) WHO well-being index
Now I will read five statements about how a person might be feeling. For each of the five statements,
please indicate whether in the last two weeks, you have been feeling this way most of the time, more
than half of the time, less than half of the time, only rarely, or never.




                                                                                                          
                                                                      PLEASE SHOW AND ASK TO
                                                                     PICK OUT THE COLORED AND
                                                                       NUMBERED CARDS          
                                                                    RESPONSE CODE                         
                                                                    MOST OF THE TIME                 1  
                                                                    MORE THAN HALF OF THE
                                                                                                     2
                                                                    TIME
                                                                    LESS THAN HALF OF THE
                                                                                                     3          RECORD
                                                                    TIME
                                                                                                             RESPONSE CODE
                                                                    ONLY RARELY                      4
                                                                    NEVER                            5

(8.01) In the past two weeks, I have felt cheerful and in good spirits…..                                 

(8.02) In the past 2 weeks, I have felt calm and relaxed…                                                 




                                                                                                                         80
