                                                     WPS8163


Policy Research Working Paper                       8163




Peer Effects in the Demand for Property Rights
          Experimental Evidence from Urban Tanzania

                                   Matthew Collin




Governance Global Practice Group
August 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8163


  Abstract
 This paper investigates the presence of endogenous peer                            same city. Although the exact channel is undetermined, the
 effects in the adoption of formal property rights. Using data                      evidence points toward complementarities in the reduc-
 from a unique land titling experiment held in an unplanned                         tion in expropriation risk, as peer effects are strongest
 settlement in Dar es Salaam, the analysis finds a strong,                          between households living close to each other and there
 positive impact of neighbor adoption on the household’s                            is some evidence that peer effects are strongest for house-
 choice to purchase a land title. The paper also shows that                         holds most concerned with expropriation. The results show
 this relationship holds in a separate, identical experiment                        that, within the Tanzanian context, households will rein-
 held a year later in a nearby community, as well as in admin-                      force each other’s decisions to enter formal tenure systems.
 istrative data for more than 160,000 land parcels in the




  This paper is a product of the Governance Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide
  open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research
  Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be contacted at mcollin@
  worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
            Peer Eﬀects in the Demand for Property Rights:
             Experimental Evidence from Urban Tanzania
                                          Matthew Collin∗†




       Keywords: Peer eﬀects, Technology adoption, Land tenure, Tanzania, Unplanned settlements
       JEL classiﬁcation: P14, Q15
   ∗
     World Bank; Email: mcollin@worldbank.org
   †
     I would like to thank Bet Caeyers, Stefan Dercon, Marcel Fafchamps, James Fenske, and Imran Rasul
for their support, discussions and suggestions, as well as Stefano Cari, Martina Kirchberger, Jan Loeprick,
Lara Tobin and participants of the CSAE, DIAL, GREThA, NEUDC conferences and LSE SERC and
Rockwool seminars for helpful comments and suggestions. I am also indebted to Daniel Ayalew Ali, Klaus
Deininger, Stefan Dercon, Justin Sandefur and Andrew Zeitlin for their design and implementation of
(and my involvement in) the land titling research project from which this analysis was made possible.
Finally, I am grateful to Andrew Zeitlin, who provided many helpful thoughts and discussions at the early
stages of the analysis, as well as quick access to some of the administrative data presented in this paper.
1        Introduction
The formalization of property rights is considered by many to be crucial to the institution-
al development of societies as well as a path out of poverty for informal property owners
(De Soto 2000). Land titling is seen as one of the most fundamental steps in this process,
despite mixed evidence of its immediate beneﬁts (Field 2005; Galiani and Schargrodsky
2010). While these schemes seem particularly urgent in the face of massive levels of urban
growth, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, very little is known about how to successfully
propagate new tenure regimes.
    The context for this paper is Dar es Salaam, which throughout its history has been
shaped by a constant battle between authorities desperate to maintain control over the
city’s development and the ongoing pressure of informal growth and migration from rural
areas. This struggle has roots as far back as the times of British colonial rule, when
the colonial authorities tried, but largely failed to introduce a formal land title system
to help contain the expansion of a growing Indian population (Brennan 2007). Despite
half a century of of large-scale urban planning and ‘strict’ government control over the
allocation of land, Dar es Salaam remains largely informal today, with over 80% of land
belonging to unplanned, unrecognized settlements (Kombe 2005). It is hardly surprising
then that the Tanzanian government, like many others dealing with rapid urban growth,
has been keen to ﬁnd innovative ways to sustainably introduce a formal tenure system,
both to increase its control over the growth of its urban areas as well as tap into a new
base of revenue.
    One facet of both tenure adoption and other formalization decisions that is often
overlooked is how individuals’ decisions to enter the formal system might co-vary with
one another. Here, I investigate whether the adoption of formal property rights appears
to be contagious, where the action of one agent adopting a new type of tenure increases
the chance that another does the same. In the peer eﬀects literature these are known as
endogenous peer eﬀects (Manski 1993).
    The existence of endogenous peer eﬀects in property rights adoption would be mean-
ingful for several reasons. First, the existence of adoption spillovers is informative as to
whether or not property rights should be considered solely as a private good, or as one
with substantial spatial externalities. Secondly, if the channel through which adoption
peer eﬀects operate can be identiﬁed, we might learn something more about the expected
beneﬁts of titling. Finally, even if the exact mechanisms remain hidden, the presence
of positive endogenous peer eﬀects is interesting from a policy perspective, as interven-
tions aimed at encouraging take up would have a subsequent knock-on eﬀect on others,
otherwise known as a social multiplier eﬀect (Glaeser, Scheinkman, and Sacerdote 2003).
    Endogenous peer eﬀects are notoriously diﬃcult to identify, as they are subject to
both ‘reﬂection’ bias (where the direction of causality cannot be determined) and corre-
lated eﬀects (where shared unobservable characteristics drives similar decisions). In this
paper, I overcome these standard identiﬁcation challenges by using exogenous variation
in land title purchases resulting from a unique land titling experiment1 in the unplanned
settlements of Dar es Salaam. The experiment randomly allocated a subset of informal
landowners to treatment groups which received massive subsidies to obtain a land ti-
tle, leaving others excluded. I then combine this variation in the incentive to title with
spatial information on the location and treatment status of each household’s set of nearest-
neighbors, allowing me to identify the impact of each neighbor’s adoption decision on the
    1
        The experiment is described in detail in Ali, Collin, Deininger, Dercon, Sandefur, and Zeitlin (2016).


                                                        2
probability that a given household will purchase a land title. This approach is similar to
a number of studies which use randomised selection into a programme to identify peer
eﬀects (Duﬂo and Saez 2003; Lalive and Cattaneo 2009; Bobonis and Finan 2009; Oster
and Thornton 2012; Carter, Laajaj, and Yang 2014). These results suggest that there are
strong, positive endogenous peer eﬀects in land title adoption. In my main speciﬁcation,
the probability that a household chooses to purchase a land title increases by 8-15% for
every neighbor that also chooses to purchase one, an eﬀect equivalent in size to a 25-50%
discount on the price of the land title. I also show that these results not only diminish
with distance, but they appear to be operating primarily through physical proximity,
rather than social proximity, and are not necessarily due to the exchange of information.
Furthermore, I show that there is some evidence that households with a higher ex-ante
perception of expropriation risk are more responsive to the behavior of their neighbors,
suggesting that there are strategic complementarities in adoption to those most fearful of
expropriation. For robustness, I show that these results hold for some basic changes to
the structure of the peer group. I then go on to show that these results remain roughly
consistent for an identical experiment rolled out in a neighboring community a year later.
Finally, I turn to a database covering roughly 170,000 land parcels in Dar es Salaam,
using popular non-experimental methods of identifying peer eﬀects to show that positive
eﬀects also exist in this larger setting, albeit with a slightly diﬀerent type of land title.
    In the next section, I discuss the setting of urban Tanzania in more detail, as well as
the types of land titles this paper will be covering. Section 3 covers some reasons why
peer eﬀects in land titling take-up are likely to exist. Section 4 outlines the randomised
controlled trial which I will exploit to identify peer eﬀects. Section 5 discusses identiﬁ-
cation and the empirical set up. Section 6 covers the main results of the paper, Section
7 covers the results from the second experiment and administrative data, and I conclude
with Section 8.



2       Land tenure in urban Tanzania
In Tanzania, formal access to urban land is controlled exclusively by the government, as
all land in the country is owned by the Oﬃce of the President (Kironde 1995). Given the
rates of growth that Tanzania’s cities experienced, the post-independence management
and distribution of urban land has generally been haphazard and insuﬃcient (Kombe
2005). Following the 1999 Land Act, the Tanzanian government introduced two new forms
of land tenure in urban areas in an attempt to pave the way for more rapid formalization
of existing settlements. The ﬁrst form of tenure was a temporary, two-year leasehold
known as a residential license (RL), which had the beneﬁt of being cheap and easy to
implement, but lacked many of the features desired in full titles, such as perpetual security,
transferability and collateralizability.
     The second form of tenure has been considered to be much closer to a full land title:
a certiﬁcate of right of occupancy (CRO) lasts 99 years, is transferable and is seen by
many, including providers of credit, as reasonable proof of land ownership. Despite the
obvious appeal of the CRO, the Tanzanian government has largely failed to encourage
urban land owners to purchase them.2 The lack of progress has been principally due to
    2
    Records from the Kinondoni Municipality in Dar es Salaam indicate that a little over 2,000 applications
from CRO have been made, out of a total population of 60,000 land parcels.



                                                    3
the large practical and monetary hurdles that urban landowners face, including expensive
prerequisites such as cadastral surveying and application fees (Collin, Dercon, Nielson,
Sandefur, and Zeitlin 2012).


The beneﬁts of CRO ownership
     While the Land Act includes relatively straightforward provisions on the legality of
using CROs to obtain credit or sell land, the interaction between CRO ownership, ex-
propriation and compensation is less clear. The Land Acquisition Act of 1967 gives the
Tanzanian government broad powers to expropriate land for “any public purpose”, even
if the owner is in possession of a CRO. This includes government schemes, general pub-
lic use, sanitary improvements, upgrading or planning, developing airﬁelds or ports and
uses related to mining or minerals. Indeed, recent history suggests such expropriation
seems most likely to occur from government-driven development initiatives (Hooper and
Ortolano 2012). While exact ﬁgures on government expropriation are not known, the
practice seems frequent enough to elicit alarm in the media: Kironde (2009) found six
expropriation-related stories in local newspapers in just one week.
     While the Tanzanian government is legally obligated to relocate displaced residents
and provide adequate compensation when it acquires land, case studies of recent land con-
ﬂicts reveal that these eﬀorts are at best mismanaged and at worst completely neglected
(Kombe 2010). While a CRO does not legally protect a household from expropriation, it
might very well indirectly protect a land parcel from government expropriation by raising
the value of said land and making the compensation transfer more straightforward. The
Land Acquisition Act only provides for compensation in the case where the owner can be
identiﬁed (Ndezi 2009). Incidents of government expropriation of urban land reported in
newspapers and in case studies suggest that informal settlements face the highest risk, so
there is reason to believe that, when faced with a choice, governments will usually go for
the low-hanging fruit of untitled land.
     Even if CRO ownership had no discernable impact on the probability of expropriation,
many residents still believe that it does. As part of the baseline data collection for
the experiment used in this paper, residents of two unplanned settlements were asked
about their perceived probability of full expropriation in the next ﬁve years. Respondents
were asked to condition their predictions on hypothetically having no title at all, having
a residential license, or having a CRO.3 Figure 1 displays local-polynomial smoothing
estimates of the cumulative density function for each response.4 It is clear, at least for
a substantial portion of residents, that CROs are perceived to be eﬀective at mitigating
expropriation risk. As mentioned before, the Land Act also establishes the legal basis
for CROs to be used as collateral for loans. Anecdotal discussions with formal lenders
in Dar es Salaam suggests that, while CROs are readily accepted as collateral, they do
not necessarily oﬀer a substantial beneﬁt over than of a residential license. Still, evidence
from the baseline survey used for the experiment described in this paper suggests that
households, on average, also expect that CROs will lead to an increase in both credit
supply and land values. While it is clear that households recognize a private beneﬁt to
titling, what this fails to reveal is whether or not landowners perceive any externalities
   3
    The order of the conditional questions were randomized to avoid priming the respondents.
   4
    While responses to the expropriation question were discrete bins, diﬀerences in perceived risk are
easier to discern using this method. Paired Kolmorogov-Smirnov tests of equality of distributions (not
shown) reject the null in every instance.


                                                  4
          Figure 1: Perceived impact of formal land tenure on expropriation risk




Note: Graph shows local-polynomial smoothed cumulative densities of self-reported perceived
expropriation probability, conditional on (hypothetical) ownership of diﬀerent forms of land titles. Data
taken from baseline census of landowners in Kigogo Kati and Mburahati Barafu wards in Kinondoni
Municipality, Dar es Salaam.



in adoption which would give rise to peer eﬀects, a possibility I will explore further in
Section 3.
    Before describing the experimental setting where people have been induced to adopt
this new form of land title, I will ﬁrst consider the reasons why we might expect peer
eﬀects in CRO adoption to exist in this context.



3     Peer eﬀects in land rights adoption
Most work on formal property rights bundles the beneﬁts and expected impacts of titling
into three broad categories, initially summarised by Besley (1995) and later expanded
upon in Besley and Ghatak (2010). The ﬁrst of these is through an (expected) reduction
in expropriation risk: formalization should, in theory, reduce the chance a landowner loses
his or her land to either the state or other individuals. In most theoretical contexts, the
beneﬁts of reducing expropriation risk are strictly private and positive. Tenure formal-
ization is also expected to make it easier for landowners access credit by giving them the
ability to collateralize their property. Finally, formalization is expected to increase the
transferability of land, allowing landowners to take advantage of rising land prices and
for ownership to shift to those who can use it most productively.
    With the exception of general equilibrium credit market and land price impacts, which
are often ambiguous (Besley and Ghatak 2010), many of these beneﬁts are often modeled
as private returns, with the act of one landowner having obtained formal land tenure
having no impact on other landowners. There are a number of reasons why there might
be immediate, direct spillovers from the decision to buy a land title, both of which have
implications for the existence of peer eﬀects. In this section I will consider the most

                                                    5
plausible ones, given the context, and then discuss how, in this paper, I will attempt to
discern between them.


Complementarity or substitutability in the returns to land title adoption
    One particular area which remains understudied is whether or not there are spillovers
in the returns to adopting formal property rights. Individual formalization eﬀorts, such as
land titling, might not only result in a private beneﬁt, but might also impact the returns
to titling for other individuals. We might, for example, expect that the returns to titling
would be increasing in the number of neighbors taking the same action. This is the classic
case of strategic complementarity, when the private returns to an action are greater when
other agents also take it (Schelling 1978; Bulow, Geanakoplos, and Klemperer 1985). In
the above example, this would be the case when the cross-partial derivative is greater
than zero, with household i’s returns to titling increasing as more neighbors adopt.
    Where might we see strategic complementarities in practice? For one, there might be
a snowballing eﬀect in the reduction in expropriation risk, with the government taking
formal tenure more seriously as more people adopt it, possibly due to the rising implicit
costs of paying out compensation or because a legal appeal against expropriation is in-
creasingly more likely to succeed with each additional titled household. However, even in
the presence of strategic complementarities, expropriation spillovers might not be entirely
positive. If, for example, a government decides to expropriate land which has the lowest
level of formal tenure, the act of land titling might just shift expropriation risk from one
set of households to another. In this instance, households will be induced to title when
their neighbors do the same, not because the decision leads to a net gain in welfare, but
because they must do so to prevent a rise in their risk of expropriation. This implies
that titling creates a ‘race to the bottom,’ where all households title in order to improve
their security of tenure, but are no better oﬀ at the end of the titling scheme. This result
is akin to De Meza and Gould’s (1992) burglar alarm example: while there is a private
beneﬁt for a given household installing a burglar alarm, it increases the probability of
neighboring houses being burgled and hence a no-alarm equilibrium is preferable to an
all-alarm one.
    Complementarities might also exist in the other standard beneﬁts of land titling. For
example, banks may be more likely to accept land titles as form of collateral if they are
widely used and accepted in a community (Fort, Ruben, and Escobal 2006) or the impacts
of titling on land prices might increase as more neighbors adopt.5 In some contexts the
formalization of land might also be viewed from the perspective of compliance, where
expectations of enforcement and social norms can play a roll. Landowners face a similar
dilemma to that of ﬁrms or individual taxpayers deciding to register for or pay tax. There
is growing evidence that potential taxpayers respond positively the decisions of their
immediate peers, either because it changes their priors on the probability of enforcement
or because it signals a shift in social norms (Chetty 2014; Drago, Mengel, and Traxler
2015; Alm, Bloomquist, and McKee 2016).
    Of course, titling decisions could also be substitutes: if the marginal utility from titling
   5
    Note that both of these channels might also be subject to net negative impacts. If banks switch to a
regime where formal titles are the only legitimate form of collateral, non-adopting households might be
rationed out of the market (Van Tassel (2004) shows a similar result might happen even if all households
are given title. Similarly, if titles become the de facto means of transferring property, households relying
on informal channels may feel the need to adopt if they are to sell in the future.



                                                     6
decreases as more neighbors take up, then household i will be more likely to opt out.6
If the main beneﬁts of titling are through reducing expropriation risk, this would reﬂect
a context where low levels of titling are enough to deter a government from clearing an
area, and so subsequent titling is less eﬀective. Similarly, some have argued that the
credit-supply eﬀects of large scale titling will be smaller than individual titling: if lenders
consider titling to be a signal of borrower quality, rather than as a collateralizable asset,
then large-scale titling would imply a lower signal-to-noise ratio (Dower and Potamites
2012).
    Strategic complementarity (substitutability) in the returns to titling would imply a
positive (negative) endogenous peer eﬀect, as the eﬀect of neighbor take-up increases (de-
creases) the marginal beneﬁt to titling for a given household. For most of the impacts
discussed here, we would also expect these spillovers to be inherently spatial: both ex-
propriation risk and land values are typically highly correlated across space (as might be
collateral values, as lenders might be more conﬁdent in extending loans to areas they are
already familiar with). Later on on this paper, I will take advantage of the spatial nature
of the data to discern whether or not the observed endogenous peer eﬀect varies with
distance.


Learning and rule-of-thumb behavior
    Peer eﬀects might also arise from learning behavior: based on their peers’ experience,
individuals update their beliefs on the eﬃcacy of a product. This ‘social learning’ behavior
has already been revealed in the decision of farmers to adopt new farming techniques or
new types of crops (Bandiera and Rasul 2006; Conley and Udry 2010; Zeitlin 2012). This
could equally apply to landowners in urban areas who observe their neighbors obtaining
land titles and possibly being secure from expropriation, gaining access to credit or selling
at a high price. Yet, in the context of this study, the beneﬁts of holding a land title would
be impossible to measure: as I will discuss in the next section, land titles were ultimately
not issued for landowners involved in the ﬁeld experiment. This prevents the sort of
wait-and-see learning observed in previous studies.
    However, if landowners believe that the adoption decisions of their peers reveal their
knowledge about the beneﬁts of land titling, high rates of peer adoption may act as a
signal for high returns. Recent evidence suggest that peers’ adoption decisions transmit
important information, irrespective of actual adoption outcomes (Bursztyn et al. 2014).
In this circumstance, any observed endogenous peer eﬀects would be unambiguously pos-
itive, as take-up conveys a signal of high-returns to titling.
    It is normally diﬃcult to disentangle peer eﬀects created by strategic complementari-
ties from signaling/learning behavior. However, we might expect peer eﬀects determined
by the latter to transmit through traditional social networks, as households observe the
behavior of not only their neighbors, but also their friends and acquaintances. Later in
this paper, after establishing that that endogenous peer eﬀects in land title take-up exist
between spatially-proximate households, I will then take advantage of some basic social
network data to investigate whether or not endogenous peer eﬀects also exist across this
alternate network structure, which would suggest that eﬀects other than complementari-
ty/substitutability spillovers are at play.
   6
     This opens the door for standard public goods/collective action problems, as everyone has a private
incentive to disinvest if they know their neighbor is investing.



                                                   7
Other channels
    Another concern might be strategic expropriation on the part of those obtaining a
land title, with early-movers grabbing a portion of their neighbor’s land by making an
early claim. While this might be a concern in other settings, it is unlikely to be a factor
here, as contiguous neighbors must sign oﬀ on the CRO application forms aﬃrming the
boundaries of the plot. Furthermore, these sorts of actions would still fall under the
‘complementarity’ channel: if adopting a CRO protects me from my neighbor’s attempt
to grab land, my neighbor’s action increases the marginal gain from adopting that title.
    Finally, there might be information-transfer peer eﬀects, where households learn about
the beneﬁts of CRO adoption and share this information, then make entirely independent
decisions to title. I will discuss this channel and my attempt to rule it out more in the
next section.



4     Experimental design and data collection
As I described in the Section 2, most households in Dar es Salaam face formidable barriers
to the adoption of formal land titles. In this section, I will describe an experimentally-
provided land titling program designed to overcome these barriers. The experiment,
conceived as part of an impact evaluation of CRO adoption, is described in detail in
Ali, Collin, Deininger, Dercon, Sandefur, and Zeitlin (2016). The random variation in
CRO adoption induced by the experiment will then be used to identify the impact of a
neighbor’s adoption on a given household’s propensity to adopt.

4.1   An experimental land titling program
The setting is Kinondoni, which is the largest of the three municipalities which make up
Dar es Salaam and houses approximately 50% of the city’s population. The land titling
program was introduced in two adjacent neighborhoods (known as sub-wards or mitaa ),
ﬁrst in Mburahati Barafu then a year later in Kigogo Kati. Barafu will be the main focus
of this paper, due to the completeness and robustness of its data, although I will be using
the subsequent replication in Kati as a robustness check in Section 7.1.
    Both neighborhoods are located approximately ﬁve kilometers from the city center.
While there are a number of pre-planned parcels at the core of each settlement, each mtaa
is primarily composed of unplanned, informal settlements. Table 1 displays some basic
administrative data from both neighborhoods alongside Kinondoni as a whole. Typical of
most informal settlements, Barafu is a high density area with relatively low reported land
values and a lack of access to public services and infrastructure. Informality is the norm
here, with very few households holding formal tenure: estimates from a baseline census
of Barafu put the total number of CRO owners at around 10 households, less than 1% of
the community, and administrative data suggests less than 40% of households have ever
purchased a residential license.
    In October, 2010, the University of Oxford and the World Bank began implementing
a land titling program ultimately aimed at identifying the impact of CRO adoption in
Barafu. This was done in partnership with the Woman’s Advancement Trust (WAT),
a Tanzanian NGO which specializes in large-scale titling programs. The intervention
proceeded as follows: prior to launching the land titling program, all land parcels in
Barafu were identiﬁed via a household listing of the community and a recent map drawn

                                            8
                  Table 1: Summary Statistics on Parcel Characteristics

                                              Kinondoni            Kigogo           Mburahati
                                             Municipality           Kati             Barafu
    Formal employment                           49.9%              44.6%             44.3%
    Size and Value of Property
       Area in square meters                      439                264               247
       Property value in ’000 TSh.              12,562              9,939             8,910
       Land rent in TSh.                         3,679              2,125             1,907
    Accessibility to the Property
       No access                                 1.3%                1.1%              1.1%
       Foot path                                 55.2%              71.3%             82.0%
       Feeder road                               36.4%              19.8%             16.2%
       Main road                                 5.5%               6.6%               0.6%
       Highway                                   1.6%               1.1%               0.0%
    Access to Public Utilities
       Piped water (incl. public)                22.7%              22.0%              5.6%
       Electricity connection                    46.1%              38.6%             35.1%
    Waste removal services
       Burn/buried on plot                      35.4%               25.4%             55.7%
       Gutter/river/street                      20.0%               49.6%             35.4%
       Collected by priv. company               40.8%               24.4%              8.4%
       Collected by municipality                 3.8%                0.7%              0.5%
    Number of properties                        65,535              1,474               990
   Source: Author’s calculations based on the land registry maintained by Kinondoni Municipality.


up by a town-planning ﬁrm. This map was used to divide the community up into 20
‘blocks’ of roughly 40-50 parcels each. Using a set of basic characteristics taken from
the listing to establish balance, 10 blocks were randomly allocated to a treatment group
and ten to a control group. Balance results for the overall treatment are available in
Table 12 in Appendix A.1. Figure 2 shows the map of Barafu with treatment and control
blocks outlined. Parcels in treatment blocks (and their owners) were subject to several
interventions:

  1. All parcels in treatment blocks were subject to a cadastral survey (demarcation of
     boundaries using cement beacons), one of the prerequisites for applying for a CRO.

  2. Parcels in treatment blocks were invited to meetings to discuss involvement in the
     land titling program and the beneﬁts of CRO ownership, run by WAT.

  3. During these meetings and subsequent follow-up visits, treatment parcels were invit-
     ed to pay 100,000 TSh to WAT (approximately $62, the average cost of the cadastral
     surveying plus application fees) over a period of about ﬁve months in return for a
     CRO. In exchange for this, WAT would manage the application process and any
     related fees.

  4. Within treatment blocks, parcels were randomly allocated voucher discounts through
     a public lottery. Two types of vouchers were allocated: general vouchers, which were
     redeemable without condition, and conditional vouchers, which required that a fe-
     male member of the household be included as an owner on the ﬁnal documents. A
     parcel could receive both voucher types, just one type, or none at all, and vouchers


                                                 9
                  Figure 2: Treatment and control blocks in Mburahati Barafu




                              Note: Treatment blocks are shaded grey.


        could take on values of 20, 40, 60 or 80 thousand shillings.7

    Following this, households in treatment blocks were free to sign up and begin repay-
ment. Through an agreement with the municipal government, treated households could
not obtain a CRO through conventional means, only through the NGO. Households in
control blocks were free to obtain CROs through the municipality, at the regular cost,
although a subsequent review of municipal records revealed that none have done so to
date.
    The project began in late 2010 and repayment in both subwards took place throughout
2011 and much of 2012. However, following this initial repayment period, the Tanzanian
government made a number of decisions which prevented CROs from being issued to
the residents of the study area. After Dar es Salaam was subject to a high degree of
ﬂooding in late 2011, the Ministry of Lands decided to classify a large proportion of the
study area as being ineligible to be covered by a CRO due to its proximity to low-lying,
ﬂood prone areas of the city. This, combined with the Ministry’s decision to drastically
(and unexpectedly) raise the price of obtaining a CRO, led to substantial delays in the
processing of CROs. Ultimately, in 2015 the project determined it would not be able to
guarantee that households in the community would be able to receive a CRO and instead
oﬀered residents the option to have their contributions refunded with interest.
    Despite the fact that the project was ultimately unsuccessful, the payments made by
residents of Mburahati Barafu and Kigogo Kati during the ﬁrst two years of the project
represent concrete, credible decisions made at a time when the project did appear to
be moving forward. As is described in more detail in Ali et al. (2016), there was no
expectation by either the residents, the participating NGO or the researchers that the
project would fail.
  7
      Complete details of the voucher allocation process are discussed in Ali et al. (2016)




                                                     10
4.2     Data sources
In this paper I use three primary sources of data from Barafu. The ﬁrst was collected prior
to the randomised intervention: in the summer of 2010, roughly six months before the
start of the land titling program, the University of Oxford conducted a complete census of
all known parcels in Barafu, using records obtained from the Kinondoni Municipality. For
each parcel, an owning household was identiﬁed and interviewed, resulting in a rich data
set of owner and parcel characteristics. However, as this data was collected earlier and
used a diﬀerent sample frame than the administrative project data, there are a number of
missing observations, mainly due to parcels which were missed during the baseline census
or those that were sold to a new owner in the interim. Baseline data are available for
roughly 92% of unplanned parcels in treatment blocks, but only 72% of control blocks
have linked baseline data, due to a lack of project information for these households. I will
use these data both for testing balance and for controls in my main speciﬁcation.
    The second is detailed parcel-level data taken from project records, including meeting
attendance, sign-up and repayment information. As households in control blocks were
excluded from participating in the project, this data only contains information on treated
parcels. However, data obtained from the Kinondoni municipality reveals that no parcels
in the control blacks purchased a CRO during the time frame of the project. Finally, the
third source of data I use is detailed geographic information service (GIS) encoded data
on the location, shape and size of each parcel in both treatment and control areas.8 This
will allow me to calculate ‘nearest-neighbor’ peer groups for every parcel and compare the
probability of a household choosing to purchase a CRO with the average adoption rate of
that household’s nearest-neighbor set.
    Throughout the remainder of the paper, I will primarily be using unplanned parcels
in the analysis, as this group was the original target of the research. While there is
complete project data and limited baseline data on planned parcels (those who were in a
pre-planned area or had already obtained a cadastral survey prior to the intervention), I
will only be using them as a robustness check for the main result.



5       Identiﬁcation of peer eﬀects
Consider a basic linear probability model for household i’s decision to adopt a land title:

                      Ti = α + ρT g(−i) + xi β + xg(−i) δ + ui +   g   + εi               (1)
Where Ti is the household’s choice to adopt a land title, T g(−i) is the average choice of the
households group of neighbors g (excluding i), xi is a vector of household characteristics,
xg(−i) is the same set averaged over the group, ui is a household-speciﬁc eﬀect and g is a
vector of group-speciﬁc characteristics. Using Manski’s (1993) terminology, ρ is known as
the endogenous eﬀect, the impact of i’s neighbors’ choices on i’s choice. The parameter
δ represents a vector of eﬀects stemming from i’s neighbors’ characteristics, known as
exogenous or contextual eﬀects. Finally, g contains unobserved within-group correlated
eﬀects.
    There are two primary challenges to the identiﬁcation of ρ, the parameter of interest.
    8
   This data was taken from a ‘town plan’ of Barafu, the ﬁnal planning document drawn up for a
community before CROs can be provided



                                             11
The ﬁrst is a result of Manski’s ‘reﬂection problem’, where the direction of causality is
diﬃcult to discern. At ﬁrst glance, we are unable to identify whether ρ captures aggregate
eﬀects of i’s neighbors’ adoption on i or vice versa. In the extreme case where peer groups
are perfectly transitive,9 it is diﬃcult to separately identify endogenous peer eﬀects ρ and
the set of contextual eﬀects δg .10 However, when peer or neighbor groups are partially
overlapping (i.e. when the neighbors of i’s neighbors can reasonably be excluded from
i’s neighbor set) identiﬁcation is made possible by exploiting variation in characteristics
of these excluded neighbors (Bramoull´     e et al. 2009; De Giorgi et al. 2010), a popular
method I will apply to a larger, non-experimental data set in Section 7.2.
    The second concern is over conﬂating endogenous peer eﬀects with correlated eﬀects.
The latter can arise when peer groups or neighbors are aﬀected by common background
characteristics or shocks which also predict adoption. For example, if land title adop-
tion depends on unobserved (to the researcher) land quality, then adoption rates will be
correlated across neighbors even in the absence of endogenous eﬀects. Similarly, if the
endogenous sorting of households into peer groups or neighbor sets is marked by homophi-
ly, then correlated adoption decisions might solely be the result of correlated individual
characteristics, such as wealth or risk aversion.
    In this paper, I use the random variation in the price and accessability of land title
purchase to identify exogenous changes in Tg(−i) , allowing me to estimate (1) using two-
stage least squares (2SLS) with reduced concerns for correlated eﬀects and reﬂection. I do
this using the percentage of household i’s neighbors who were included in treatment blocks
as well as their average voucher values11 as instruments for the average adoption of the
neighbor set. Since households in control blocks were eﬀectively excluded from purchasing
CROs, the sample will only cover households in treated blocks (although I will consider
neighbors from both treatment and control blocks). I will discuss the suitability of these
instruments and possible reasons why identiﬁcation might still fail in the next subsection.
    While many studies have used random variation in group assignment to estimate peer
eﬀects (Sacerdote 2001; Guryan, Kroft, and Notowidigdo 2009), my approach in this
paper is more similar to those which use random variation in program assignment as an
instrument for peer-level adoption. For example, both Lalive and Cattaneo (2009) and
Bobonis and Finan (2009) use the random assignment of a conditional cash subsidy in
PROGRESA villages to instrument for the school enrollment of a child’s peer group.
Similarly, Oster and Thornton (2012) use the random assignment of menstrual pads to
Nepalese school girls to study the impact of group-level treatment on individual utilization
of the pads. Both Godlonton and Thornton (2012) and Ngatia (2011) use randomized
price incentives to get tested for HIV/AIDS in Malawi to instrument for peer group
testing. In each of these studies, social interactions are treated as a speciﬁc type of
treatment spillover: an individual’s peer group is randomly shocked and the resulting
change in behavior aﬀects the individual’s adoption choice. This method was ﬁrst laid
out by Robert Moﬃtt as the partial-population approach (Moﬃtt et al. 2001).
    There are a couple of caveats to the interpretation of ρ using the partial-population
approach. First, while properly instrumenting Tg(−i) solves the reﬂection problem and
bypasses any group or individual-level unobservables, the resulting estimate of ρ is the
   9
     Transitivity implies that if i and j are peers and j and k are peers, then i and k must also be peers.
  10
     Brock and Durlauf (2001) exploit nonlinearities in discrete choice models to identify linear-in-means
models, yet identifying assumptions are heavily dependent on functional form, and do not allow for
correlated eﬀects.
  11
     Averaged over included-neighbors. For precision I use both regular and conditional vouchers sepa-
rately.


                                                    12
endogenous peer eﬀect, conditional on groups already having formed endogenously. These
‘true’ peer eﬀects might be stronger or weaker for households which have chosen to live
together as opposed to those randomly sorted into the same neighborhood. For instance,
households from the same religious background might be more likely to associate and share
information about adoption decisions. In this instance, we might expect the estimate of
ρ, post-endogenous sorting, to be higher than the estimate under random sorting.
    Which estimate do we care about? While the ‘randomly-assigned’ endogenous peer
eﬀect might be more appealing to those concerned with pure social interactions, in reality
the policy maker has little control over the formation of these peer groups, in which
case the ‘post-sorting’ endogenous peer eﬀect is clearly the preferred parameter. In the
context of urban formalization, most policy makers are burdened with the signiﬁcant
task of getting large, informal settlements to take up formal property rights. As these
settlements have not formed randomly, the post-sorting peer eﬀect gives us an idea as to
whether signiﬁcant policy multipliers are present for property rights interventions.
    Another issue follows directly from using 2SLS with an exogenous treatment instru-
ment to identify peer eﬀects. Under the assumption of heterogenous eﬀects, instrumental
variables regressions only allow the researcher to identify the local average treatment
eﬀect (LATE) (Imbens and Angrist 1994). The implications of this for the estimation
of peer eﬀects are nonnegligible. For example, when using the block-level treatment as
an instrument for neighbor adoption, the eﬀect identiﬁed ρ is only deﬁned for complier-
s, households whose neighbors were induced to adopt from the treatment, but otherwise
would have not done so. As mentioned in the previous section, there are no always-takers,
so estimates of ρ using project treatment of an instrument will only be leaving out never-
takers, those that do not respond to the treatment. If we have reason to believe that peer
eﬀects are heterogenous, then LATE estimates of ρ might deviate substantially from the
average treatment eﬀect estimate. The peer eﬀects literature has largely been silent on
this issue, with some exceptions.12
    Finally, it should be emphasized that while the randomized control trial described
above has generated geographic variation in the take-up of CROs, the block-level RCT
itself was not designed for the purpose of of studying peer eﬀects. Thus most13 of the
identifying variation in take-up will be generated by the large-scale block-level variation
in treatment. While this is not as precise as a parcel-level treatment, identiﬁcation will
be possible as long as treated neighbors are not systematically diﬀerent from untreated
neighbors or households with treated neighbors are systematically diﬀerent than those
without. To allay any concerns, I will show in Section 5.2 that when compared using
baseline data, treated and untreated parcels are, on the whole, very similar.

5.1    Challenges to identiﬁcation
Even though the instruments I use in this paper are randomly drawn, there are still a
number of ways the above identiﬁcation strategy might be undermined. For instance,
despite the randomization, a bad draw in assignment of treatment status or voucher val-
ues might have resulted in spurious correlation with relevant unobservable characteristics.
Later, I will show that not only both treatment and voucher assignment are well-balanced
  12
     To date, only Dahl, Løken, and Mogstad (2014) and Ngatia (2011) have explicitly acknowledged that
peer eﬀects estimated using 2SLS are subject to a LATE interpretation. Ngatia (2011) explicitly models
these heterogenous eﬀects and estimates their eﬀects by exploiting multiple instruments for adoption.
  13
     Some of the variation will still be driven by variation in the voucher allocation received by treated
neighbors.


                                                   13
across a range of observable characteristics obtained from the baseline census, but that
the main results presented in Section 6, are unaﬀected by the inclusion of these character-
istics. While balance and conditioning on observables does not guarantee identiﬁcation
(Bruhn and McKenzie 2009), randomization is as close as we are ever likely to get, as
in expectation the instruments should be uncorrelated with the error term in the main
equation.
    A more pertinent problem is the exclusion restriction. In order for the estimate of ρ to
be interpreted solely as an endogenous peer eﬀect, the instruments (being in a treatment
block and the random voucher draw) must only aﬀect a household’s adoption of a land
title through the adoption of its neighbors. There are a few reasons why this might not
be the case:
    One valid concern is that direct-adoption peer eﬀects might be confused with infor-
mation exchange. Prior to the intervention, most residents knew very little about CROs.
Since households in treated blocks are invited to meetings in which they are given exten-
sive information on the beneﬁts of these titles, it is possible that attending households
passed this information on to their non-attending neighbors. Thus the observed peer ef-
fect ρ might include the impact of this information transfer. To account for information
in my main speciﬁcation, I will use data on household and neighbor meeting attendance
to proxy for knowledge of CROs.
    Another potential problem is related to a second change in neighbor characteristics
driven by the treatment. Recall that all parcels in treatment blocks are subject to a
cadastral survey, even if the owners do not go on to purchase a land title. The act of
surveying a neighbor’s plot could have an independent eﬀect on a household’s decision
to purchase a CRO if, for instance, being in a heavily-surveyed area aﬀects the perceived
value of a title. Recent evidence suggests that land demarcation has important impli-
cations for the function and growth of land markets (Libecap and Lueck 2011), so it is
possible that a shift from the previous regime14 to tightly-regulated cadastral surveying
could have substantial impacts independent of land title adoption.
    To deal with this, I ﬁrst turn to data from the baseline census, which suggests that a
household’s perceived expropriation risk is unaﬀected by proximity to previously-surveyed
parcels. Secondly, I also ﬁnd that endogenous peer eﬀects are of a similar magnitude when
I include previous-surveyed parcels as neighbors.15 Finally, the timing of the intervention
suggests that adoption decisions might have been independent of surveying: while treat-
ment and control blocks were decided at the beginning, actual cadastral surveying did not
begin until several months following the initial sign-up period, and took over a year to
complete, so the ﬁnal surveying status of treated-neighbors would have been unconﬁrmed
for most households.
    Another assumption behind the exclusion restriction is that proximate neighbors have
independent budget constraints. This would be undermined if two neighbors act as a single
household or take part in risk-sharing groups.16 However, while spontaneous risk-sharing
groups have been observed in randomized controlled trials in the past,17 the chances of
  14
     Prior to the introduction of the town plan, parcels were delineated with hand-drawn maps produced
using aerial photography.
  15
     Both of these results are available upon request.
  16
     Lalive and Cattaneo (2009) discuss this as a potential threat to identiﬁcation, where sharing of
PROGRESA transfers might lead to a spurious social interaction result.
  17
      Blattman (2011) discusses diﬃculties with lottery recipients exchanging winnings. Similarly An-
gelucci and De Giorgi (2009) shows that ineligible households are aﬀected by cash transfers to treatment
households.


                                                  14
such an arrangement existing in this context are slim, given that the households were
presented with non-transferable vouchers which were tied to individual parcels.
    Finally, the exclusion restriction might be undermined if households decide not to
participate in the program because of concerns for fairness (for their neighbors not being
included) or if high/low voucher allocations to neighbors elicit feelings of envy or unfair-
ness which stop them from adopting. However, anecdotally there is not much evidence
that these sort of feelings are at play on the ground.

5.2    Empirical setup
Reconsider the empirical model presented in equation (1), which is presented as a linear
probability model (LPM):

                        Ti = α + ρT g(−i) + xi β + xg(−i) δ + ui +       g   + εi
    While it is possible to estimate this using a nonlinear speciﬁcation, such as a probit or
logit, the LPM makes interpretation of the results relatively straightforward. The chief
concern over the use of a LPM is over out-of-sample predictions and the potential bias
which results from its use. In Table 17 in Appendix A.1, I show that the percentage of
out-of-sample predictions is extremely low, which suggests that there is not much scope
for bias in the LPM (Horrace and Oaxaca 2006).
    A dummy variable equal to one if a household has fully paid for its CRO will be
used as my main measure of title adoption Ti .18 In my main speciﬁcation, for house-
hold/parcel characteristics xi , I will include the general and conditional voucher values
that the household received and a control for whether or not that household attended the
block-level meeting. In addition, I will include a series of baseline controls, including the
natural log of the parcel’s area, the year the parcel was obtained, the household’s monthly
income, total value of all assets (TSh), household size, average schooling and dummy vari-
ables for whether the parcel is rented out, the owner is resident on the parcel, and there
has been recent investment in the parcel. Each of these controls is also averaged across
the household’s neighbor set and included in xg(−i) , with the exception of the neighbor’s
voucher values, which are used as instruments. I have also included a control for whether
or not the household has neighbors outside of the treatment block, so as not to conﬂate
diﬀerences in neighbor treatment with the household’s relative location within the block.
    Using GIS data to calculate distances between parcel borders, I construct peer groups
using the n closest neighbors to household i. This approach allows for results which
are intuitive and easy to understand, as each house has equal-sized peer groups. For
robustness, I will also present results using ﬁxed-distance neighbor sets (which include
all neighbors within a certain distance d), but the diﬀerences are minor. As it oﬀers
a reasonable trade-oﬀ between proximity and the power of the instruments,19 my main
results will use the ﬁve nearest-neighbors, but extensions on the size of the neighbor sets
are presented in Section 6.2.
    Summary statistics for the main controls, as well as their balance across voucher
allocations and the percentage of ﬁve nearest-neighbors treated, are shown in Table 2.
Parcels which faced a high price were slightly less likely to be electriﬁed and had slightly
higher levels of schooling, but neither of these diﬀerences are substantial. Households with
  18
    Results are also robust to using household sign-up as a measure of adoption instead of full purchase.
  19
    The larger the neighbor set the greater the number of households which fall outside i’s block and
therefore have the potential to be treated.


                                                   15
a high percentage of treated neighbors were more likely to attend meetings and were less
likely to have purchased a residential license. Apart from these diﬀerences, the sample
appears to be fairly well-balanced.
    Finally, I will be using both average voucher values across the neighbor set and the
percentage of treated neighbors as instruments for T g(−i) . While the results are robust
to including these as separate instruments, the estimates are most precise when they are
aggregated into a single instrument. This instrument is deﬁned as the ‘total’ price of a
CRO per household, which is set to TSh 500,000 for untreated neighbors (which is in line
with previous estimates)20 and set to the actual project price, net of vouchers, for treated
neighbors.
    To account for spatial dependence of observations, all standard errors are calculated
using Conley’s (1999) method, where the estimated covariance matrix is adjusted to
allow for arbitrary spatial correlation between observations. The degree of correlation is
allowed to decrease linearly with distance and is set at zero beyond a speciﬁed cutoﬀ. For
all nearest-neighbor speciﬁcations, cutoﬀ values are set at the average distance of the ﬁfth
neighbor across observations. For distance-band speciﬁcations, cutoﬀ values are set equal
to the distance-band. In general, the results are not qualitatively diﬀerent from standard
heteroskedastic-robust estimates.



6        Main results
Table 4 shows the results from the estimation of equation (1) using the ﬁve nearest-
neighbors as the relevant peer group. The ﬁrst three columns display results from an
OLS estimation of the probability that household i adopts a land title on the number of
neighbors in the neighbor set also adopting.21 In column (1), the controls included are
household i’s allocated vouchers, whether or not someone from the household attended
the information/voucher distribution meeting held for the treatment block, the percentage
of i’s neighbors who attended a meeting and the percentage of neighbors who are in a
diﬀerent treatment/control block. Column (2) restricts the sample to households with
baseline data and the nearest-neighbor set to neighbors with baseline data, but does
not include baseline controls. These are introduced in column (3), so as not to conﬂate
sample-selection diﬀerences with the changes induced by including controls. Also included
are average values for these controls for household i’s neighbor set. Columns (4), (5), and
(6) repeat the same pattern, but using 2SLS to estimate equation (1), using the average
‘total’ price households in the neighbor set faced as an instrument.
    OLS estimates of the endogenous peer eﬀect ρ are positive and of similar size, even
when including baseline controls, with the predicted probability that household i purchas-
es a land title increasing by 7-8 percentage points with each neighbor that takes up. When
instrumented, these estimates nearly double, with the probability that the household pur-
chases a CRO increasing by 14-15 percentage points with each neighbor that takes up.
In previous literature, IV estimates of peer eﬀects are nearly always higher than the OLS
estimates. In a pure Manski world, this is perplexing, as simultaneity bias and correlated
eﬀects should, on average, lead to bias away from zero, rather than towards it.
    20
     Average estimates put this at about $500-1000 per parcel.
    21
     This estimation is equivalent to using the average adoption rate for the neighbor set, multiplied by the
size of the neighbor set, which is a constant. For results using distance bands instead of nearest-neighbor
sets, I multiply by the average neighbor set size.


                                                     16
 Table 2: Summary statistics and balance (voucher distribution and treated neighbors)

                                                    Own          % neighbours         Mean neighbour
                                  Mean/SD           price          treated                 price
                                    (1)              (2)             (3)                    (4)
Attended meeting                    0.61            0.002           0.515                 -.0008
                                     (0.488)       (0.0009)∗∗        (0.165)∗∗             (0.0004)∗∗

Year parcel acquired               1992.126         0.014             6.454                  -.016
                                    (12.307)        (0.023)           (4.228)               (0.009)∗

Parcel rented out                     0.4           0.001             -.040                 0.00007
                                     (0.512)        (0.001)           (0.176)               (0.0004)

Owner resides on parcel              0.827         -.00007             0.05                 -.00008
                                     (0.395)        (0.0007)          (0.136)               (0.0003)

Applied for CRO in past              0.014         -.00007            -.061                 0.0001
                                     (0.124)        (0.0002)          (0.042)               (0.00009)

Applied for RL in past               0.386          0.0001            -.288                 0.0006
                                     (0.508)        (0.001)           (0.175)∗              (0.0004)

Parcel was inherited                 0.107          0.0008            0.113                 -.0002
                                     (0.322)        (0.0006)          (0.111)               (0.0002)

Parcel has electricity               0.408           -.002            0.033                 -.0003
                                     (0.513)       (0.001)∗∗          (0.177)               (0.0004)

# buildings on parcel                1.332          0.0007            -.065                 0.0002
                                     (0.56)         (0.001)           (0.193)               (0.0004)

Invested in parcel                   0.175          -.0006             0.06                 -.00003
                                     (0.397)        (0.0007)          (0.137)               (0.0003)

Monthly income                      356.346         0.477           -175.492                 0.328
                                    (464.245)       (0.876)          (159.710)               (0.349)

Total assets (tsh 000’)            4140.882         15.221          -1836.007                4.724
                                   (6848.912)       (12.908)        (2357.852)               (5.151)

Average schooling                   12.263          0.009             1.479                  -.002
                                     (2.783)        (0.005)∗          (0.956)                (0.002)

Household size                       4.716           -.007            -.669                 0.0003
                                     (2.508)        (0.005)           (0.863)                (0.002)

Ln(area m2 )                         5.096          0.001             0.146                 -.0002
                                     (0.529)        (0.001)           (0.182)               (0.0004)

Obs                                   459             459              459                    459

Column (1) displays the mean and standard deviation for each variable. Columns (2)-(4) display the
mean and standard error of β2 from the linear regression of each variable var = β1 + β2 ∗ Z , where Z is
overall price the household faced (2), the percentage of ﬁve-nearest neighbors who were in treatment
blocks (3) and the average price faced by the household’s ﬁve-nearest neighbors (setting p = 500,000 TSh
for neighbors in control blocks)(4). Price measured in (’000 TSh). ∗ (p < 0.10),∗∗ (p < 0.05),∗∗∗ (p < 0.01)




                                                    17
                              Table 3: Barafu - impact of neighbour’s CRO take up on own take up - 5 closest neighbours

                                                                   OLS                                                          2SLS
                                            (1)            (2)                    (3)                  (4)            (5)                      (6)
                                           Basic        Restricted       Restricted + Controls        Basic        Restricted         Restricted + Controls
     # of neighbours adopting           0.0773***       0.0836***              0.0835***            0.147***        0.137***                   0.148***
                                         (0.0170)        (0.0173)               (0.0182)            (0.0409)        (0.0425)                   (0.0396)
     Voucher (tsh ’000)                0.00386***      0.00318***             0.00389***            0.00290**       0.00244*                  0.00301**
                                        (0.00113)       (0.00120)              (0.00120)            (0.00128)       (0.00136)                 (0.00137)
     Gender voucher (’000)             0.00388***      0.00394***             0.00424***           0.00294***      0.00316***                 0.00342***
                                       (0.000946)      (0.000974)             (0.000994)            (0.00111)       (0.00116)                  (0.00116)
     Attended meeting                    0.192***        0.126**                0.124**             0.203***         0.133**                   0.129**
                                         (0.0514)        (0.0558)               (0.0550)            (0.0531)         (0.0567)                  (0.0561)
     % neighbours attended               -0.164**         -0.118                 -0.119              -0.180**         -0.132                    -0.128
                                         (0.0832)        (0.0854)               (0.0878)             (0.0850)        (0.0866)                  (0.0895)




18
     % neighbours out of block            0.0202         0.00630                0.00511               0.0499          0.0290                    0.0359
                                         (0.0493)        (0.0503)               (0.0222)             (0.0518)        (0.0531)                  (0.0516)
     Constant                             0.148*         0.176**                  5.865              -0.00645        0.0559                    0.00114
                                         (0.0798)        (0.0820)                (4.209)              (0.111)        (0.115)                   (0.112)
     Baseline controls                      No              No                     Yes                  No              No                       Yes
     Adj. R-Square                         0.110           0.106                  0.121               0.0784          0.0865                    0.0946
     Obs                                    456             421                    421                 456              421                      421
     C-D Wald F-stat                                                                                  84.52           67.75                     75.94
     Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a CRO
     Basic columns include only controls shown + # of neighbours attending meeting and a control for whether household has neighbours outside treatment block
     Restricted columns are the same as basic, except sample and neighbour sets are restricted to households with non-missing baseline data
     Restricted + Controls columns include household and average neighbour set controls for Log(parcel area), year of purchase, rental status, owner residence
     RL ownership, electricity access, number of buildings, recent parcel investment, monthly income, assets, average schooling and hh size
     Instruments in 2SLS speciﬁcation: average priced faced by neighbours (setting untreated parcels at price = tsh 500,000
     Conley-adjusted standard errors in parentheses, ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                              Table 4: Barafu - impact of neighbor’s CRO take up on own take up - 5 closest neighbors

                                                                 OLS                                                           2SLS
                                          (1)            (2)                    (3)                   (4)            (5)                     (6)
                                         Basic        Restricted       Restricted + Controls         Basic        Restricted        Restricted + Controls
     # of neighbors adopting          0.0882***       0.0930***              0.0898***             0.166***        0.156***                    0.144***
                                       (0.0121)        (0.0125)               (0.0125)             (0.0425)        (0.0457)                    (0.0460)
     Voucher (tsh ’000)               0.00208***      0.00189***             0.00204***           0.00152**       0.00143**                   0.00167**
                                      (0.000564)      (0.000598)             (0.000601)           (0.000623)      (0.000673)                  (0.000658)
     Gender voucher (’000)            0.00241***      0.00249***             0.00257***           0.00186***     0.00201***                   0.00221***
                                      (0.000534)      (0.000554)             (0.000552)           (0.000596)     (0.000637)                   (0.000622)
     Attended meeting                  0.147***        0.129***               0.125***             0.155***        0.136***                    0.130***
                                       (0.0249)        (0.0264)               (0.0271)             (0.0258)        (0.0272)                    (0.0280)
     % neighbors attended              -0.108**        -0.117**               -0.127**            -0.145***       -0.145***                   -0.149***
                                       (0.0484)        (0.0501)               (0.0507)             (0.0521)        (0.0537)                    (0.0544)




19
     % neighbors out of block          0.00319         0.000959               -0.000205             0.0150         0.00986                     0.00847
                                       (0.0259)        (0.0273)                (0.0129)            (0.0268)        (0.0282)                    (0.0287)
     Constant                          0.200***        0.221***                 1.870               0.0209          0.0698                      0.111
                                       (0.0539)        (0.0575)                (2.058)              (0.110)         (0.121)                    (0.124)
     Baseline controls                    No               No                    Yes                  No              No                         Yes
     Adj. R-Square                       0.285           0.304                  0.311                0.255           0.283                      0.297
     Obs                                 1140            1036                   1036                 1140            1036                       1036
     C-D Wald F-stat                                                                                 81.78           72.55                      69.98
     Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a CRO
     Basic columns include only controls shown + # of neighbors attending meeting and a control for whether household has neighbors outside treatment block
     Restricted columns are the same as basic, except sample and neighbor sets are restricted to households with non-missing baseline data
     Restricted + Controls columns include household and average neighbor set controls for Log(parcel area), year of purchase, rental status, owner residence
     RL ownership, electricity access, number of buildings, recent parcel investment, monthly income, assets, average schooling and hh size
     Instruments in 2SLS speciﬁcation: average priced faced by neighbors (setting untreated parcels at price = tsh 500,000
     Conley-adjusted standard errors in parentheses, ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
     One possibility relies on the local average treatment eﬀect interpretation of the esti-
mated coeﬃcient: as ρ is estimated using 2SLS, it is deﬁned only over households whose
neighbors were aﬀected by the treatment, thus leaving out all households with neighbors
who decided, despite facing large subsidies, not to purchase a land title. This decision
might convey unobserved information which also interacts with the mechanisms driving
peer eﬀects: for example, the choice of a neighbor not to purchase a title might reveal
that expropriation complementarities are not expected to be particularly strong in a giv-
en location. Also, if some neighbors never intend to adopt CROs (even if they were to
face a price of zero) their non-adoption might convey little-to-no information to other
households, resulting in lower average peer eﬀects when they are included.
     The other possible reason why 2SLS results are higher than OLS is due to a mechan-
ical downward bias in OLS estimates inherent in most endogenous peer eﬀects models.
Guryan, Kroft, and Notowidigdo (2009) show that when peer groups are constructed
which exclude the household itself and peers are considered as observations as well, OLS
estimates will be biased downward.22 Guryan et al. (2009) also show that controlling
for the average take-up of the pool from which a household’s peers are selected corrects
for this bias. However, in the current context, this ‘pool’ comprises all observations from
Barafu except for the household of interest: as all variation in the pool average is being
driven by variation in Ti , it is impossible to include it as a control. Caeyers and Fafchamps
(2016) shows that this bias is removed when using 2SLS, as valid instruments for T g(−i)
also side-step the mechanical bias, hence resulting in higher estimates under 2SLS than
OLS.
     Both types of vouchers have strong, signiﬁcant eﬀects on take up. Meeting attendance
is correlated with higher take-up, although it is unclear if this due to the eﬀect of the
meeting or driven by unobserved demand for CROs. Interestingly, neighbor attendance
of meetings is negatively correlated with CRO adoption, indicating that the direction of
information channels is not straightforward. As meeting attendance is endogenous, Table
15 in the appendix shows the main results still hold when meeting attendance is excluded
from the speciﬁcation. The dummy indicating that the household has neighbors living
outside the treatment block does not appear to be a signiﬁcant correlate of adoption.
     The voucher results give us a novel way to interpret the size of the peer eﬀect results.
In the 2SLS speciﬁcation with baseline controls a 1,000 TSh voucher is associated with
approximately a .03% increase in the predicted probability that a household purchases
a CRO, the decision of a nearest-neighbor to purchase a CRO leads to approximately a
15% increase. Thus, the peer eﬀect generated by a single neighbor adopting is roughly
equivalent to a 50,000 TSh voucher transfer.
     That peer eﬀects are large and strictly positive suggests positive strategic comple-
mentarities in the purchase of CROs. I will investigate this further using a variety of
robustness checks throughout this section. More substantial robustness checks are per-
formed in Appendix A.2, where I show these results a robust to the inclusion of block ﬁxed
eﬀects and controls for the take-up decisions of household’s outside of the nearest-neighbor
set.
  22
    The intuition is as follows: as households are being excluded from their own peer group, if the
household had a high value of the outcome of interest Yi then the resulting peer group will have, in
expectation, a lower average outcome Y i . When, in turn a household from the same group with a low
value of Yi is considered, the constructed peer group will have a higher average value.




                                                20
       Table 5: Barafu - impact of neighbor’s adoption for nth nearest-neighbor sets

                                      (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)
      OLS

      Basic                        0.0933∗∗      0.0773∗∗      0.0513∗∗      0.039∗∗      0.0299∗∗
                                    (0.0232)       (0.017)      (0.0104)     (0.0086)      (0.0074)

      Restricted                   0.0944∗∗      0.0836∗∗      0.048∗∗      0.0365∗∗      0.0302∗∗
                                    (0.0236)      (0.0173)      (0.0112)     (0.0088)      (0.0072)

      Covariates                   0.0914∗∗      0.0835∗∗      0.0448∗∗     0.0301∗∗       0.028∗∗
                                    (0.0242)      (0.0182)      (0.0118)     (0.0101)      (0.0078)

      2SLS

      Basic                        0.2339∗∗       0.147∗∗      0.0483∗∗     0.0349∗∗      0.0239∗∗
                                    (0.0593)      (0.0409)      (0.0194)     (0.0123)      (0.0094)

      Restricted                   0.1896∗∗      0.1368∗∗      0.0474∗∗     0.0302∗∗      0.0217∗∗
                                    (0.0607)      (0.0425)      (0.0203)     (0.0129)       (0.01)

      Covariates                   0.2031∗∗      0.1478∗∗      0.0611∗∗     0.0404∗∗      0.0292∗∗
                                    (0.0629)      (0.0396)      (0.0199)     (0.0127)      (0.0088)

      # nearest neighbours =           3             5            10            15           20

Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a CRO. “Basic” rows include
only controls shown & # of neighbors attending meeting and a control for whether household has
neighbors outside treatment block. “Restricted” rows are the same as basic, except sample and
neighbor sets are restricted to households with non-missing baseline data. “Covariates” columns
include household and average neighbor set controls for Log(parcel area), year of purchase, rental status,
owner residence. Each column represents a diﬀerent nearest-neighbor set (i.e. 3 = 3 closest neighbors).
Conley standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01



6.1     Distance and social connections
To conﬁrm that these results are not isolated to a single speciﬁcation, Table 5 shows
estimates of ρ across diﬀerent nearest-neighbor sets. In both the OLS and 2SLS speciﬁca-
tions, peer eﬀects are strong, positive and signiﬁcant. Table 13, located in the appendix,
shows these results to be similar when using distance-bands.
    From these results, it is clear that peer eﬀects are decreasing with distance. The
average eﬀect per-neighbor in the three-neighbor 2SLS speciﬁcation is roughly seven times
greater than the twenty-neighbor one (although this gradient is less steep for the OLS and
distance-band speciﬁcations). Figure 3 shows the decrease in the eﬀect for both nearest-
neighbor and distance-band approaches as the number of neighbors included is increased.
While this shows that peer eﬀects in adoption are determined by distance, it does not
suggest a direct mechanism. Although proximate geographic complementarities might be
at play, physical distance might just be a convenient proxy for social distance, as those
who live close to one another are more likely to interact on a day-to-day basis.
    Data taken during the baseline survey might prove helpful in solving this conundrum.
Prior to the baseline data collection, for each of 15 administrative blocks of households
(note that these blocks do not correspond to the blocks used for the experiment) a random
sample of 10 households were chosen to form a network questionnaire. During the baseline
survey, each household was asked if they knew the head of each household from the
network roster. For all households with baseline data, I have matched up those listed on


                                                   21
       Figure 3: Average neighbor peer eﬀect as neighbor set increases in distance




the network roster with program take-up data. Matching these responses in the network
questionnaire has allowed me to construct a limited dyadic sample of 402 parcels, each
with 9.24 links on average, for a total of 3,718 observations. The i dimension of the
dyad includes all treated households with responses to the network questionnaire. The j
dimension includes all of those listed on the roster with take up data. This will allow me
to investigate whether adoption peer eﬀects are higher for households closer together, or
those that know each other.
    Table 6 shows the results from a regression of i’s probability of take up on j ’s take up,
including an interaction term if household i knows household j and a second interaction
for the geographic distance between i and j in meters. Standard errors are clustered
at both the i and j level using Cameron et al.’s (2011) method, which provides a good
approximation of the dyad-speciﬁc approach proposed by Fafchamps and Gubert (2007).
The ﬁrst column of Table 6 shows the results using OLS, which show that j ’s purchase of
a CRO is associated with a 10% increase in the probability that i purchases a CRO. This
eﬀect increases by roughly one percentage point if i knows j , but the eﬀect is insigniﬁcant
at the 10% level. However, the peer eﬀect decreases with distance: the eﬀect is 1% lower
for every 15 meters of distance between the two households. Column (2) shows a 2SLS
speciﬁcation, again using aggregate price of a CRO as an instrument for j ’s take-up.23 The
coeﬃcients in the 2SLS speciﬁcation are very similar to those of OLS, with the negative
coeﬃcient on the distance interaction being nearly identical and still signiﬁcant at the
10% level.
    While the results here are based on a limited sample (those who answered the network
questionnaire and those who were randomly selected to be on the network questionnaire),
they do suggest that peer eﬀects are primarily running through physical proximity, rather
than ex-ante familiarity between households. Again, this points towards complementari-
ties in the marginal gain from CRO adoption, rather than signaling or information ﬂows.
  23
    To instrument the interaction terms, I use interactions between the main instrument (average neighbor
price) and the two dummies of interest, i knowing j and the distance between i and j .



                                                   22
  Table 6: Impact of neighbour’s CRO take up on own take up - matched network list

                                                          (1)                         (2)
                                                          OLS                        2SLS
          Household j is adopting                      0.103**                     0.137**
                                                       (0.0425)                    (0.0615)
          (j adopting) * (i knows j)                   -0.00437                     0.00769
                                                       (0.0716)                     (0.104)
          (j adopting) * (i-j distance)              -0.000656**                  -0.000709*
                                                      (0.000274)                  (0.000379)
          Household i knows household j                 0.0509                      0.0399
                                                       (0.0500)                    (0.0647)
          Distance between parcels i and j           0.000397***                 0.000438***
                                                      (0.000135)                  (0.000156)
          Unconditional voucher                       0.00264**                   0.00265**
                                                      (0.00122)                   (0.00122)
          Conditional voucher                         0.00469***                  0.00466***
                                                      (0.000974)                  (0.000977)
          Constant                                     0.317***                    0.302***
                                                       (0.0558)                    (0.0574)
          Adj. R-Square                                  0.0515                      0.0506
          Obs                                             3718                        3718
          C-D Wald F-stat                                                            15.32
          Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if household i purchases a CRO
          Instruments in 2SLS speciﬁcation: j household in treatment block, (i knows j)*(j treated)
          and (i-j distance)*(j in treatment block). Robust standard errors in parentheses,
          two-level clustering at both i and j parcel level. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01


However, if households consider signals from households that are more proximate to them
(because they share similar environmental characteristics, for example) then signalling
may still be driving the peer eﬀects from proximate neighbors (BenYishay and Mobarak
2014).


6.2   Distance or contiguity?
While the results in the previous subsection suggest that peer eﬀects in land titling take-
up are inherently spatial in nature, it is not yet possible to discern whether or not these
eﬀects are due to general spatial spillovers (where we would expect eﬀects to diminish
gradually with distance) or immediate neighbor eﬀects (where we would expect a sharp
‘drop’ in the peer eﬀect for non-contiguous parcels). While we would expect the former
for spillovers in aggregate expropriation risk or land prices, the latter might be driven by
concerns over losing land to titled neighbors. To investigate whether or not peer eﬀects
vary discontinuously, I have created a dyad of i − j pairings of every parcel within 150
meters of each other in the neighborhood, then repeated the speciﬁcation used in Table
6, this time interacting the dummy for j ’s decision to purchase a CRO with a dummy
equal to one if the two parcels are contiguous, allowing us to investigate whether or not
contiguity implies a stronger peer eﬀect.

                                                        23
Table 7: Impact of neighbour’s CRO take up on own take up - distance dyad

                                                    (1)                     (2)
                                                    OLS                    2SLS
    Household j is adopting                        0.0497**              0.211***
                                                   (0.0197)              (0.0600)
    (j adopting) * (i-j distance)               -0.000426*              -0.00132**
                                                (0.000234)              (0.000557)
    (j adopting) * (i-j contiguous)                0.0849**               0.0245
                                                   (0.0335)               (0.146)
    Unconditional voucher value                 0.00356***             0.00358***
                                                 (0.00112)              (0.00111)
    Conditional voucher value                   0.00466***             0.00460***
                                                (0.000969)             (0.000969)
    Distance between parcels i and j            -0.0000416               0.000226
                                                (0.000166)              (0.000211)
    i and j are contiguous neighbours            -0.0565**                -0.0350
                                                  (0.0235)               (0.0886)
    Constant                                        0.636                  0.527
                                                   (0.619)                (0.727)
    Baseline controls                                Yes                    Yes
    Adj. R-Square                                   0.113                  0.106
    Obs                                             56386                  55856
    KP F-stat                                                              6.770
    Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if household i purchases a CRO
    Instruments in 2SLS speciﬁcation: j household in treatment block, (i-j contiguous)
    *(j in treatment block) and (i-j distance)*(j in treatment block). Robust standard
    errors in parentheses, two-level clustering at both i and j parcel level.
    ∗
        p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                              24
     The results are presented in Table 7. While in the basic OLS speciﬁcation, the in-
teraction term between contiguity and j ’s take-up decision is positive and signiﬁcant,
suggesting stronger peer eﬀects when two parcels share a border, this eﬀect disappears
in the 2SLS speciﬁcation. In both speciﬁcations, the interaction between j ’s adoption
decision and the distance between the two parcels is negative and signiﬁcant. Taken to-
gether, while there is still some scope for a ‘contiguity eﬀect’, the peer eﬀects observed
here seem to be best captured by linear distance, implying general spillovers rather than
titling driven by concerns over neighbor encroachment.

6.3      Peer eﬀects and baseline perceptions of expropriation risk
In order to investigate further the role of expropriation risk in this context, I turn to
baseline data on the parcel owner’s perceived risk of expropriation (presented earlier in
Figure 1). While respondents could choose probabilities anywhere from zero to one,
predictions were clumped around zero, 0.5 and 1. To see if those who believe themselves
to be at a higher risk of expropriation are more responsive to their neighbors’ adoption,
I create a dummy variable (expropi ) which is equal to one if the house reported their
perceived expropriation risk (conditioned on not having any form of title) to be greater
than or equal to 50%. I then interact this dummy with T g(−i) , the adoption rate of the
neighbors, and proceed with the same speciﬁcation as before. For the 2SLS estimates, I
retrieve predicted values of T g(−i) from the ﬁrst stage regression, then use these predicted
values and their interactions T g(−i) × expropi as instruments for T g(−i) and T g(−i) ×
expropi .24
    Table 8 shows the results from both the OLS and 2SLS estimation for three diﬀerent
neighbor sets, all with baseline controls included. In all OLS speciﬁcations, the interaction
eﬀect is signiﬁcant and positive, where the 2SLS results show a signiﬁcant eﬀect at the
10% level in the two largest-neighbor sets (columns (4) and (6)). These results suggest
that the peer eﬀect is stronger for those that had a higher ex-ante perceived probability of
expropriation. The coeﬃcient of the level eﬀect of expropi is consistently large, negative
and signiﬁcant in most speciﬁcations. It appears that while households with a higher ex-
ante expropriation risk are more responsive to peer eﬀects, they have a lower absolute level
of take-up. This is consistent with a model in which households with a high perceived risk
only bother to purchase if they observe others around them doing them same, suggesting
that there are complementarities in the reduction of expropriation risk.



7        Additional results
In this section I will present results from two other sources of data, ﬁrst from a repli-
cation of the above experiment in Kigogo Kati, an adjacent community, and then from
administrative data from the Kinondoni Municipality.

7.1      A second experiment
Nearly a year following the allocation of treatment and control blocks and the voucher
distribution in Mburahati Barafu, the same intervention was introduced in Kigogo Kati,
    24
    Wooldridge (2010) suggests that there are eﬃciency gains when using predicted values as interaction
terms, rather than the original instruments.


                                                  25
       Table 8: Barafu - interaction between perceived expropriation risk and impact of neighbour’s CRO take up

                                                        5 nearest                     10 nearest                   15 nearest
                                                 (1)                (2)           (3)              (4)         (5)               (6)
                                                 OLS                IV            OLS              IV          OLS               IV
     # of neighbours adopting                   0.0284         0.129**         0.000145          0.0310     -0.000481           0.0204
                                               (0.0350)        (0.0571)        (0.0197)         (0.0277)     (0.0161)          (0.0190)
     High exprop risk × # adopting             0.0771*          0.0318         0.0682***        0.0527*     0.0464***          0.0337*
                                               (0.0393)        (0.0581)         (0.0228)        (0.0305)     (0.0176)          (0.0195)
     High exprop risk                          -0.260**          -0.111        -0.444***        -0.351*     -0.443***          -0.331*
                                                (0.131)         (0.186)         (0.141)         (0.184)      (0.158)           (0.174)
     Voucher (tsh ’000)                      0.00404***       0.00301**       0.00451***      0.00423***   0.00464***      0.00442***
                                              (0.00125)       (0.00136)        (0.00124)       (0.00122)    (0.00122)       (0.00119)
     Pink voucher (tsh ’000)                 0.00417***       0.00333***      0.00460***      0.00427***   0.00495***      0.00469***




26
                                              (0.00105)        (0.00115)       (0.00102)       (0.00101)    (0.00100)      (0.000971)
     Attended meeting                          0.122**         0.129**         0.133**         0.144***      0.122**           0.132**
                                               (0.0571)        (0.0560)        (0.0541)        (0.0531)      (0.0535)          (0.0522)
     Constant                                    7.156           4.853           9.963           9.981        6.037             7.317
                                                (10.90)         (10.43)         (16.30)         (15.50)      (19.73)           (18.80)
     Baseline controls                            Yes               Yes           Yes              Yes         Yes               Yes
     Adj. R-Square                               0.127          0.0927           0.151           0.143        0.145             0.140
     Obs                                          421             421             421             421          421               421
     C-D Wald F-stat                                             32.48                           62.17                          144.3
     Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a CRO. High expropriation risk a dummy = 1
     if household’s perceived probability of expropriation >= 50%. Speciﬁcation includes main and baseline controls discussed in
     previous tables. Instruments in 2SLS speciﬁcation: predicted values from ﬁrst stage regression of 2SLS regression (using
     average priced faced by neighbours (setting untreated parcels at price = 500,000 TSh) as an instrument, interacted with
     high expropriation risk. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
which borders Barafu to the south. Due to the length of time between the two interven-
tions, this provides us with an interesting replication of the Barafu experiment. Other
than location, Kati diﬀers from Barafu in two key ways which might aﬀect estimates of
peer eﬀects. Firstly, shortly after the intervention began, Dar es Salaam was subject to
some of the worst ﬂooding in 60 years, with Kati being one of the areas which was af-
fected the most. This subsequently depressed CRO adoption, as households were subject
to a shortfall in income. While this should not necessarily dampen peer eﬀects, the low
levels of take-up (roughly 15% versus approximately 60% in Barafu), indicate that the
instruments used to identify peer eﬀects will be signiﬁcantly weaker.
    Secondly, Kati has been the recipient of a community infrastructure upgrading project
(CIUP) for several years, which has led to a number of parcels being demolished to make
way for road expansion and electriﬁcation. This increased probability of expropriation
and the changes in the gains for land titling which might come from being in a heavily
invested area are both likely to interact with peer eﬀects. Furthermore, while the take up
data from Barafu is considered complete, Kati is still in the process of collecting repayment
and soliciting more participants, so these results should be considered preliminary.
    Table 9 replicates the same speciﬁcation seen in Table 4 for the ﬁve nearest-neighbors,
ﬁrst showing the results for OLS with and without baseline covariates and then using
2SLS. In order to maximize the explanatory power of the instrument, I use average voucher
values and average assignment-to-treatment as individual instruments, rather than the
composite price measure I used in the previous section. For the OLS speciﬁcation, peer
eﬀects are of similar magnitude to the results from the Barafu experiment, with each
neighbor adopting associated with a 8-9.5% increase in the probability the household
will also adopt. As before, the 2SLS result is signiﬁcantly higher, with each neighbor
adopting associated with a 20% increase in the predicted probability (note that this is
the maximum peer eﬀect size allowed in this speciﬁcation). Note that the Cragg-Donald
Wald F statistic, reported at the bottom of the table, is quite low, so these results should
be taken with some caution.25
    In Appendix A.1, Table 16 shows the results from replication of the speciﬁcation
across diﬀerent-sized neighbor sets. The results seem reasonably robust to variations of
the peer group, again showing a decreasing eﬀect as the neighbor set grows to include
parcels which are further away. Not all results are signiﬁcant at the 10% level, but the
coeﬃcients are on the same order of magnitude of the results from Barafu.




 25
      Also, this CDW F-stat has not been corrected for spatial correlation.


                                                    27
                               Table 9: Kati - impact of neighbour’s CRO take up on own take up - 5 closest neighbours

                                                                 OLS                                                           2SLS
                                           (1)           (2)                   (3)                   (4)            (5)                      (6)
                                          Basic       Restricted      Restricted + Controls         Basic        Restricted         Restricted + Controls
     # of neighbours adopting          0.0944***      0.0980***              0.0788***            0.206***       0.225***                      0.231**
                                        (0.0186)       (0.0192)               (0.0211)            (0.0737)       (0.0749)                      (0.0915)
     Voucher (tsh ’000)                0.00114*        0.00117*               0.00123*            0.000819       0.000777                      0.000953
                                      (0.000604)      (0.000653)             (0.000639)          (0.000649)     (0.000724)                    (0.000688)
     Gender voucher (’000)            0.00147**       0.00153**              0.00153**            0.00114        0.00116                       0.00129*
                                      (0.000641)      (0.000672)             (0.000643)          (0.000695)     (0.000736)                    (0.000700)
     Attended meeting                   0.133***       0.136***               0.141***            0.138***       0.142***                     0.148***
                                        (0.0260)       (0.0274)               (0.0292)            (0.0274)       (0.0296)                     (0.0321)




28
     Constant                            -0.0202       -0.00417                 0.171               -0.0450        -0.0331                      -0.0365
                                        (0.0461)       (0.0518)                (2.177)             (0.0458)       (0.0498)                     (0.0542)
     Baseline controls                     No              No                    Yes                  No             No                          Yes
     Adj. R-Square                       0.0892         0.0922                  0.107               0.0135        -0.00721                     -0.0217
     Obs                                   684           615                     615                 684             615                         615
     C-D Wald F-stat                                                                                12.38           13.38                       9.129
     Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a CRO
     Basic columns include only controls shown + # of neighbours attending meeting and a control for whether household has neighbours outside treatment block
     Restricted columns are the same as basic, except sample and neighbour sets are restricted to households with non-missing baseline data
     Restricted + Controls columns include household and average neighbour set controls for Log(parcel area), year of purchase, rental status, owner residence
     RL ownership, electricity access, number of buildings, recent parcel investment, monthly income, assets, average schooling and hh size
     Instruments in 2SLS speciﬁcation: average programme treatment status and average priced faced by neighbours
     Conley-adjusted standard errors in parentheses, ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
7.2    Peer eﬀects in residential license take-up
While endogenous peer eﬀects appear to be a determinant of take-up in both Mburahati
Barafu and Kigogo Kati, it is not immediately clear that the results are generalizable to
other settings or necessarily scalable. This is a common criticism of micro-empirical work,
including most randomized controlled trials (Ravallion 2008; Deaton 2010) and one that
is rarely dealt with.
    Ideally, a replication of the experiments in Barafu and Kati at a larger level would
show that these results are scalable. For lack of such an experiment, I turn to adminis-
trative data: in 2005, the Ministry of Lands embarked on a large-scale eﬀort to register
informally-held property in each of the three municipalities which make up Dar es Salaam
(Kinondoni, Illala and Temeke). As part of this exercise, land oﬃcers and town planners
used areal photographs of unplanned settlements to map out the size and location of
approximately 219,000 land parcels. Together, these parcels comprise approximately 1.5
million residents, or roughly 50% of the population of Dar es Salaam at the time of the
data collection. Figure 4 displays the location of these land parcels, including Barafu
and Kati. Following this, the Ministry and the three municipal governments interviewed
parcel owners to construct land registry, containing basic information on both parcel and
owning-household characteristics.
    Also available are records for every purchase of a residential license, the short-term
land title mentioned in Section 2, from the time they ﬁrst became available in mid-
2005 until early 2013. By matching the GIS-coded map data to the municipal registry
and residential license data, it is possible to investigate whether or not peer eﬀects in
residential license adoption exist at a larger scale.
    While there is no experimental variation in residential license take up, the peer eﬀects
literature has developed several methods of identifying peer eﬀects, given some limiting
assumptions on how neighbors interact. A common method of overcoming the reﬂection
problem is to take advantage of the structure of partially-overlapping peer groups. This
is this case when peer group structures are not transitive; for example, when j being part
of of i’s peer group and k being part of j ’s peer group does not guarantee that k will be
in i’s peer group. When this is the case, there were will be characteristics in k ’s equation
which can be used as instruments for j ’s adoption.
    The intuition is this: k ’s exogenous characteristics aﬀect k ’s adoption decision directly,
and thus j ’s adoption decision indirectly (through the endogenous peer eﬀect).26 Since
i does not directly interact with k , the latter’s exogenous characteristics only aﬀect i’s
adoption through j ’s adoption. Thus, k ’s exogenous characteristics satisfy the exclusion
restriction and are potential instruments for j ’s take up. This method was developed
simultaneously by Bramoull´     e, Djebbari, and Fortin (2009) and De Giorgi, Pellizzari, and
Redaelli (2010) and has since become a popular method of overcoming the simultaneity
bias inherent in peer eﬀects models.
    Figure 5 shows a hypothetical case using a map of Mburahati Barafu. In this example,
the shaded area indicates all parcels which are in j ’s peer group, but not in i’s peer group,
and therefore can be used as “excluded” neighbors. When peer groups are constructed
spatially, the partially-overlapping requirement for intransitivity is usually met.
    Letting g (−i) indicates household i’s neighbor set and g 2 (−i) indicate the set of neigh-
  26
    In the presence of exogenous (contextual) eﬀects, k’s characteristics will also aﬀect j ’s adoption
decision directly.




                                                  29
                      Figure 4: Coverage of DSM Municipality GIS data




                    Dark red shapes indicate Mburahati Barafu and Kigogo Kati.a
   a
   Basemap sources: National Geographic, Esri, DeLorme, HERE, TomTom, Intermap, increment P
Corp., GEBCO, USGS, FAO, NPS, NRCAN, GEoBase, IGN, Kadaster NL, Ordinance Survey, Esri Japan,
MET, Esri China (HK), swisstopo, MapmyIndia, and the GIS User Communities




                            Figure 5: Example of excluded neighbors




Note: Black circles indicate the boundaries of i and j ’s neighbor set. Shaded area indicates excluded
neighbors.




                                                   30
bors of i’s neighbors (both discluding i), reconsider the empirical adoption equation:

                         Ti = α + ρT g(−i) + xi β + xg(−i) δ + ui +       g   + εi

    To identify ρ, we need to instrument T g(−i) with xg2 (−i) , the average exogenous char-
acteristics of the neighbors of i’s neighbors.27 The exclusion restriction, that xg2 (−i) only
aﬀects Ti through T g(−i) , is heavily dependent on the assumption that household i does
not interact with households outside of its designated peer group. While this assumption
is more easily defended when peer groups are deﬁned by a rigid structure (such as friends
in a network roster), in a dense slum it is a little more precarious. Furthermore, while
the neighbors-of-neighbors approach theoretically deals with the reﬂection problem, it
does not eliminate correlated eﬀects. For example, if wealth is positively correlated with
unobserved land quality, but also aﬀects residential license adoption, then the wealth of
excluded neighbors might be correlated with unobserved land quality in i’s equation as
well.
    My approach is as follows: ﬁrst I restrict the sample and neighbor-sets to all non-
empty parcels with non-missing observations for a set of characteristics, which reduces
the total sample size to approximately 169,000 land parcels. This includes the log of the
parcel’s area, a dummy for the parcel being used for residential purposes, a dummy for
the parcel being used for both residential and commercial purposes, whether the parcel is
on hazard land or not (land deemed unlivable by the government), the number of rooms,
the number of households living there, the number of people living there, a dummy equal
to one if the parcel has a positive property value, and an interaction between the positive
property value dummy and the natural log of the household’s value in Tanzanian shillings.
    This set of characteristics will be included both as a set of controls for the house-
hold/parcel in question i, averaged across the household’s neighbor set. For instruments,
I have taken a subset of these characteristics for the neighbor’s excluded neighbors which
are the most informative about T g(−i) (the number of rooms, people living on the parcel,
and the property value variables). To account for correlated eﬀects, I have included ﬁrst
mtaa/ward ﬁxed eﬀects, then administrative block ﬁxed eﬀects.
    Table 10 displays the results from the estimation of the ﬁve nearest-neighbors peer
eﬀects speciﬁcation, using residential license take-up as the measure of property rights
adoption. The ﬁrst two columns show the OLS results, while controlling for neighbor
characteristics, ﬁrst with mtaa ﬁxed eﬀects then with block ﬁxed eﬀects. The second two
columns show results from the 2SLS speciﬁcation, when the neighbor-set’s average take up
of CROs is instrumented with the characteristics the neighbors of neighbors. Both OLS
and 2SLS estimates are of similar magnitude to what was seen in both Kigogo Kati and
Mburahati Barafu. However, the 2SLS estimates which incorporate controls for correlated
eﬀects, when administrative block ﬁxed eﬀects are included, are approximately 30% larger
than the estimates for CRO adoption (11.8% in Table 10 versus 14.8% in Table 4).
    Given that residential licenses only have a limited tenure value, as they must be
renewed every ﬁve years, it is possible that there is less room for complementarities in
reducing expropriation risk. Furthermore, given the diﬀerences in the two forms of tenure,
and the fact that these results are based on a eight-year span of adoption, it is likely that
the exogenous peer eﬀects revealed here are operating through entirely diﬀerent channels
than in the ﬁeld experiments.
  27
      Recall that the identifying information is coming only from excluded neighbors. Those which are part
of j ’s neighbor set but not part of i’s neighbor set.


                                                   31
Table 10: Dar es Salaam - impact of neighbor’s RL adoption on own adoption - 5 nearest
neighbors

                                                         OLS                                2SLS
                                                 (1)              (2)                 (3)            (4)
     # neighbors adopting RL                 0.0489***        0.0341***         0.193***           0.191***
                                             (0.00258)        (0.00160)         (0.0199)           (0.0268)
     # households living on plot            -0.0146***        -0.0145***       -0.0141***      -0.0142***
                                            (0.000938)        (0.000807)       (0.000949)      (0.000846)
     # rooms in house                       0.0133***         0.0128***        0.0120***       0.0121***
                                            (0.000699)        (0.000590)       (0.000726)      (0.000622)
     # people living on plot                6.22e-10***      8.32e-10***      3.57e-10***     3.89e-10***
                                             (5.97e-12)       (6.71e-12)       (3.64e-11)      (7.56e-11)
     Plot is on hazard land                  -0.488***         -0.487***        -0.482***      -0.482***
                                              (0.0143)         (0.00943)         (0.0156)       (0.0105)
     Ln(parcel area)                         0.0318***        0.0333***        0.0325***       0.0326***
                                             (0.00377)        (0.00253)        (0.00373)       (0.00269)
     Mixed use plot                          0.0474***        0.0475***        0.0488***       0.0483***
                                              (0.0138)         (0.0119)         (0.0145)        (0.0125)
     Residential plot                         0.00361          0.00530           0.0168             0.0167
                                              (0.0113)         (0.0100)         (0.0115)           (0.0106)
     Property value > 0                      -0.190***         -0.188***        -0.195***      -0.195***
                                              (0.0146)          (0.0106)         (0.0151)       (0.0115)
     Ln(Prop value) * (value > 0)           0.0107***         0.0106***        0.0112***       0.0111***
                                            (0.000864)        (0.000633)       (0.000906)      (0.000698)
     Constant                                0.0000137        0.0000172       0.00000539      0.00000669
                                            (0.0000166)      (0.0000166)      (0.0000140)     (0.0000165)
     Neighbor controls                           Yes              Yes                 Yes            Yes
     Mtaa ﬁxed eﬀects                            Yes              No                  Yes            No
     Block ﬁxed eﬀects                           No               Yes                 No             Yes
     Adj. R-Square                            0.0798            0.0608           -0.0350           -0.0677
     Obs                                      168822            168822           168822             168822
     C-D Wald F-stat                                                              2119.2             7.122
     Hansen J p-value                                                             0.395            8.01e-10
     Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a RL in 2005-2013
     Neighbor controls are average values of household/parcel characteristics for neighbor set
     Instruments in 2SLS speciﬁcation are average values of household/parcel characteristics
     for excluded neighbors of neighbors. Standard errors clustered at mtaa level in columns (1)
     and (3) and at block level in (2) and (4). ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                        32
Table 11: Dar es Salaam - impact of neighbor’s RL adoption on own adoption – diﬀerent
neighbour sets

                                                         Nearest-neighbour groups
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)
                                             5             10             15              20
     # neighbours adopting RL            0.191***     0.0908***       0.0497***       0.0344***
                                         (0.0268)      (0.0129)       (0.00896)       (0.00741)
     Neighbour controls                     Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
     Admin block f.e.                       Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
     Adj. R-Square                       -0.0677         0.00959       0.0416          0.0490
     Obs                                  168822         168822        168822          168822
     C-D Wald F-stat                       7.122          6.746         6.296           6.371
     Hansen J p-value                    8.01e-10         0.0885        0.190           0.440
     Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a RL in 2005-2013
     Neighbor controls are average values of household/parcel characteristics for neighbor set
     Instruments in 2SLS speciﬁcation are average values of household/parcel characteristics
     for excluded neighbors of neighbors.
     Standard errors clustered at block level ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01


    Finally, Table 11 shows the results for other neighbor set sizes. Again, the results are
of a very similar magnitude to what was seen in the experimental data, especially when
the neighbor set is extended to the twenty nearest-neighbors. Peer eﬀect estimates also
seem to decline as the size of the neighbor set grows. It should be noted that most of
these speciﬁcations seem to suﬀer from a weak instrument problem, as Kleibergen-Paap F
statistic (standard errors are clustered at the block level, violating the homoscedasticity
assumptions necessary for using standard Cragg-Donald test)r is very low. Also, some
speciﬁcations also fail their overidentiﬁcation tests, suggesting that the instruments here
are not entirely valid.28 Despite these problems, there is still evidence here that residential
license uptake decisions are correlated, possibly as a result of strategic complementarities
in their adoption.



8     Conclusion
The options for the many developing countries grappling with high levels of urban growth
could be characterized as formality-by-design or formality-by-nudge. The former is char-
acterized by high levels of urban planning and slum clearance, bringing new arrivals
immediately into the formal system and forcing existing residents to adjust. For the lat-
ter, the incentives to switch are introduced ex-post, through the introduction of simple
and robust formal tenure systems as well as slum-upgrading. After advocating the former
camp for decades following independence, the Tanzanian government largely has found
  28
     Although in a world of heterogenous peer eﬀects, the Hansen J test may just be highlighting the local
average treatment eﬀect interpretation.




                                                    33
itself relying on the latter within Dar es Salaam.29 However, its eﬀorts to entice informal
settlements to shift to a new tenure system continue to struggle, partly due to lack of
knowledge of how to spur demand for land titles.
     In this paper, I set out to determine whether or not endogenous peer eﬀects in land
titling adoption exist. Using the results from two randomized controlled trials in Dar
es Salaam, I exploited random variation in the incentive to title in order to identify the
impact of a neighbor’s adoption on a household’s propensity to adopt. The results suggest
there are strong, positive endogenous peer eﬀects, and these results are robust to diﬀerent
neighbor set speciﬁcations, as well as a replication of the main experiment in a second
location. There is also evidence that positive exogenous peer eﬀects are present at a
much larger scale, as results from municipal records suggest that residential license take
up show similar signs of being contagious. While the exact mechanism for these results
is elusive, evidence strongly points towards geographic proximity as a determinant of the
size of the peer eﬀects. This, combined with evidence that households with a higher ex-
ante perception of expropriation risk are more responsive to peer eﬀects, suggests that
perceived complementarities in risk-reduction are driving the result.
     This paper has established that not only is encouraging take-up possible, as evidenced
by the eﬀectiveness of the land titling program, but it also has positive spillovers which
can encourage larger levels of adoption. This is encouraging not only from a narrow
policy perspective, but it also suggests that landowners consider formal property rights
to be complementary, that is, more useful to purchase if everyone else is doing the same.
These complementarities might also extend to other areas of formalization, such as tax
compliance or business registration, suggesting other areas where experimentation might
be fruitful.
     If large externalities to land titling adoption do exist, then why is it that more com-
munities have not embraced large scale formalization, even without further government
intervention? While the cost of an individual cadastral survey is prohibitively expensive,
en-mass surveying can be considerably cheaper. Given that the demand for title has been
shown to be substantial once these hurdles have been overcome (in this instance, by our
intervention), the fact that households had not already coordinated to take advantage
of these returns to scale suggests these communities already face signiﬁcant barriers to
collective action. These are not universally insurmountable, as there are a few examples
of communities in Dar es Salaam coordinating to get the entire neighborhood titled.30
What remains to be seen is what policies best take advantage of this social multiplier
eﬀect and whether or not it is enough to ensure a full shift to a formal system.




  29
     It is worth noting that the Tanzanian government has pushed for large scale formalization in other
areas of the economy and the country, such as mapping taxpayers through its Block Management System
or land through its Secondary Cities program.
  30
     Magigi and Majani (2006) presents a case study of an informal community in Dar es Salaam with
atypically high social capital organising a full cadastral survey of the entire unplanned settlement.


                                                  34
References
 Ali, D. A., M. Collin, K. Deininger, S. Dercon, J. Sandefur, and A. Zeitlin (2016).
     Small price incentives increase women’s access to land titles in tanzania. Journal of
     Development Economics 123, 107–122.
 Alm, J., K. M. Bloomquist, and M. McKee (2016). When you know your neighbour
    pays taxes: Information, peer eﬀects, and tax compliance. Fiscal Studies .
 Angelucci, M. and G. De Giorgi (2009). Indirect eﬀects of an aid program: how do cash
   transfers aﬀect ineligibles’ consumption? The American Economic Review 99 (1),
   486–508.
 Bandiera, O. and I. Rasul (2006). Social networks and technology adoption in northern
    Mozambique. The Economic Journal 116 (514), 869–902.
 BenYishay, A. and A. M. Mobarak (2014). Social learning and communication. Tech-
    nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
 Besley, T. (1995). Property rights and investment incentives: theory and evidence from
    Ghana. Journal of Political Economy 103 (5), 903–937.
 Besley, T. and M. Ghatak (2010). Property rights and economic development. In D. Ro-
    drick and M. Rosenzweig (Eds.), Handbook of Development Economics. Amsterdam:
    North-Holland.
 Blattman, C. (2011). The trials of randomization Chris Blattman (blog), April 23, 2011.
    http://chrisblattman.com/2011/04/23/the-trials-of-randomization/.
 Bobonis, G. and F. Finan (2009). Neighborhood peer eﬀects in secondary school en-
   rollment decisions. The Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (4), 695–716.
 Bramoull´e, Y., H. Djebbari, and B. Fortin (2009). Identiﬁcation of peer eﬀects through
    social networks. Journal of Econometrics 150 (1), 41–55.
 Brennan, J. (2007). Between segregation and gentriﬁcation: Africans, Indians, and the
    struggle for housing in Dar es Salaam, 1920-1950. In J. Brennan, A. Burton, and
    Y. Lawi (Eds.), Dar es Salaam: histories from an emerging African metropolis, pp.
    223–233. Mkuki Na Nyota Publishers.
 Brock, W. and S. Durlauf (2001). Discrete choice with social interactions. The Review
    of Economic Studies 68 (2), 235–260.
 Bruhn, M. and D. McKenzie (2009). In pursuit of balance: randomization in practice
    in development ﬁeld experiments. American Economic Journal: Applied Economic-
    s 1 (4), 200–232.
 Bulow, J. I., J. D. Geanakoplos, and P. D. Klemperer (1985). Multimarket oligopoly:
    Strategic substitutes and complements. The Journal of Political Economy 93 (3),
    488–511.
 Bursztyn, L., F. Ederer, B. Ferman, and N. Yuchtman (2014). Understanding mecha-
    nisms underlying peer eﬀects: Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment on ﬁnancial deci-
    sions. Econometrica 82 (4), 1273–1301.
 Caeyers, B. and M. Fafchamps (2016). Exclusion bias in the estimation of peer eﬀects.
    Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
 Cameron, A., J. Gelbach, and D. Miller (2011). Robust inference with multiway clus-
   tering. Journal of Business ands Economic Statistics 29 (2), 238–249.

                                           35
Carter, M. R., R. Laajaj, and D. Yang (2014). Subsidies and the persistence of tech-
   nology adoption: Field experimental evidence from mozambique. Technical report,
   National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chetty, R., M. M. . S. M. (2014). Increasing tax compliance through social recognition.
   Technical report, IGC Policy Brief 14/0658.
Collin, M., S. Dercon, H. Nielson, J. Sandefur, and A. Zeitlin (2012). The practical
   and institutional hurdles to obtaining land titles in urban Tanzania. IGC report,
   International Growth Centre.
Conley, T. (1999). GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence. Journal of E-
   conometrics 92 (1), 1–45.
Conley, T. and C. Udry (2010). Learning about a new technology: pineapple in Ghana.
   The American Economic Review 100 (1), 35–69.
Dahl, G. B., K. V. Løken, and M. Mogstad (2014). Peer eﬀects in program participation.
  The American Economic Review 104 (7), 2049–2074.
De Giorgi, G., M. Pellizzari, and S. Redaelli (2010). Identiﬁcation of social interactions
   through partially overlapping peer groups. American Economic Journal: Applied
   Economics 2 (2), 241–275.
De Meza, D. and J. R. Gould (1992). The social eﬃciency of private decisions to enforce
   property rights. Journal of Political Economy , 561–580.
De Soto, H. (2000). The mystery of capital: why capitalism succeeds in the West and
   fails everywhere else. New York: Basic Books.
Deaton, A. (2010). Instruments, randomization, and learning about development. Jour-
   nal of Economic Literature 48 (2), 424–455.
Dower, P. and E. Potamites (2012, September). Signaling credit-worthiness: Land titles,
  banking practices and formal credit in Indonesia. Working Papers w0186, Center
  for Economic and Financial Research (CEFIR).
Drago, F., F. Mengel, and C. Traxler (2015). Compliance behavior in networks: Evi-
   dence from a ﬁeld experiment.
Duﬂo, E. and E. Saez (2003). The role of information and social interactions in re-
  tirement plan decisions: evidence from a randomized experiment. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 118 (3), 815–842.
Fafchamps, M. and F. Gubert (2007). The formation of risk sharing networks. Journal
   of Development Economics 83 (2), 326–350.
Field, E. (2005). Property rights and investment in urban slums. Journal of the Euro-
   pean Economic Association 3 (2-3), 279–290.
Fort, R., R. Ruben, and J. Escobal (2006). Spillover and externality eﬀects of titling
   on investments: evidence from Peru. In 11th Annual Meeting of the Latin American
   and Caribbean Economic Association.
Galiani, S. and E. Schargrodsky (2010). Property rights for the poor: eﬀects of land
   titling. Journal of Public Economics 94 (9), 700–729.
Glaeser, E., J. Scheinkman, and B. Sacerdote (2003). The social multiplier. Journal of
   the European Economic Association , 345–353.


                                          36
Godlonton, S. and R. Thornton (2012). Peer eﬀects in learning HIV results. Journal of
  Development Economics 97 (1), 118–129.
Guryan, J., K. Kroft, and M. Notowidigdo (2009). Peer eﬀects in the workplace: evi-
  dence from random groupings in professional golf tournaments. American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 1 (4), 34.
Hooper, M. and L. Ortolano (2012). Confronting urban displacement social movement
  participation and post-eviction resettlement success in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
  Journal of Planning Education and Research 32 (3), 278–288.
Horrace, W. and R. Oaxaca (2006). Results on the bias and inconsistency of ordinary
   least squares for the linear probability model. Economics Letters 90 (3), 321–327.
Imbens, G. and J. Angrist (1994). Identiﬁcation and estimation of local average treat-
   ment eﬀects. Econometrica 62 (2), 467–475.
Kironde, J. (1995). Access to land by the urban poor in Tanzania: some ﬁndings from
   Dar es Salaam. Environment and Urbanization 7 (1), 77–96.
Kironde, J. L. (2009). Improving land sector governance in Tanzania: implementation
   of the land governance assessment framework. Working paper, Ardhi University.
Kombe, W. (2005). Land use dynamics in peri-urban areas and their implications on
  the urban growth and form: the case of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Habitat Interna-
  tional 29 (1), 113–135.
Kombe, W. (2010). Land conﬂicts in Dar es Salaam: who gains? who loses? Cities and
  Fragile States Working Paper 82, Crisis States Research Centre, London School of
  Economics and Polical Science.
Lalive, R. and M. Cattaneo (2009). Social interactions and schooling decisions. The
   Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (3), 457–477.
Libecap, G. and D. Lueck (2011). The demarcation of land and the role of coordinating
   property institutions. The Journal of Political Economy 119 (3), 426–467.
Magigi, W. and B. Majani (2006). Community involvement in land regularization for
  informal settlements in Tanzania: a strategy for enhancing security of tenure in
  residential neighborhoods. Habitat international 30 (4), 1066–1081.
Manski, C. (1993). Identiﬁcation of endogenous social eﬀects: the reﬂection problem.
  The Review of Economic Studies 60 (3), 531–542.
Moﬃtt, R. et al. (2001). Policy interventions, low-level equilibria, and social interac-
  tions. Social dynamics , 45–82.
Ndezi, T. (2009). The limit of community initiatives in addressing resettlement in
  Kurasini ward, Tanzania. Environment and Urbanization 21 (77), 77–88.
Ngatia, M. (2011). Social interactions and individual reproductive decisions. Working
   paper, Yale University.
Oster, E. and R. Thornton (2012). Determinants of technology adoption: private val-
   ue and peer eﬀects in menstrual cup take-up. Journal of the European Economic
   Association 10 (6).
Ravallion, M. (2008). Evaluation in the practice of development. Policy Research Work-
   ing Paper Series 4547, The World Bank.


                                         37
 Sacerdote, B. (2001). Peer eﬀects with random assignment: results for Dartmouth
    roommates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2), 681–704.
 Schelling, T. C. (1978). Micromotives and macrobehavior. WW Norton.
 Van Tassel, E. (2004). Credit access and transferable land rights. Oxford economic
    papers 56 (1), 151–166.
 Wooldridge, J. (2010). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Vol-
   ume 1. The MIT Press.
 Zeitlin, A. (2012). Identiﬁcation and estimation of peer eﬀects on endogenous aﬃliation
    networks: an application to Ghanaian agriculture. Working paper.


A     Appendix
A.1   Additional tables

                Table 12: Barafu - main treatment and control balance

                                     Treatment        Control     T-test           OLS
                                        (1)             (2)         (3)             (4)
        # Rooms                        5.118           5.033      -0.560          0.085
                                      (2.604)         (2.175)     [0.575]        (0.149)
        Electrical connection          0.739           0.733      -0.264          0.007
                                      (0.439)         (0.443)     [0.792]        (0.026)
        Owner occupied                 0.847           0.848       0.023          -0.000
                                      (0.360)         (0.360)     [0.982]        (0.022)
        Tenants on parcel              0.636           0.602      -1.170           0.034
                                      (0.482)         (0.490)     [0.242]        (0.029)
        Access to road                 0.243           0.231      -0.471          0.012
                                      (0.429)         (0.422)     [0.638]        (0.025)
        Log(parcel area m2 )           5.298           5.336       1.089          -0.038
                                      (0.605)         (0.594)     [0.276]        (0.035)
        Notes: Columns (1)-(2) show means for treatment and control groups, standard
        deviations in ( ). Column (3) shows test statistic for t-test, p-values in [ ].
        Column (4) shows coeﬃcient and standard error for OLS regression of outcome
        variable on treatment.




                                                 38
    Table 13: Barafu - impact of neighbor’s adoption for neighbors within distance d

                                                  (1)             (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
             OLS

             Basic                           0.0657∗∗        0.0512∗∗     0.0432∗∗    0.0307∗∗    0.0277∗∗
                                              (0.0124)        (0.0101)     (0.0086)     (0.008)   (0.0068)

             Restricted                      0.0652∗∗        0.0458∗∗     0.0418∗∗    0.0294∗∗    0.0267∗∗
                                              (0.0136)        (0.0113)     (0.0094)    (0.0086)   (0.0075)

             Covariates                      0.0666∗∗        0.0445∗∗      0.039∗∗    0.0245∗∗    0.024∗∗
                                              (0.0139)        (0.0119)     (0.0103)    (0.0098)   (0.0088)

             2SLS

             Basic                           0.0762∗∗        0.0475∗∗     0.0337∗∗    0.0248∗∗    0.0247∗∗
                                              (0.0273)        (0.0178)     (0.0126)    (0.0099)   (0.0083)

             Restricted                      0.0806∗∗         0.0383∗     0.0338∗∗     0.025∗∗    0.0242∗∗
                                                 (0.033)      (0.0211)     (0.0145)    (0.0113)   (0.0097)

             Covariates                      0.1003∗∗        0.0511∗∗     0.0429∗∗    0.0301∗∗    0.0302∗∗
                                              (0.0323)        (0.0202)     (0.0141)    (0.0116)   (0.0101)

             Distance band length (m) =             10             15        20           25        30

Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a CRO. “Basic” rows include
only controls shown & # of neighbors attending meeting and a control for whether household has
neighbors outside treatment block. “Restricted” rows are the same as basic, except sample and
neighbor sets are restricted to households with non-missing baseline data. “Covariates” columns
include household and average neighbor set controls for Log(parcel area), year of purchase, rental status,
owner residence. Each column represents a diﬀerent distance band (i.e. 10b = all neighbors within 10
meters) Conley-adjusted standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01


Table 14: Barafu - impact of neighbor’s adoption for nth nearest-neighbor sets, including
previously-surveyed neighbors

                                           (1)               (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)
             OLS

             Basic                    0.1094∗∗             0.0795∗∗      0.0521∗∗     0.0433∗∗    0.0341∗∗
                                          (0.0235)         (0.0167)      (0.0101)      (0.008)    (0.0071)

             Restricted               0.1045∗∗             0.086∗∗       0.0501∗∗     0.0384∗∗    0.0323∗∗
                                          (0.0236)         (0.0169)      (0.0108)     (0.0085)    (0.0069)

             Covariates               0.0995∗∗             0.0801∗∗      0.0436∗∗     0.0301∗∗    0.0296∗∗
                                          (0.0242)         (0.0178)      (0.0117)     (0.0099)    (0.0081)

             2SLS

             Basic                    0.2276∗∗             0.1395∗∗      0.0563∗∗     0.0396∗∗    0.0316∗∗
                                          (0.0665)         (0.0457)      (0.0222)     (0.0136)    (0.0105)

             Restricted               0.2353∗∗             0.1537∗∗      0.0496∗∗     0.0349∗∗    0.0263∗∗
                                           (0.06)          (0.0434)      (0.0212)      (0.013)    (0.0101)

             Covariates               0.2268∗∗             0.1513∗∗      0.0616∗∗     0.0362∗∗     0.03∗∗
                                          (0.0618)         (0.0414)      (0.0205)     (0.0133)    (0.0097)

             # nearest neighbours =          3                5            10            15         20

Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a CRO. “Basic” rows include
only controls shown & # of neighbors attending meeting and a control for whether household has
neighbors outside treatment block. “Restricted” rows are the same as basic, except sample and
neighbor sets are restricted to households with non-missing baseline data. “Covariates” columns
include household and average neighbor set controls for Log(parcel area), year of purchase, rental status,
owner residence. Each column represents a diﬀerent nearest-neighbor set (i.e. 3n = 3 closest neighbors).
Conley-adjusted standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                                                            39
Table 15: Barafu - impact of neighbor’s adoption for nth nearest-neighbor sets, without
meeting controls

                                        (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)
             OLS

             Basic                    0.0917∗∗    0.0735∗∗   0.0476∗∗    0.0351∗∗   0.0246∗∗
                                       (0.0232)   (0.0173)    (0.0107)   (0.0087)    (0.0075)

             Restricted               0.0941∗∗    0.0814∗∗   0.0447∗∗    0.0328∗∗   0.0256∗∗
                                       (0.0235)   (0.0173)    (0.0113)   (0.0091)    (0.0074)

             Covariates               0.0919∗∗    0.0822∗∗   0.0417∗∗    0.0267∗∗   0.0248∗∗
                                       (0.0242)   (0.0181)    (0.0121)   (0.0102)    (0.0078)

             2SLS

             Basic                    0.2478∗∗    0.1421∗∗   0.0392∗     0.0262∗∗    0.0147
                                       (0.0604)   (0.0435)    (0.0202)   (0.0132)    (0.0098)

             Restricted               0.1911∗∗    0.1309∗∗   0.0352∗     0.0211      0.0145
                                       (0.0611)   (0.0435)    (0.0213)   (0.0134)    (0.0097)

             Covariates               0.2024∗∗    0.1426∗∗   0.0511∗∗    0.0338∗∗   0.0261∗∗
                                       (0.0628)    (0.041)    (0.0213)   (0.0133)    (0.0088)

             # nearest neighbours =       3          5          10         15          20

Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a CRO. “Basic” rows include
only controls shown & # of neighbors attending meeting and a control for whether household has
neighbors outside treatment block. “Restricted” rows are the same as basic, except sample and
neighbor sets are restricted to households with non-missing baseline data. “Covariates” columns
include household and average neighbor set controls for Log(parcel area), year of purchase, rental status,
owner residence. Each column represents a diﬀerent nearest-neighbor set (i.e. 3n = 3 closest neighbors).
Conley-adjusted standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01


       Table 16: Kati - impact of neighbor’s adoption for nth nearest-neighbor sets

                                        (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)
             OLS

             Basic                    0.1141∗∗    0.0944∗∗   0.063∗∗     0.0456∗∗   0.0379∗∗
                                       (0.0247)   (0.0186)    (0.0116)   (0.0094)    (0.0071)

             Restricted               0.1201∗∗    0.098∗∗    0.0662∗∗    0.0431∗∗   0.0361∗∗
                                       (0.0261)   (0.0192)    (0.0121)   (0.0095)    (0.0073)

             Covariates               0.1122∗∗    0.0788∗∗   0.0503∗∗    0.0316∗∗   0.0247∗∗
                                       (0.0269)   (0.0211)    (0.0149)   (0.0107)    (0.0086)

             2SLS

             Basic                     0.1869     0.2061∗∗   0.0957∗∗    0.0605∗∗    0.034
                                       (0.1293)   (0.0737)    (0.0468)   (0.0277)    (0.0242)

             Restricted                0.2249∗    0.2248∗∗   0.1079∗∗    0.0606∗∗    0.0324
                                       (0.1239)   (0.0749)    (0.0423)   (0.0252)    (0.0218)

             Covariates                0.1437     0.2311∗∗   0.1217∗     0.0454      0.0256
                                       (0.1301)   (0.0915)    (0.0727)   (0.0511)    (0.0484)

             # nearest neighbours =       3          5          10         15          20

Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a CRO. “Basic” rows include
only controls shown & # of neighbors attending meeting and a control for whether household has
neighbors outside treatment block. “Restricted” rows are the same as basic, except sample and
neighbor sets are restricted to households with non-missing baseline data. “Covariates” columns
include household and average neighbor set controls for Log(parcel area), year of purchase, rental status,
owner residence. Each column represents a diﬀerent nearest-neighbor set (i.e. 3n = 3 closest neighbors).
Conley-adjusted standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                                                   40
      Table 17: Percentage of predictions outside of [0,1] in LPM model (Barafu)

               # Neighbours                     3         5       10          15    20
               OLS
               Basic                            0          0     .0022       0        0
               Restricted                       0          0        0     .0024       0
               Restricted + Controls          .021       .038     .043     .036     .033
               IV
               Basic                          .036        .062    .04         .04   .036
               Restricted                      .02       .0022   .0022         0      0
               Restricted + Controls          .019          0      0           0      0
               Each cell shows the % of observations with predicted values which
               fall outside of the [0,1] interval for a given speciﬁcation.
               Results are from Barafu nearest-neighbour regressions.


A.2    Extra robustness: block ﬁxed eﬀects and outside-neighbor set adop-
       tion
To ensure that the main results in this paper are not being driven by block-level unob-
servables, I have re-run the main speciﬁcation with treatment block ﬁxed eﬀects. The
results are presented in Table 18. The results are broadly similar to what has been seen
before, although they are less-precisely estimated.
    Another concern is the identiﬁcation of the correct neighbor set. Under the assumption
that a nearest-neighbor set of size n is the “correct” neighbor set (i.e. it captures all
neighbors relevant for the CRO adoption decision), then estimates of ρ using smaller
nearest-neighbor sets may be biased upward. For instance, if the main speciﬁcation (1)
is estimated using the index household’s ﬁve nearest-neighbors, the titling decisions of
neighbors outside of this group will inﬂuence both the ﬁve nearest-neighbors and the
household in question. Therefore, nearest-neighbor sets which are “too small” will also
be proxying for the larger, “correct” neighbor sets, and so per-neighbor estimates will
be biased upwards. This does not prevent identiﬁcation of ρ, but it does complicated
its interpretation. Instrumenting might take care of this problem, but the instruments
used here (the percentage of neighbor who are treated) will also be correlated across
diﬀerent-sized neighbor sets.
    To account for this, Table 19 re-runs the main speciﬁcation while controlling for the
percentage of neighbors outside of the chosen neighbor set (up to twenty-nearest neigh-
bors) who have purchased a CRO. So, for example, when the speciﬁed neighbor set is
the ﬁve-nearest neighbors, a control is included for the % of excluded neighbors (those
between the sixth and twentieth-nearest neighbors) who have also adopted a CRO. The
results indicate that speciﬁcations using smaller neighbor sets might be upward-biased
(the 2SLS estimates for three-nearest neighbors are 0.159 for the full speciﬁcation, versus
0.203 in Table 5). However, estimates of larger neighbor sets are very close to what was
seen in previous results.




                                                    41
Table 18: Barafu - impact of neighbor’s adoption - nearest neighbor - block ﬁxed eﬀects

                                         (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
             OLS

             Basic                     0.077∗∗    0.0668∗∗   0.0489∗∗    0.0379∗∗   0.0328∗∗
                                       (0.0246)   (0.0182)    (0.0117)    (0.01)    (0.0098)

             Restricted               0.0702∗∗    0.0687∗∗   0.0421∗∗    0.0341∗∗   0.0302∗∗
                                       (0.0251)   (0.0191)    (0.0127)    (0.011)   (0.0112)

             Covariates               0.0642∗∗    0.068∗∗    0.0352∗∗    0.0189     0.0175
                                       (0.0253)   (0.0199)    (0.0139)    (0.013)   (0.0121)

             2SLS

             Basic                    0.2259∗∗    0.1501∗∗   0.0489∗     0.0363∗∗   0.0265∗
                                       (0.0715)   (0.0507)    (0.0261)   (0.0168)   (0.0144)

             Restricted               0.1664∗∗    0.1398∗∗   0.0511∗     0.0314∗    0.0177
                                       (0.0714)   (0.0532)    (0.0267)   (0.0187)   (0.0179)

             Covariates               0.1825∗∗    0.1446∗∗   0.0644∗∗    0.0479∗∗   0.0312∗∗
                                       (0.0734)   (0.0505)    (0.0276)   (0.0176)   (0.0156)

             # nearest neighbours =       3          5          10          15        20


Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a CRO. “Basic” rows include
only controls shown & # of neighbors attending meeting and a control for whether household has
neighbors outside treatment block. “Restricted” rows are the same as basic, except sample and
neighbor sets are restricted to households with non-missing baseline data. “Covariates” columns
include household and average neighbor set controls for Log(parcel area), year of purchase, rental status,
owner residence. Each column represents a diﬀerent nearest-neighbor set (i.e. 3 = 3 closest neighbors).
Conley standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01


 Table 19: Barafu - nearest neighbor - controlling for adoption outside of neighbor set

                                         (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
             OLS

             Basic                    0.0943∗∗    0.0781∗∗   0.0515∗∗    0.0389∗∗   0.0299∗∗
                                       (0.0226)   (0.0167)    (0.0104)   (0.0086)   (0.0074)

             Restricted               0.0911∗∗    0.0815∗∗   0.0472∗∗    0.0366∗∗   0.0302∗∗
                                        (0.023)   (0.0171)    (0.0112)   (0.0089)   (0.0072)

             Covariates               0.0879∗∗    0.0821∗∗   0.0447∗∗    0.0301∗∗   0.028∗∗
                                       (0.0233)   (0.0178)    (0.0118)   (0.0101)   (0.0078)

             2SLS

             Basic                    0.1992∗∗    0.1266∗∗   0.0458∗∗    0.0352∗∗   0.0239∗∗
                                       (0.0581)   (0.0397)    (0.0182)   (0.0118)   (0.0094)

             Restricted               0.1524∗∗    0.1171∗∗   0.041∗∗     0.0303∗∗   0.0217∗∗
                                        (0.062)   (0.0444)    (0.0202)   (0.0128)    (0.01)

             Covariates               0.1597∗∗    0.1299∗∗   0.0555∗∗    0.0402∗∗   0.0292∗∗
                                       (0.0615)   (0.0406)    (0.0194)   (0.0125)   (0.0088)

             # nearest neighbours =       3          5          10          15        20


Dependent variable is a dummy variable = 1 if the household purchases a CRO. “Basic” rows include
only controls shown & # of neighbors attending meeting and a control for whether household has
neighbors outside treatment block. “Restricted” rows are the same as basic, except sample and
neighbor sets are restricted to households with non-missing baseline data. “Covariates” columns
include household and average neighbor set controls for Log(parcel area), year of purchase, rental status,
owner residence. Each column represents a diﬀerent nearest-neighbor set (i.e. 3 = 3 closest neighbors).
For all nearest-neighbor sets < 20, a control is included for the take up of households outside of the
neighbor set, but within the 20-nearest neighbors cut-oﬀ. Conley standard errors in parentheses.
∗
  p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                                                   42
