                                               WPS8043


Policy Research Working Paper                 8043




                         Stronger Together
   Intra-Household Cooperation and Household Welfare
                      in Malawi

                             Nancy McCarthy
                               Talip Kilic




Development Data Group
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8043


  Abstract
  It has long been recognized that household decision-making                        achieving intra-household cooperation. The model’s pre-
  may not result in outcomes consistent with the unitary                            dictions are in turn tested using a unique panel data set on
  household model. Within the collective bargaining frame-                          married couples in rural Malawi. The analysis shows that,
  work, consumption decisions would be driven by the                                relative to increasing wives’ bargaining power, improving
  spouse with greater bargaining power, while the outcomes                          cooperation between spouses would exert larger and sta-
  would still be Pareto efficient. Within the non-cooperative                       tistically significant positive impacts on total household
  framework, households would not achieve Pareto efficient                          income and consumption expenditures per capita, as well
  outcomes, and under the simplest representation, bargain-                         as the share of household consumption devoted to public
  ing power would not affect consumption decisions. This                            goods. Supported also by cross-country qualitative research,
  paper develops a model that allows consumption patterns                           the results suggest that household public goods are relatively
  and labor supply to be affected by both bargaining power                          important to both women and men in rural Malawi, hus-
  and non-cooperation. The model highlights the potential                           bands’ capacity to control wives’ incomes is relatively limited,
  gains from improving bargaining power versus increasing                           and development programs that promote intra-household
  cooperation between spouses, and presents conditions                              cooperation could lead to greater gains in income and
  under which relatively large gains would be expected                              household public goods provision compared with inter-
  from moving to more equitable bargaining power versus                             ventions focusing exclusively on women’s empowerment.




  This paper is a product of the Development Data Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open
  access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working
  Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at tkilic@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
         Stronger Together: Intra-Household Cooperation and Household Welfare in Malawi

                                                               Nancy McCarthy† and Talip Kilic‡1




JEL Codes: C23, C72, J16, O12.
Keywords: Non-Cooperative Bargaining Model, Intra-Household Cooperation, Women’s
Empowerment, Household Welfare, Malawi, Sub-Saharan Africa.




                                                            
1    †
     Research Manager, LEAD Analytics, Inc., 5136 Nebraska Ave. NW, Washington, D.C, 20008.
nmccarthy@leadanalyticsinc.com. ‡ Corresponding Author. Senior Economist, Living Standards Measurement Study
(LSMS), Survey Unit, Development Data Group, The World Bank, Via Labicana 110, 00179 Rome, Italy.
tkilic@worldbank.org. The authors thank Joshua Brubaker for excellent research assistance, and the participants of
the Seventh International Conference on Agricultural Statistics (October 26-28, 2016, Rome, Italy) for their
comments. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work fully reflect the views of LEAD
Analytics.
1. Introduction

In the context of the economic growth debate, Boserup (1970) presented a compelling argument
that women could lose control over resources under certain development pathways. This could in
turn lead to reductions in their own welfare, and potentially to inefficiencies in production and
slower economic development. Boserup’s key message of empowering women to ensure their full
participation in development, combined with other feminist research and advocacy at the time,
proved to be an exceptionally powerful message, leading to the broad-reaching and influential
“women in development” paradigm, followed by the “gender and development” paradigm.

Boserup’s argument is not consistent with the standard unitary model of utility maximization,
where households act as a single unit to achieve Pareto efficient outcomes. Instead, it is more
consistent with outcomes arising from intra-household bargaining models. The first theoretical
treatment of intra-household bargaining was undertaken by McElroy and Horney (1982). The
authors developed a game-theoretic cooperative bargaining model to highlight how inter-spousal
bargaining power influences consumption patterns, including allocations to household public
goods such as expenditures on boys and girls schooling or health. Under the cooperative bargaining
framework, while it is assumed households reach a Pareto-efficient allocation of resources, the
distribution of resulting income changes as spouses’ relative bargaining power changes. As the
wife’s bargaining power improves, the consumption basket shifts towards her preferences. If there
are positive spillovers to society from household public goods – such as healthier, better educated
children – then public policies to empower women can increase these public goods to the extent
that women value such goods relatively more than men. However, given the assumption of Pareto
efficiency, cooperative bargaining models do not capture potential inefficiencies in production and
income generation.

Much of the subsequent theoretical and empirical work on intra-household bargaining has retained
the collective bargaining model approach that assumes Pareto efficiency (Chiappori, 1992;
Browning and Chiappori, 1998; Pollack, 2005). Although empirical research in developed
countries tends to support the Pareto efficiency hypothesis, the evidence in developing countries
often lends support to the hypothesis of Pareto inefficient outcomes (Katz, 1995; Udry, 1996;
McPeak and Doss, 2006; Heath and Tan, 2016). Simple non-cooperative models with one pure
public good and one private good for the wife and for the husband yield the well-known result that
the household will provide less of the public good vis-à-vis a unitary household, and that resource
allocation will not be Pareto efficient (Warr, 1983; Cornes and Sandler, 1984). However, inter-
spousal differences in bargaining power will have no effect on consumption patterns (Warr, 1983;
Bergstrom et al. 1986; Browning et al., 2010). The latter is primarily driven by the assumption that
women’s and men’s contribution to the provision of household public goods are perfect substitutes.




                                                                                                  2
However, if one assumes that spouses’ contributions are imperfect substitutes, then bargaining
power will matter for consumption. This is the basic assumption of the “separate spheres”
collective bargaining models, where the non-cooperative outcome serves as the threat point
(Lundberg and Pollack, 1993; Chen and Woolley, 2001; Anderson and Eswaran, 2009). External
changes that increase the wife’s utility under non-cooperation shift her threat point, leading to
greater bargaining power under the collective outcome. However, the outcomes of the collective
bargaining game are still Pareto efficient (Lundberg and Pollack, 1993). Thus, only the non-
cooperative separate spheres model captures both of Boserup’s hypotheses: 1) that bargaining
power matters in the distribution of resources and, and 2) that household production can be
inefficient, particularly in the provision of household public goods.

In this paper, we are interested in explicitly comparing gains from achieving women’s
empowerment versus gains from moving from non-cooperation to cooperation. These gains
operate through different channels, and the comparison highlights the conditions under which we
would expect relatively large gains from empowerment versus cooperation. Our comparisons
result from modeling four different scenarios based on a separate spheres model: 1) unequal
bargaining power, non-cooperation; 2) equal bargaining power, non-cooperation; 3) unequal
bargaining power, cooperation; and 4) equal bargaining power, cooperation. Whereas the first
scenario leads to the worst set of outcomes in terms of women’s empowerment, the fourth scenario
leads to the best outcomes. More interesting to consider are movements from the first scenario to
the second and third scenarios, to determine the conditions under which the gains achieved by
promoting empowerment are greater than gains from promoting cooperation within the household.
For instance, our theoretical model demonstrates that improving women’s empowerment can have
limited impacts on total household income and household public good provision if non-
cooperation within the household still prevails. Under other conditions, moving to cooperation will
have limited impacts on household good provision, though total income will always increase.

Given the emphasis on women’s empowerment in the development discourse, it is useful to clearly
capture the different impacts one would expect from increasing women’s bargaining power versus
increasing intra-household cooperation. Thus, our first contribution to the literature is the
development of a stylized model that captures these differences, and that characterizes the
conditions under which we would expect greater gains from increasing bargaining power versus
increasing intra-household cooperation. In reality, even though increasing women’s empowerment
may increase intra-household cooperation, there may still be losses from not additionally focusing
on gains from fostering cooperative decision-making within the household.

Our second contribution is to empirically test the model hypotheses using the sub-sample of rural
households compromised of married couples that were interviewed in 2010 and 2013 by the
Malawi Integrated Household Panel Survey (IHPS). The IHPS solicited information on whom in
the household controls income from each source of income, allowing for both individual and joint


                                                                                                 3
control. The data allow us to compute (1) the share of jointly controlled income in total income to
proxy for intra-household cooperation, and (2) the share of female income in total disjoint (male
+ female) income to proxy for wife’s bargaining power. Allowing for non-linear impacts, and
using panel regression models that control for time-invariant household-level unobserved
heterogeneity, we explore the impacts of the shares of interest on household welfare outcomes. As
far as we are aware, this is only the second paper presenting empirical evidence on the welfare
impacts of intra-household cooperation separate from that of women’s empowerment.

There are three main findings. First, we find that total household gross income per capita is
positively correlated with the share of jointly controlled income in total income, except when the
total income is entirely jointly controlled. The same outcome is positively correlated with the share
of female income in total disjoint income only while moving from zero to a low-level of the share
of interest. Second, total, food and non-food household consumption expenditures per capita
increase over a wide range of increasing joint shares, but demonstrate no association with the share
of female income. Third, through seemingly unrelated regressions of consumption shares, we find
that only higher joint shares lead to a greater share of consumption allocated to household public
goods. Taken together, the results suggest that, in rural Malawi, development programs that
promote intra-household cooperation could lead to greater gains in income and household public
goods provision compared to interventions focusing exclusively on women’s empowerment.

The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we review the historical development of the
concept of women’s empowerment and its influence on development policy, followed by a review
of the relevant empirical literature. In section 3, we present the theoretical model capturing the
potential impacts of increasing intra-household cooperation and/or wife’s bargaining power.
Section 4 describes the data and our empirical model, followed by the discussion of the results in
Section 5. Section 6 discusses the policy implications of our findings for the design of development
projects and government policies whose main objectives are to enhance household public good
provision as well as women’s empowerment.

2. Literature Review

Initially, Boserup (1970) proposed that development, promulgated by external forces and
combined with local social norms, could lead to an erosion in women’s control of assets and
income. This in turn could lead to overall reductions in their welfare, and potentially to inefficient
production. In response to Boserup’s arguments, as well as to the broader feminist agenda gaining
political momentum at the time, the women in development (WID) movement in the United States
was born. By 1973, the Percy Amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act was adopted, which called
for foreign assistance programs and projects to integrate women into their efforts in order to
improve their status, and thus improve development efforts more broadly. In 1975, the first United
Nations (UN) World Conference on Women was held, emphasizing the need to integrate women


                                                                                                    4
in the development process and to ensure their full participation (United Nations, 1986). This in
turn led to the UN’s declaring 1976-1985 as the UN Decade for Women.

The focus of most WID projects was on helping women to gain access to resources such as
education, credit, and land, as well as on increasing women’s capacity to actively participate in the
development process (USAID, 1983). The fact that most women are members of households that
also include men was recognized, but there was little emphasis on promoting cooperation between
men and women within the same household. By 1985, limited gains from earlier WID projects led
to a call to switch to the “gender and development” (GAD) paradigm, which focused on
mainstreaming gender across all projects, and working with governments to mainstream gender
concerns across line ministries (Okali, 2011). It was felt that mainstreaming would help restructure
the inequality in relationships between men and women. Nonetheless, the GAD focus on
mainstreaming actually placed even less emphasis on intra-household dynamics compared to the
earlier WID paradigm.

By the early 2000s, although a number of researchers stressed the need to consider that family
members had at least some joint, or shared, interests (Jackson, 2003; Sharma, 2004; Whitehead
and Kabeer, 2001), the emphasis on women’s empowerment dominates in key policy papers of the
donor community. For instance, the USAID Policy Statement on “Gender Equality and Female
Empowerment” discusses the need to reduce gender disparities in access to resources and
opportunities, reduce gender-based violence, and increase the capacity of women and girls to
realize their full potential (USAID, 2012). Of the seven guiding principles, none explicitly
discusses cooperation or shared interest within the household. Interestingly, the World Bank’s
World Development Report 2012 specifically mentions intra-household cooperation. The first
instance discusses increasing women’s voice within the household through increasing intra-
household cooperation, the second discusses decreasing violence against women through
awareness campaigns for couples, and the third discusses increasing child welfare outcomes
through the promotion of positive parenting by couples (World Bank, 2011). Further, the United
Kingdom Department for International Development (DFID) Strategic Vision for Girls and
Women focuses on the capacity of girls and women to realize their potential and live free from
violence. To achieve the strategic vision, DFID recognizes the importance of securing the support
of boys and men in reaching these goals (DFID, 2011). Thus, there are limited signs that
development actors are starting to take intra-household relationships into consideration as well as
women’s empowerment.

Similar to the international donor literature, most empirical research has focused on determining
whether and to what extent wife’s bargaining power affects consumption patterns, wife’s labor
supply, and resource allocation. With respect to impacts on consumption patterns, most studies in
developing countries show positive, though often limited, impacts of increased bargaining power



                                                                                                   5
on (i) consumption shares of women’s private goods; (ii) consumption shares of household public
goods; and/or (iii) women’s labor supply.

Quisumbing and Maluccio (2003) examine the impact of the wife’s bargaining power on food,
education, health, child clothing, and alcohol/tobacco shares using data from Bangladesh,
Indonesia, Ethiopia and South Africa. Their most robust result is a positive impact of the wife’s
bargaining power on education across the three countries. However, most coefficients on women’s
absolute and relative bargaining power are only significant and positive for one or two share
categories across the four countries. Other studies on consumption shares give similar results, with
the most robust positive impacts on education, some positive impacts on food consumption and
women’s goods, some negative impacts on men’s goods, and often a large number of non-
significant impacts, including on health and children’s clothing (Quisumbing and de la Briere,
2000; Doss, 2006; Backiny-Yetna and Wodon, 2010; Bussolo et al., 2009).

Duflo and Udry (2004) use male, female, and joint household income to predict consumption
expenditures, and proxy for male, female and joint incomes with different crop incomes that have
been identified in the anthropological literature as falling under the control of husbands, wives or
the household as a whole. This paper is one of the few to include a measure of jointly controlled
income in an analysis of consumption expenditure patterns. The authors find that male and female
incomes both have a significant positive impact on adult goods, and that female incomes have a
statistically significant impact on most food categories. On the other hand, jointly controlled
income exerts a significant positive impact on all household public goods, including education as
well as food, and significant negative impacts on adult goods.

Another strand of literature looks at the impact of the wife’s bargaining power on subjective
measures of the wife’s decision-making powers. For instance, Anderson and Eswaran (2009) find
that the wife’s landholdings and her independent income earnings both have statistically
significant impacts on various measures of autonomy. Doss et al. (2014) also look at the impact of
both women’s sole ownership of and joint ownership of land on women’s self-reported level of
input into several farm and non-farm decision-making processes. In the three African countries
included in their study, both sole and joint land ownership increase women’s input into decision-
making across most of the domains considered, though neither has a statistically significant impact
using the Indian data. Interestingly, results from a study of Brazil’s Bolsa Familia program, which
provided cash transfers to women in poor households, indicate that such transfers have positive
impacts on women’s autonomy over many decisions only in urban, and not rural, areas (de Brauw
et al., 2014).

A number of empirical papers have also tested whether household outcomes are Pareto efficient
in rural, developing country settings, an assumption underlying the hypotheses of the collective
bargaining models. While much of the evidence from developed countries supports Pareto


                                                                                                  6
efficiency, the evidence from developing countries often does not. Instead, the results are
consistent with the hypotheses from non-cooperative bargaining models. Udry (1996) finds that
factor allocations across men’s and women’s plots are not efficient in Burkina Faso, while Akresh
(2005) documents that agricultural production is Pareto inefficient also in Burkina Faso. McPeak
and Doss (2006) find inefficient household outcomes tied to husband’s ability to force livestock
migration decisions that limit wife’s ability to market milk. Heath and Tan (2016) show that an
increase in women’s unearned income in India due to the changes in the inheritance laws have led
to an increase in women’s labor supply, consistent with the non-cooperative model predictions,
but not consistent with the cooperative bargaining model.2

There is relatively little empirical evidence of the impact of increased cooperation within the
household on household welfare, especially for rural households in developing countries, outside
of the Duflo and Udry (2004) article. Lecoutere and Jassogne (2016) ran experimental games with
couples who had and had not participated in couples’ trainings for coffee farming households in
Uganda that stressed cooperation between spouses. Results suggest that couples who did
participate in the trainings were more likely to reach cooperative outcomes in the experiments.

In summary, most of the theoretical literature has emphasized cooperative bargaining models, and
much of the empirical literature has focused on testing hypotheses from those models. However,
in the developing country context, the empirical literature suggests that outcomes are more
consistent with non-cooperative model hypotheses. Yet, there remains a dearth of empirical
evidence on the separate impacts of empowerment and intra-household cooperation.

3. Theoretical Model

The purpose of this modeling exercise is to explicitly evaluate gains from equalizing bargaining
power within the household as distinct from gains to increasing cooperation within the household.
We first consider a non-cooperative intra-household utility maximization problem, where the wife
and husband choose the optimal amount of a private good to consume, xf, xm, respectively, and the
optimal amount of the household goods to provide, gf, gm respectively. The husband is assumed to
be able to control a share of his wife’s income, represented in the model as 1 – δ. We assume that
only the wife benefits from her private good, and only the husband benefits from his private good.
Both spouses benefit from the household goods provided, though not necessarily to the same
extent. As discussed above, if the spousal contributions are perfect substitutes, then the extent of
the wife’s bargaining power will not affect the total amount of the good provided (Browning et al.,
2010, Lundberg and Pollack, 1993; Doepke and Tirtilt, 2014). To characterize a game where
bargaining power does affect contributions to the household good, we make the additional

                                                            
2
 Increased labor supply is not consistent with the simple cooperative models where bargaining power is not a function
of hours worked outside the home; however, as Heath and Tan (2016) note, if working outside does increase
bargaining power, then similar results on labor allocation can materialize under the cooperative framework.

                                                                                                                   7
assumption that the spouses’ contributions to the household good are additively separable, as in
Heath and Tan (2016) and Anderson and Eswaran (2009).

In addition to choosing the consumption basket, the wife also chooses the amount of labor to
supply to generate income, Lf for a given wage, wf. The opportunity cost of labor is captured by rf,
and an additional term capturing disutility of working as the proportion of her income under her
own control, δ, decreases. The total cost of working is thus written as               	    . Adding disutility
from having income coopted by the husband ensures that the wife’s labor supply increases as her
bargaining power increases; without this assumption, the marginal utility of income from an
increase in her bargaining power would be exactly offset by the marginal disutility of supplying
more labor.

Following other papers that capture female labor supply within an intra-household bargaining
framework, we assume that the husband’s labor supply is fixed at Lm , and that he receives a wage
rate of wm. Given the separate spheres assumption on household good provision, allowing the
husband to choose optimal labor does not alter the wife’s maximization problem or the resulting
labor supply or consumption decisions. One could let the husband choose the optimal proportion
of the wife’s income to control as well; however, in this simplified model, that proportion is always
equal to one-third, and does not depend on other parameters.

After solving for the “worst case” scenario, where spouses do not cooperate and the husband
controls a fraction of his wife’s income, we next consider outcomes when spouses still do not
cooperate, but the husband cannot control any of his wife’s income. These are outcomes that would
arise if wives were fully empowered over control of their own incomes, but non-cooperation still
prevailed within the household. In the third scenario, we assume perfect cooperation, but allow the
husband to control the wife’s income. Finally, we consider outcomes under the “best case”
scenario, where there is perfect cooperation within the household, and the husband cannot control
his wife’s income. Comparing the subsequent outcomes across the four scenarios enables us to
highlight the circumstances under which programs to empower women’s control over their
incomes lead to relatively higher gains vis-à-vis programs that foster intra-household cooperation.

3.1. Non-Cooperative Outcome - Husband Can Control Wife’s Income (   1 )

The constrained maximization problems for the wife and the husband are as follows:
                                                    rf
         max U f  a ln x f  b ln g f  d ln g m     L f 2   f  w f L f  cxf x f  cg g f          [1]
       x f ,g f ,Lf                                 2
         max U m  m ln xm  n ln g f  p ln gm  m  1    wf L f  wm Lm  cxm xm  cg gm           [2]
         xm , gm




                                                                                                            8
Maximization results in the first-order conditions that are provided in Appendix I; these can be
solved for wife’s private and public good, her labor supply, and the husband’s private and public
good as follows:

                      Wife                                                   Husband


        xf 
                      a 1.5 w f
                                                  [3]        xm     1    w f L f  wm Lm 
                                                                    m                                      [6]
                  cxf rf.5  a  b 
                                            .5
                                                                             cxm  m  p 

        gf 
                       b 1.5 w f
                                                  [4]        gm      1    w f L f  wm Lm 
                                                                     p                                     [7]
                  cgf rf.5  a  b 
                                            .5
                                                                             cgm  m  p 

                   .5  a  b 
                                       .5

        Lf                                       [5]
                           rf.5

3.2. Non-Cooperation Outcome - Husband Cannot Control Wife’s Income (   1 )

Here, the maximization problems are as follows:

                                                        rf
         max U f  a ln x f  b ln g f  d ln g m           L f 2   f  w f L f  cxf x f  cg g f       [8]
       x f ,g f ,Lf                                     2
       max U m  m ln xm  n ln g f  p ln gm  m  wm Lm  cxm xm  cg gm                                 [9]
        xm , gm



Equilibrium private and household goods, and labor supply are as follows:

                      Wife                                          Husband

                           aw f                                        mwm Lm
        xf                                      [10]        xm                                            [13]
                  cxf rf.5  a  b 
                                            .5
                                                                    c xm  m  p 
                           bw f                                         pwm Lm
        gf                                      [11]        gm                                            [14]
                  cgf r   .5
                          f    a  b
                                            .5
                                                                    c gm  m  p 

                a  b
                                  .5

       Lf                                       [12]
                      rf.5

Comparing the equations for wife’s household good provision, [4] and [11], we note that
eliminating the ability of the husband to control wife’s income unambiguously increases the wife’s
provision of her household good. On the other hand, the husband simultaneously reduces


                                                                                                               9
provision of his household good. Comparing the wife’s increase to the husband’s decrease, total
household public good provision increases when the following holds:

              b 1   1.5             p 1    L f w f
                                    
          cgf rf.5  a  b             cgm  m  p 
                               .5                      .5




The expression is more likely to hold when the wife values the household public good relatively
more than the husband, when the wife’s disutility from working is lower, and when the wife
provides her household public good at a relatively lower cost. Much of the discussion in the
literature has focused almost exclusively on household public good provision when the wife’s
preferences for these goods are greater than that of the husband. Our results highlight that, even if
the wife does value the utility from these goods relatively more than the husband  b  p  , when
the husband can provide these goods more cheaply, then household public good provision can still
decline as the wife’s ability to control her own income increases. For instance, home or equipment
repairs that require heavy labor could drop when the husband no longer controls a fraction of his
wife’s income; at least in cases when, due to social norms, the wife has never acquired the required
skills and/or when the husband is more capable of undertaking the task at a lower cost.

    3.3. Cooperative Outcome - Husband Can Control Wife’s Income (   1 )

Next, we consider the solutions when each spouse internalizes the other spouse’s gain from the
household public good. In this scenario, however, the husband can still control a fraction of the
wife’s income. The optimization problem for the wife and husband, respectively, can be written
as:
                                                           r
      max U f  a ln x f  b ln g f  d ln g m  n ln g f  f L f 2   f  w f L f  cxf x f  cg g f  [15]
    x f ,g f ,Lf                                           2
    max U m  m ln xm  n ln g f  p ln gm  d ln gm  m  1    wf L f  wm Lm  cxm xm  cg gm    [16]
    xm , gm



                     Wife                                                 Husband


          xf 
                         a 1.5 w f
                                                    [17]     xm     1    w f L f  wm Lm 
                                                                    m                                  [20]
                  cxf rf.5  a  b  n 
                                               .5
                                                                         cxm  m  p  d 

                     b  n   1.5 w f                                   1    w f L f  wm Lm 
                                                                     pd                         
          gf                                       [18]     gm                                         [21]
                  cgf rf.5  a  b  n 
                                        .5
                                                                          cgm  m  p  d 

                   .5  a  b  n 
                                          .5

          Lf                                       [19]
                           rf.5

                                                                                                           10
For the wife, comparing equations [19] and [5], we can see that her labor supply increases when
she internalizes the positive externality her household good provides to her husband compared to
the non-cooperative scenario. She also provides more of the household good (compare equation
[18] with equation [4]), and purchases less of the private good (compare equation [17] with
equation [3]). The husband also unambiguously reduces his expenditure on the private good and
increases provision of the household good.

Moving to the cooperative outcome leads to greater household public goods provision, even when
the husband can control a fraction of his wife’s income. This is in contrast to the situation
immediately above; a greater amount of the household public good does not necessarily materialize
when the wife has full control over her income but non-cooperation prevails within the household.
This scenario increases the wife’s labor supply in comparison to Scenario 2, as presented in Section
3.2, when the following condition holds:


                       .5  a  b  n                 a  b
                                       .5                        .5

          LC ,U
           f                               L
                                             NC ,E
                                             f       
                              rf.5                        rf.5

where the superscripts NC , C denote non-cooperation and cooperation, respectively; and U and E
denote lack of empowerment (subject to income control) and empowerment, respectively. Labor
under the C,U scenario will be greater than the NC,E scenario when the husband controls a
relatively small fraction of her income to begin with, and the wife’s internalization of her
husband’s benefits from the household public good increases.

     3.4. Cooperative Outcome - Husband Cannot Control Wife’s Income

Finally, we consider the case when spouses cooperate by internalizing each other’s externalities,
and when the husband cannot control his wife’s income. This leads to the following maximization
problems for the wife and husband, respectively:
                                                       rf
  max U f  a ln x f  b ln g f  d ln g m  n ln g f  L f 2   f  w f L f  cxf x f  cg g f  [22]
x f ,g f ,Lf                                           2


max U m  m ln xm  n ln g f  p ln gm  d ln gm  m  wm Lm  cxm xm  cg gm                   [23]
xm , gm




                                                                                                    11
The resulting optimal private and household public goods, and labor supply for the wife are given
by:

                             Wife                                                       Husband


                                      aw f                                              w f L f  wm Lm 
                                                                                      m                 
               xf                                             [24]            xm                           [27]
                         cxf rf.5  a  b  n 
                                                       .5
                                                                                       cxm  m  p  d 

                               b  n wf                                               p  d  wm Lm
               gf                                             [25]            gm                           [28]
                          cgf rf.5  a  b  n                                       cgm  m  p  d 
                                                .5



                        a  b  n
                                              .5

               Lf                                             [26]
                                  rf.5

In this case, equilibrium levels of the wife’s provision of the household public good and her labor
supply are the greatest in comparison to any of the above scenarios. While the husband’s provision
of the household public good may be lower in comparison to Scenario 2, it will still be greater than
the worst-case scenario.

3.5.            Summarizing Model Results on Wife’s Labor Supply

In the empirical section of the paper, we will look at the impact of different patterns of control
over income on overall household income and consumption outcomes. These outcomes are mainly
driven by the wife’s labor supply decision. In Table 1, we reproduce equilibrium labor supply for
the wife under the four scenarios3 considered above to facilitate comparison and to draw testable
hypotheses.

                                                                  Table 1: Wife’s Labor Supply
                                                                   under Alternative Scenarios
                                                                Scenario Wife’s Labor Supply
                                                               1. NC, U            . .

                                                               2. NC, E            .

                                                               3. C, U                 . .

                                                               4. C, E                 . .




Impacts of increasing the wife’s empowerment or increasing intra-household cooperation both
unambiguously lead to greater labor supply vis-à-vis the non-cooperative, un-empowered scenario.
Which of the two scenarios, NC,E or C,U, leads to greater labor supply depends on how much
income the husband can control versus how highly he values the household public good. Thus,

                                                            
    Since the optimal labor supply is divided by r f under all four scenarios.
3                                                                     .5




                                                                                                              12
when social norms allow the husband to coopt a large fraction of the wife’s income, empowerment
programs should perform relatively better in terms of wife’s labor supply. Where norms limit that
fraction, and where returns to household goods are high, interventions to foster cooperation among
spouses should perform relatively better. Nonetheless, the best possible outcome clearly results
when spouses cooperate and where the husband does not control his wife’s income, C,E.

4. Analysis

4.1. Data

In testing the model’s hypotheses, we use panel household survey data from the first two rounds
of the Malawi Integrated Household Panel Survey (IHPS) which was implemented by the National
Statistical Office (NSO) under the Living Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Household
Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA)4 program. In 2013, the IHPS attempted to track and resurvey
3,246 households across 204 enumeration areas (EAs) that had been previously surveyed as part
of the Third Integrated Household Survey (IHS3) 2010/11. The IHPS sample had been designed
in 2010 to be representative at the national-, urban/rural, regional levels, and for the six strata
defined by the combinations of region and urban/rural domains. In 2013, IHPS targeted all
individuals that were part of the IHS3, including those that moved away from the IHS3 dwelling
locations between 2010 and 2013. Once a split-off individual was located, the new household that
he/she formed or joined since the IHS3 interview was brought into the IHPS sample. As a result,
the overall IHPS database includes 4,000 households, which could be traced back to 3,104 IHS3
households. Attrition was limited to only 3.8 and 7.4 percent, of households and individuals,
respectively. Given our focus on intra-household decision-making in rural areas, the analysis
sample includes 1,929 households that had the same principal couple in 2010 and 2013, who were
residing in rural areas in both years.

The main IHPS fieldwork was carried out during the period of April-October 2013, with residual
tracking operations conducted during the period of November-December 2013. The survey
attempted to visit each household twice, identical to the IHS3 practice, within two weeks of the
baseline interview timeframe, and with approximately three months in between visits. In both
rounds, the sampled households were administered the multi-topic Household Questionnaire that
collected individual-disaggregated information on demographics, education, health, wage
employment, nonfarm enterprises, anthropometrics, as well as data on housing, food consumption,
food and non-food expenditures, food security, and durable and agricultural asset ownership,
among other topics. The sample households that were involved in agricultural activities (through
ownership and/or cultivation of land, and/or ownership of livestock) were administered the
                                                            
4
  The Living Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA) provides financial and
technical support to governments in Sub-Saharan Africa in the design and implementation of multi-topic, national,
panel household surveys with a strong focus on agriculture. The IHPS data and documentation are publicly available
on www.worldbank.org/lsms.

                                                                                                               13
Agriculture Questionnaire, which solicited information on land areas, labor and non-labor input
use, crop cultivation and production at the plot5-level, separately for the reference rainy and dry
seasons.

While the data do not include direct measures of either intra-household cooperation or wives’
empowerment, the IHPS included over 40 questions asked at varying levels of observation across
all income domains that could be used to identify up to 2 household members that decide on the
use of each unique source of income. Using this information, we calculate total gross income6 that
is controlled solely by females; solely by males; and jointly by females and males; and use the
share of joint controlled income in total gross income as a proxy for intra-household cooperation,
and the share of female controlled income in total disjoint gross income as a proxy for wives’
empowerment. Using the share of female controlled income in total disjoint gross income avoids
difficulties in interpreting the coefficient that would arise if we used female share in total income.
Conceptually, it also allows for a cleaner distinction between cooperation leading to joint control
of income versus wives’ bargaining power leading to greater control over disjoint income.
Appendix II provides the details on the computation of intra-household income shares.

Additionally, we would like to allow for non-linear impacts of income shares on our outcomes of
interest. However, including a squared term may magnify attenuation bias if there are measurement
errors in our income shares variables (Griliches, 1986). Income shares are, of course, based on
measures of income, which suffer from measurement error. As noted by Bound et al. (1994), fixed
effects can compound measurement error, particularly when the variable of interest is highly
correlated over time, as it is here. Therefore, instead of using intra-household income shares as
calculated above, we divided both income shares of interest into five categories. Three categories
map to income share terciles calculated in each round among households where income shares are
positive but less than 1. The fourth category contains households where the income share is equal
to zero, and the fifth contains households where the income share is equal to one.7

Table 2 presents the relevant variable means in each round, and the results from the tests of mean
and distributional differences. On our outcome variables, the inter-annual differences in means are

                                                            
5
  A plot was defined as a continuous piece of land on which a unique crop or a mixture of crops is grown, under a
uniform, consistent crop management system, not split by a path of more than one meter in width. Plot boundaries
were defined in accordance with the crops grown and the operator.
6
  Total disjoint gross income is defined as the sum of (i) gross income controlled solely by females and (ii) gross
income controlled solely by males.
7
  While misclassification errors may remain, Goldstein et al. (2008) argue that small misclassification probabilities
result in small changes in parameter estimates. To test for possible misclassification bias, we estimated our regressions
using only three categories for each share of interest, namely zero, some, and all; as well as using four categories
where “some” is broken down to above and below the median share. It is reasonable to posit that, if misclassification
is a problem, it would become more pronounced as categories are defined finer. The results using three and four
categories are substantially similar to the results shown here, with goodness of fit measures being slightly higher for
the preferred specification discussed in the subsequent section. The results from these sensitivity analyses are available
upon request.

                                                                                                                       14
either insignificant or significant but not sizeable as a percentage of the 2010 mean. However,
when mean differences are significant, the inter-annual distributional differences are significant as
well. Concerning the key explanatory variables, the average share of joint income in total income
and the average share of female controlled income in disjoint income are higher by 12.2 percentage
points and 9.0 percentage points, respectively, in 2013 vis-a-vis 2010. Focusing on the distribution
of the sample across the categories based on the share of female income in disjoint income, we
observe that while only 5.7 percent of the sample had a share of female controlled income in total
disjoint income equal to 1 in 2010, the comparable statistic in 2013 was 12.5 percent. In terms of
the distribution of the sample across the categories based on the share of joint income in total
income, the share of households in all categories with positive share values is higher in 2013
compared to 2010, and the mean differences are statistically significant across the board.

4.2. Empirical Model

To explore the relative impacts of intra-household cooperation vis-à-vis wives’ empowerment on
household welfare, we estimate the following regressions:

    1 	      	 										      	        	                	     	   	   	   	   ∂   		   ρ   ∗   	   σ	   		   		 	   					

(2) ∑                   	
                               	                               	       	       ∂        ρ   ∗       σ	           	   	

In both equations, h and t denote household and survey round, respectively, and Y represents the
outcome variable. Equation 1 is estimated as a linear panel regression with household fixed effects,
separately for each of the logarithmic, real, annual and per capita versions of household gross
income and household total, food and non-food consumption expenditures.8 Equation 2 is
estimated as a system of seemingly-unrelated regressions (SURs) in which the five dependent
variables are the shares for consumption expenditures on (i) food; (ii) public goods, defined as
education, health, clothing, and furnishings; (iii) housing and utilities; (iv) adult goods, defined as
alcohol, tobacco, transport, and communication; and (v) other goods, inclusive of recreation, hotels
and restaurants, and miscellaneous items. We rectify the absence of household fixed effects in
Equation 2 by estimating SURs with correlated random effects instead, as explained below.


                                                            
8
  We use the real (and disaggregated) consumption aggregates that are disseminated with the IHPS public use data,
which include a re-released unit-record data tied specifically to the panel sub-sample of the IHS3 2010/11 (with
adjusted sampling weights) and the corresponding 2010 consumption aggregate, which was re-visited in 2013
following the improvements in the ancillary CPI and food conversion factor data and due to the need to adjust the
approach to spatial and temporal deflation of nominal consumption in each round in view of the shorter-than-12-
month-fieldwork underlying the panel data collection. The 2010 consumption aggregate is expressed in 2013 prices
to facilitate comparisons in real terms and accounts for 132 percent inflation in between the survey rounds. The
household gross income in 2010 is expressed in 2013 terms also using the same inflationary adjustment. For more
information on the methodology underlying the computation of the IHS3 and the IHPS consumption aggregates for
the panel sub-sample, please visit https://goo.gl/WzuRZF.

                                                                                                                         15
Equation 1 and Equation 2 include F, which is a vector of four binary variables, inclusive of a
binary variable identifying whether a household has the share of female controlled income in
total disjoint income equal to 1, and three binary variables identifying whether a household is in
each of the three terciles for the share of female income in total disjoint income, computed in each
survey round and among households that have the share of female income in total disjoint income
greater than zero but less than 1 (the comparison category encompasses households whose share
of female income in total disjoint income is equal to 0); and J, which is a vector of four binary
variables, inclusive of a binary variable identifying whether a household has the share of joint
income in total income equal to 1, and three binary variables identifying whether a household is
in each of the three terciles for the share of joint income in total income, computed in each survey
round and among households that have the share of joint income in total income greater than zero
but less than 1 (the comparison category encompasses households whose share of joint income in
total income is equal to 0).

Further, C is a vector of time-variant household-level human capital, physical capital, and
demographic attributes that may affect labor productivity and consumption preferences, including
household size, dependency ratio, the number of months spent outside the household by the
household head during the past year, two binary variables identifying whether each of the
household head and his/her spouse was chronically ill at the time of the interview, household
highest year of education, total landholdings,9 and wealth index.10

T is the time fixed effect (i.e. a binary variable identifying whether the survey round is 2013); T*D
is the vector of interactions between the time fixed effect and the binary variables identifying the
household district residence, controlling for all district-level unobserved and observed time-variant
heterogeneity that might affect income and consumption; M is a vector of binary variables
identifying the household month of interview in each survey round, in view of the seasonality in
our outcome variables and possible shifts in the interview timeline between 2010 and 2013 that
might in turn bring about incomparability in outcome measurement; and α and ε are constant and
error terms, respectively;



                                                            
9
  To compute household total landholdings in acres, the agricultural plot areas are aggregated at the household-level,
across all plots that are owned and/or cultivated by the household in the reference rainy season, which was 2009/10 in
the 2010 survey round, and 2012/13 in the 2013 survey round. We use self-reported plot areas converted to acres only
when GPS-based plot areas are missing.
10
   The household wealth index is constructed using principal component analysis in each round, and takes into account
the number of rooms in the dwelling, a set of dummy variables accounting for the ownership of (1) dwelling, (2)
mortar, (3) bed, (4) table, (5) chair, (6) fan, (7) radio, (8) tape/CD player, (9) TV/VCR, (10) sewing machine, (11)
paraffin/kerosene/electric/gas stove, (12) refrigerator, (13) bicycle, (14) car/motorcycle/minibus/lorry, (15) beer
brewing drum, (16) sofa, (17) coffee table, (18) cupboard, (19) lantern, (20) clock, (21) iron, (22) computer, (23) fixed
phone line, (24) cell phone, (25) satellite dish, (26) air-conditioner, (27) washing machine, (28) generator, (29) solar
panel, (30) desk, and a vector of dummy variables capturing access to improved outer walls, roof, floor, toilet, and
water source.

                                                                                                                      16
Finally, specific to Equation 1, θ is the household fixed effect, which controls for household-level
unobserved time-invariant heterogeneity. Concerning Equation 2, given the reliance on the SURs,
θ is replaced by ; a vector of inter-annual household-specific means of all time-variant
explanatory variables included in F, J, C, T*D, and M. The model is in turn estimated with
household random effects, similar to the Mundlak-Chamberlain (MC) device that allows
unobserved heterogeneity to be correlated with observed covariates (Mundlak, 1978; Chamberlain
1982).

The identification of the key vectors of coefficients of interest, namely β and γ, hinges on the
degree to which controlling for household-level time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity; time-
variant household-level observables; and time-variant district-level observed and unobserved
heterogeneity addresses the concerns regarding omitted unobserved heterogeneity that may jointly
determine the dependent variables and intra-household control of income.

To further assess the robustness of our estimates to potential omitted variable bias (OVB), we rely
on an approach developed by Oster (2016). Based on the assumption that observables and
unobservables have the same explanatory power in explaining a given dependent variable, Oster
demonstrates that the controlled estimate, i.e. the coefficient of interest from the model with the
full set of observables, and the bias-adjusted estimate, i.e. the comparable coefficient after
controlling for all observables as well as unobservables, can define the range that can be used to
examine the robustness of the controlled estimate to OVB. The controlled estimate is deemed to
be robust to OVB if the range is within the confidence interval of the controlled estimate. In
computing the bias-adjusted estimate, the movements in the coefficients as well as the R-squared
values are considered. Specifically, the bias-adjusted estimate, ∗ ,	is calculated as:

        ∗                            	
 3 		       	           	    ∗               																																																																																	
                                         	

where β 	and R are the controlled estimate and the associated R-squared value, respectively;
β and R are the coefficient estimate and the associated R-squared value, respectively, from the
uncontrolled regression in which the variable subject to potential OVB is the only independent
variable; and R 	 is the unknown R-squared from a hypothetical regression that controls for all
observables and unobservables. Oster suggests that R 	 min 2.2R , 1 . On the one hand, the
R values from our models lead 2.2R to be consistently greater than 1, suggesting the choice of
R 	 to be 1. On the other hand, Gonzalez and Miguel (2015) argue R 	 of 1 or close to 1 to be
on the higher side in poverty analyses tied to developing country settings, due to concerns around
measurement error in money-metric welfare aggregates. Based on relatively high quality data from
the United States, Gonzalez and Miguel (2015) recommend R 	 values not to exceed 0.9.
Following their recommendation, we choose an R 	 of 0.89 in computing the bias-adjusted
coefficient estimates in the vectors β and γ.


                                                                                                                                 17
5. Results

The results from the estimations of Equation 1 are presented in Table 3. On the whole, the bias-
adjusted coefficients associated with the variables on the intra-household income shares, per Oster
(2016), point to qualitatively similar findings across the board.

We find that total gross income per capita is positively associated with being in the first tercile of
female controlled income share in disjoint income. The coefficients associated with being in the
second and third terciles of female controlled income shares are, however, not statistically
significant, and total gross income per capita is in fact estimated, on average, to be lower in
households where there is no income solely controlled by the husband.

Conversely, we show that total gross income per capita is positively correlated with the share of
joint income in total income, except when total income is entirely jointly controlled. The
coefficients for the first and third terciles of the share of joint income in total income are
statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

Turning to the analyses of total, food and non-food household consumption expenditures per
capita, we see that none of the coefficients for the variables capturing different levels of female
controlled income shares are statistically significant.

Mirroring the findings emerging from the analysis of total gross income per capita, being in the
first and second terciles of joint income share is associated with higher total and food expenditures
per capita, and being in the second tercile of joint income share is also associated with higher non-
food expenditures per capita.

The results from the estimation of Equation 2 are presented in Table 4. The variables associated
with female controlled income shares do not have any statistically significant impact on any of the
consumption shares. On the other hand, being in the first, second and third terciles of joint income
share is associated with a higher share of household consumption devoted to public goods, defined
as education, health, clothing, and furnishings. The coefficients associated with the first and second
terciles of joint income share are statistically significant at the 5 percent level, while the coefficient
for the third tercile is statistically significant at the 10 percent level.11



                                                            
11
  Although being in the first tercile of joint income share is negatively correlated with the share of consumption
devoted to housing and utility expenditures, this result is likely related to the fact that housing consumption is
measured for virtually all households as the opportunity cost of not renting out the dwelling owned by the household.
In turn, this is highly correlated with the number of rooms in the house. These results then suggest that greater
cooperation initially leads to fewer rooms per person, which has at least some intuitive appeal. Nonetheless, the limited
ability to predict expenditure shares by bargaining power is consistent with the wider literature.

                                                                                                                      18
Taken together, our results suggest that promoting cooperation between spouses may have larger,
statistically significant and positive impacts on household welfare outcomes compared to boosting
wives’ empowerment, as proxied by the share of female controlled income in disjoint income.
Recalling the predictions of the theoretical model, we expect relatively larger gains from intra-
household cooperation versus wives’ empowerment where both spouses receive relatively high
utility from household public goods, and where current norms limit the ability of husbands to
exercise control over their wives’ incomes.

Interestingly, Njuki et al. (2013) investigate women’s empowerment in rural areas of 6 countries,
and report findings that help put our findings into a broader context. The authors estimate that rural
Malawian women are more empowered than their counterparts in the other five countries included
in the study, both in terms of an overall empowerment index as well as most of the index sub-
components. Even though only 23 percent of the sampled rural Malawian women are considered
fully empowered, 72 percent reported being self-confident; 53 percent reported having held a
leadership position; and strikingly, 64 percent reported having either sole or joint control over
household income and expenditures. Additionally, only 6.8 percent of the sample reported that
they supported the statement: “there are times when a woman deserves to be hit.” This evidence
suggests that the prevailing social norms and customs in Malawi could support women’s income
generation and limit husbands’ ability to control that income.

Returning to the theoretical model, our results are also consistent with outcomes that arise when
relaxing model assumptions. For instance, we assume that the wife suffers greater labor costs as
her ability to control labor income is reduced. If this is not the case, then her labor supply would
only be weakly increasing, as captured in the model of Heath and Tan (2016). Additionally,
allowing for the husband to choose his labor supply could lead to insignificant impacts on total
labor income, to the extent that husbands reduce their labor in response to increase in their wives’
labor. While the IHPS labor data are quite rich, they are not sufficiently exhaustive to directly test
for the impacts of control over income on days of labor supplied across the number of labor
categories observed in the data set.

6. Concluding Comments

This paper began by reviewing the theoretical and empirical developments in the women’s
empowerment literature, and its influence on donor policy. Though Boserup was concerned with
potential development pathways that could lead to both reduced women’s welfare as well as
inefficient production and slower development, the emphasis in donor policy as well as empirical
research has been overwhelmingly on promoting and evaluating women’s empowerment in the
allocation of resources, with little attention to production inefficiencies and slower development.
This emphasis makes sense for two reasons. First, the equitable access to resources inherent in the
women’s empowerment strategies is an important basic human right to support in and of itself.


                                                                                                   19
Second, to the extent that women value household public goods such as children’s health and
education relatively more than men do, then we would expect women’s empowerment to lead to
faster economic growth in the future, as children are more educated, well-fed, and in better health.

Yet, the fact is that most households are comprised of members of more than one gender,
particularly in rural areas. Cooperation within the household can lead to better household welfare
outcomes for all members. Our theoretical model provides the conditions under which we expect
to see greater gains from intra-household cooperation versus women’s empowerment, while
highlighting that the greatest gains are achieved when both cooperation and empowerment are
achieved. Improving women’s empowerment would yield the largest gains where social norms
favor husbands’ influence in the allocation of resources, and where husbands place limited value
on household public goods. On the other hand, promoting cooperation would be relatively more
effective when social norms support wives’ control over income, and both place a relatively high
value on household public goods. To test the model’s predictions, we use a unique panel data set
on married couples in rural Malawi, and find that cooperation between spouses, proxied by the
share of jointly controlled income in total income, is a better predictor of total income and
consumption expenditures per capita than wives’ empowerment, proxied by the share of female
income in total disjoint (male + female) income.

Supported also by cross-country qualitative research, our results suggest that household public
goods are relatively important to both women and men in rural Malawi; that husbands’ capacity to
control wives’ incomes is relatively limited; and that development programs that promote intra-
household cooperation could lead to greater gains in income and household public goods provision
compared to interventions focusing exclusively on women’s empowerment. The evidence,
therefore, offers support for the integration of intra-household cooperation in government and
donor agendas, policies and projects. Theoretically, we expect that focusing on both empowerment
and cooperation together would lead to the greatest gains; further empirical evidence would shed
better light on such gains, particularly on the impacts of intra-household cooperation. Additionally,
more evidence of the impact of empowerment on both wives’ and husbands’ labor supply would
be key in determining likely impacts of various interventions on household public good supply
and total income earned.




                                                                                                  20
References

Akresh. R. (2005). Understanding pareto inefficient intrahousehold allocations. Institute for the
        Study of Labor (IZA) Discussion Paper No. 1858. Retrieved on March 28, 2017 from
        http://ftp.iza.org/dp1858.pdf.
Anderson, S. and Eswaran, M. (2009). “What determines female autonomy? evidence from
        Bangladesh.” Journal of Development Economics, 90.2, pp. 179-191.
Backiny-Yetna, P., and Wodon, Q. (2010). “Gender labor income shares and human capital
        investment in the Republic of Congo.” In: J.S. Arbache, A. Kolev, and E. Filipiak (eds):
        Gender disparities in Africa’s labor market. Washington DC: Agence Francaise de
        Developpement and The World Bank.
Bussolo, M., de Hoyos, R. E., and Wodon, Q. (2009). “Higher prices of export crops,
        intrahousehold inequality, and human capital accumulation in Senegal.” In: M. Bussolo
        and R.E. de Hoyos (eds): Gender aspects of the trade and poverty nexus: a macro-micro
        approach. Washington DC: The World Bank.
Bergstrom, T.C., Blume, L., and Varian, H. (1986). “On the private provision of public goods.”
        Journal of Public Economics, 29.1, pp. 25-49.
Boserup, E. (1970). “Women's role in economic development.” American Journal of Agricultural
        Economics, 53.3, pp. 536-537.
Bound, J., Brown, C., Duncan, G. J., and Rodgers, W. L. (1994). “Evidence on the validity of
        cross-sectional and longitudinal labor market data.” Journal of Labor Economics, 12.3,
        pp. 345-368.
Browning, M., and Chiappori, P.A. (1998). “Efficient intra-household allocations: a general
        characterization and empirical tests.” Econometrica, 66.6, pp.1241-1278.
Browning, M., Chiappori, P. A., and Lechene, V. (2010). “Distributional effects in household
        models: separate spheres and income pooling.” Economic Journal, 120.545, pp. 786-799.
Carletto, C., Covarrubias, K., Davis, B., Krausova, M., and Winters, P. (2007). “Rural income
        generating activities study: methodological note on the construction of income
        aggregates.” Retrieved on March 27, 2017 from:
        http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/user_upload/riga/pdf/ai197e00.pdf
Chamberlain, G. (1982). “Multivariate regression models for panel data.” Journal of
        Econometrics, 18.1, pp. 5-46.
Chen, Z., and Woolley, F. R. (2001). “A Cournot–Nash model of family decision making.”
        Economic Journal, 111.474, 722–748.
Chiappori, P.A. (1992). “Collective labor supply and welfare.” Journal of Political
        Economy, 100.3, pp. 437-467.
Cornes, R., and Sandler, T. (1984). “The theory of public goods: Non-Nash behaviour.” Journal
        of Public Economics, 23.3, pp. 367-379.
de Brauw, A., Gilligan, D. O., Hoddinott, J., and Roy, S. (2014). The impact of Bolsa Familia on
        women’s decision-making power.” World Development, 59, pp. 487-504.


                                                                                              21
Doepke, M., and Tirtilt, M. (2014). “Does female empowerment promote economic
       development?” NBER Working Paper No. 19888. Retrieved on March 27, 2017 from:
       http://www.nber.org/papers/w19888.pdf.
Department for International Development (DFID) (2011). “A new strategic vision for girls and
       women: stopping poverty before it starts.” Retrieved on March 27, 2017 from:
       https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/67582/stra
       tegic-vision-girls-women.pdf.
Doss, C. (2006). “The effects of intrahousehold property ownership on expenditure patterns in
       Ghana.” Journal of African Economies, 25.1, pp. 149-180.
Doss, C., Kim, S. M., Njuki, J., Hillenbrand, E., and Miruka, M. (2014). “Women’s individual and
       joint property ownership: effects on household decision-making.” International Food
       Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) Discussion Paper 01347. Retrieved on March 27, 2017
       from: http://ebrary.ifpri.org/cdm/ref/collection/p15738coll2/id/128149.
Duflo, E., and Udry, C. (2004). “Intrahousehold resource allocation in Cote d’Ivoire: social norms,
       separate accounts, and consumption choices.” National Bureau of Economic Research
       (NBER) Working Paper No. 10498.
Griliches, Z. (1986). “Economic data issues.” In: Z. Griliches and M.D. Intrilligator (eds):
       Handbook of econometrics, Volume 3, pp. 1465-1514, Elsevier.
Goldstein, H., Kounali, D., and Robinson, A. (2008). “Modelling measurement errors and category
       misclassifications in multilevel models.” Statistical Modelling, 8.3, pp.243–261.
Gonzalez, F., and Miguel, E. (2015). “War and local collective action in Sierra Leone: a comment
       on the use of coefficient stability approaches.” Journal of Public Economics, 128.1, pp. 30-
       33.
Heath, R. and Tan, X. (2016). “Intrahousehold bargaining, female autonomy, and labor supply:
       theory and evidence from India.” Retrieved on March 27, 2017 from:
       https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/12277691/HSA_HeathTan.pdf
Jackson, C. (2003). “Gender analysis of land: beyond land rights for women?” Journal of Agrarian
       Change, 3.4, pp. 453-480.
Katz, E.G., 1995. “Gender and trade within the household: observations from rural Guatemala.”
       World Development, 23.2, pp. 327-342.
Lecoutere, E., and Jassogne, L. (2016). “We’re in this Together: changing intra-household
       decisionmaking for more cooperative smallholder farming. Institute of Development
       Policy and Management Working Paper No. 2016.02. Retrieved on March 27, 2017 from:
       https://www.uantwerpen.be/images/uantwerpen/container2673/files/Publications/WP/201
       6/02-Lecoutere.pdf.
Lundberg, S., and Pollak, R.A. (1993). “Separate spheres bargaining and the marriage market.”
       Journal of Political Economy, 101.6, pp. 988-1010.
McElroy, M.B., and Horney, M.J. (1981). Nash-bargained household decisions: toward a
       generalization of the theory of demand. International Economic Review, 22.2, pp.333-349.




                                                                                                22
McPeak, J.G., and Doss, C. (2006). “Are household production decisions cooperative? evidence
       on pastoral migration and milk sales from Northern Kenya.” American Journal of
       Agricultural Economics, 88.3, pp. 525-41.
Mundlak, Y. (1978). “On the pooling of time series and cross section data.” Econometrica, 46.1,
       pp. 69-85.
Njuki, J., Kruger, E., and Starr, L. (2013). “Increasing the productivity and empowerment of
       women smallholder farmers: results of a baseline assessment from six countries in Africa
       and Asia.” Atlanta, GA: CARE USA. Retrieved on March 27, 2017 from:
       http://www.care.org/sites/default/files/documents/pathways-global-baseline-report-
       2013.pdf.
Pollack, R.A. (2005). “Bargaining power in marriage: earnings, wage rates and household
       production.” NBER Working Paper No. 11239.
Okali, C. (2011). “Searching for new pathways towards achieving gender equity: beyond Boserup
       and ‘women’s role in economic development’.” FAO ESA Working Paper No. 11-09.
       Retrieved on March 27, 2017 from: http://www.fao.org/3/a-am314e.pdf.
Oster, E. (2016). “Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: theory and evidence.”
       Retrieved on March 27, 2017 from:
       https://www.brown.edu/research/projects/oster/sites/brown.edu.research.projects.oster/fil
       es/uploads/Unobservable_Selection_and_Coefficient_Stability_0.pdf.
Quisumbing, A., and de la Briere, B. (2000). “Women’s assets and intrahousehold allocation in
       rural Bangladesh: testing measures of bargaining power.” IFPRI FCND Discussion Paper
       No. 86. Retrieved on March 27, 2017 from:
       http://ebrary.ifpri.org/cdm/ref/collection/p15738coll2/id/125454.
Quisumbing, A., and Maluccio, J. 2003. “Resources at marriage and intrahousehold allocation:
       evidence from Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Indonesia, and South Africa.” Oxford Bulletin of
       Economics and Statistics, 65.3, pp. 293-327.
Sharma, P. (2004). “An overview of the field of family business studies: current status and
       directions for future research.” Family Business Review, 17.1, pp. 1-36.
Udry, C. (1996). “Gender, agricultural production, and the theory of the household.” Journal of
       Political Economy, 104.5, pp. 1010-1046.
United Nations (1986). “Report of the world conference to review and appraise the achievements
       of the United Nations decade for women: equality, development and peace.” Retrieved on
       March 27, 2017 from:
       http://www.un.org/documents/ga/conf177/nfls/thirdwcw1985-nfls.htm.
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) (1983). “Women in development.”
       Retrieved on March 27, 2017 from:
       https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1865/womendev.pdf.
USAID (2012). “Gender equality and female empowerment policy.” Retrieved on March 27, 2017
       from:
       https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1865/GenderEqualityPolicy_0.pdf.


                                                                                             23
Warr, P.G. (1983). “The private provision of a public good is independent of the distribution of
       income.” Economic Letters, 13, pp. 207-211.
Whitehead, A., and Kabeer, N. (2001). “Living with uncertainty: gender, livelihoods and pro-
       poor growth in rural Sub-Saharan Africa.” Institute of Development Studies Working
       Paper 134. Retrieved on March 27, 2017 from:
       http://www.lse.ac.uk/genderInstitute/about/resourcesNailaKabeer/whiteheadAndKabeerL
       ivingWithUncertainty.pdf.
World Bank (2011). “World development report 2012. Gender equality and development.”
       Retrieved on March 27, 2017 from:
       https://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDR2012/Resources/7778105-
       1299699968583/7786210-1315936222006/Complete-Report.pdf.




                                                                                             24
                                                                Tables 2-4

                              Table 2: Sample Means & Tests of Mean & Distributional Difference by Survey Round
                                                                                                                                 Distributional
                                                                                                                    Mean
                                                                                   2013             2010                          Difference
                                                                                                                  Difference
                                                                                                                                   (P-Value)
Outcomes
Real Annual Household Total Consumption Expenditures Per Capita                   139,932          142,220           -2,143           0.348
Real Annual Household Food Consumption Expenditures Per Capita                     80,359           79,585            888             0.413
Real Annual Household Non-Food Consumption Expenditures Per Capita                 60,619           62,995           -2,347           0.079
Real Annual Household Total Gross Income Per Capita                                80,186           74,270           5,916            0.023
Consumption Shares
  Food                                                                             0.604            0.589          0.015***           0.001
   Education/Health/Clothing/Furnishings                                           0.088            0.086            0.002            0.272
   Housing/Utilities                                                               0.175            0.210          -0.035***          0.000
   Alcohol/Tobacco/Transport/Communication                                         0.088            0.072          0.016***           0.000
   Recreation/Hotels & Restaurants/Miscellaneous                                   0.042            0.039          0.003***           0.239
Income Shares
Share of Male Income in Disjoint Income                                            0.607            0.729          -0.122***          0.000
Share of Female Income in Disjoint Income                                          0.320            0.230          0.090***           0.000
Share of Joint Income in Total Income                                              0.357            0.237          0.120***           0.000
Male Disjoint Income
   Male Disjoint Income Share in Disjoint Income = 0 †                             0.198            0.098          0.100***           0.000
   Male Disjoint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 1 †                            0.195            0.191            0.005            1.000
   Male Disjoint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 2 †                            0.183            0.174            0.009            1.000
   Male Disjoint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 3 †                            0.185            0.167            0.019            1.000
   Male Disjoint Income Share in Disjoint Income = 1 †                             0.239            0.371          -0.132***          0.000
Female Disjoint Income
   Female Disjoint Income Share in Disjoint Income = 0 †                           0.312            0.412          -0.101***          0.000
   Female Disjoint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 1 †                          0.186            0.167            0.019            1.000
   Female Disjoint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 2 †                          0.184            0.174            0.010            1.000
   Female Disjoint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 3 †                          0.194            0.191            0.003            1.000
   Female Disjoint Income Share in Disjoint Income = 1 †                           0.125            0.057          0.068***           0.000
Joint Income
   Joint Income Share in Total Income = 0 †                                        0.219            0.369          -0.150***          0.000
   Joint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 1 †                                    0.239            0.191          0.049***           0.348
   Joint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 2 †                                    0.240            0.210           0.030**           0.328
   Joint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 3 †                                    0.230            0.191           0.040**           0.348
   Joint Income Share in Total Income      =1†                                     0.071            0.040          0.032***           0.006
Time-Variant Control Variables
Household Size                                                                     5.699            5.246          0.453***           0.000
Dependency Ratio                                                                   1.199            1.134          0.065***           0.009
Head of Household: # of Months Away Past 12 Months                                 0.401            0.175          0.225***           0.047
Head of Household is Chronically Ill †                                             0.089            0.058          0.032***           0.460
Spouse is Chronically Ill †                                                        0.082            0.069            0.013            0.981
Household Highest Years of Education                                               8.921            8.556          0.370***           0.108
Land Holdings (Acres)                                                              0.650            0.641            0.008            0.413
Wealth Index                                                                       0.243            0.223          0.021***           0.001
Observations                                                                                                  1,929
Note: */**/*** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively. Sample is comprised of 1,929 couple households
that were interviewed in 2010 and 2013 and that were residing in rural areas in both years. † indicates a dummy variable. P-values associated
with distributional differences are derived from two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov equality of distributions tests.



                                                                                                                                              25
                                                          Table 3: Results from Linear Panel Regression Results with Household Fixed Effects
                                                                Total Consumption                  Food Consumption                  Non-Food Consumption                Total Gross Income
                                                              Expenditures Per Capita            Expenditures Per Capita             Expenditures Per Capita                 Per Capita
                                                            Coefficient     Bias-Adjusted      Coefficient     Bias-Adjusted      Coefficient     Bias-Adjusted      Coefficient     Bias-Adjusted
Disjoint Income
                                                         (Standard Error)    Coefficient    (Standard Error)    Coefficient    (Standard Error)    Coefficient    (Standard Error)    Coefficient
Female Disjoint Income Share in Disjoint Income = 0 †           --                                 --                                 --                                 --


Female Disjoint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 1 †        0.033             0.034            0.056             0.064             0.000            -0.001         0.417***            0.408
                                                             (0.034)                             (0.042)                            (0.033)                           (0.083)
Female Disjoint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 2 †        0.003             0.004            0.017             0.025             -0.007           -0.007           0.058             0.049
                                                             (0.026)                             (0.033)                            (0.035)                           (0.073)
Female Disjoint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 3 †        -0.007           -0.008            -0.008            -0.005            -0.030           -0.033           0.008             0.018
                                                             (0.030)                             (0.041)                            (0.037)                           (0.074)
Female Disjoint Income Share in Disjoint Income = 1 †         0.048             0.060            0.062             0.092             0.015            0.025          -0.511***          -0.446
                                                             (0.041)                             (0.054)                            (0.046)                           (0.114)
Joint Income
Joint Income Share in Total Income = 0 †                        --                                 --                                  --                                --


Joint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 1 †                0.072***            0.071           0.091**            0.093             0.032            0.029          0.450***            0.421
                                                             (0.027)                             (0.036)                            (0.030)                           (0.081)
Joint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 2 †                0.095***            0.105           0.110***           0.133            0.070**           0.078            0.103             0.174
                                                             (0.034)                             (0.041)                            (0.035)                           (0.076)
Joint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 3 †                  0.024             0.027            0.030             0.037             0.021            0.024          0.236***            0.292
                                                             (0.029)                             (0.036)                            (0.035)                           (0.067)
Joint Income Share in Total Income    =1†                     0.031             0.039            0.070             0.092             -0.037           -0.030           -0.140           -0.086
                                                             (0.057)                             (0.068)                            (0.063)                           (0.151)
Time-Variant Household Attributes
Log Household Size                                          -0.736***                          -0.732***                           -0.729***                         -0.868***
                                                             (0.058)                             (0.071)                            (0.069)                           (0.156)
Dependency Ratio                                              -0.008                             0.005                              -0.035*                            -0.030
                                                             (0.014)                             (0.019)                            (0.019)                           (0.041)
Head of Household: # of Months Away Past 12 Months            0.004                              0.006                               -0.002                            -0.010
                                                             (0.007)                             (0.008)                            (0.011)                           (0.024)
Head of Household is Chronically Ill †                        0.035                              0.055                               0.009                             0.026
                                                             (0.035)                             (0.045)                            (0.046)                           (0.161)
Spouse is Chronically Ill †                                   0.086*                             0.083*                              0.067                             -0.021
                                                             (0.045)                             (0.046)                            (0.054)                           (0.122)
Household Highest Years of Education                         0.012**                             0.013*                              0.011                            0.036**
                                                             (0.006)                             (0.007)                            (0.008)                           (0.017)
Land Holdings (Acres)                                       0.070***                            0.069**                            0.069***                           0.101**
                                                             (0.023)                             (0.029)                            (0.025)                           (0.046)
Wealth Index                                                1.319***                            1.113***                           1.750***                          1.421***                    26
                                                             (0.139)                             (0.150)                            (0.185)                           (0.459)
Year (2013) †                                                 0.012                              0.078                              -0.120*                            -0.040
                                                             (0.065)                             (0.068)                            (0.069)                           (0.109)
                                                                                                Table 3 (Cont'd)
                                                                   Total Consumption                     Food Consumption                   Non-Food Consumption                    Total Gross Income
                                                                 Expenditures Per Capita              Expenditures Per Capita               Expenditures Per Capita                     Per Capita
District-Year Fixed Effect Interactions Included?                 YES                                   YES                                  YES                                   YES
Month of Interview Fixed Effects Included?                        YES                                   YES                                  YES                                   YES
Observations                                                     3,858                                 3,858                                 3,858                                 3,858
R2 (Within)                                                      0.279                                 0.210                                 0.253                                 0.173
R2 (Between)                                                     0.567                                 0.427                                 0.625                                 0.349
R2 (Overall)                                                     0.510                                 0.367                                 0.558                                 0.282
Corr(u_i,Xb)                                                     0.155                                 -0.015                                0.267                                 0.088
Fraction of Variance due to u_i                                     0.565                                 0.472                                  0.581                                  0.490
Note: Dependent variables are annualized, defined at the household-level, in 2015 Prices. */**/*** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively. Constant, Household Fixed
Effects, District-Year Fixed Effect Interactions, Month of Interview Fixed Effects included but not reported. Sample is comprised of 1,929 couple households that were interviewed in 2010 and 2013 and that were
residing in rural areas in both years. † indicates a dummy variable.




                                                                                                                                                                                                              27
                              Table 4: Results from Seemingly Unrelated Panel Regressions of Consumption Shares with Correlated Random Effects
                                                                                Education/ Health/     Housing/       Alcohol/ Tobacco/        Recreation/ Hotels &
                                                                  Food
                                                                              Clothing/ Furnishings    Utilities Transport/ Communication Restaurants/ Miscellaneous
Disjoint Income
Female Disjoint Income Share in Disjoint Income = 0 †             ‐‐                 ‐‐                ‐‐                 ‐‐                          ‐‐

Female Disjoint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 1 †           0.009             -0.004             -0.007              0.001                    0.004**
                                                                (0.008)           (0.004)            (0.006)            (0.005)                     (0.002)
Female Disjoint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 2 †           0.010             -0.003             -0.006             -0.001                       0.002
                                                                (0.008)           (0.004)            (0.006)            (0.005)                     (0.002)
Female Disjoint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 3 †           0.004              0.001              0.004             -0.006                       0.001
                                                                (0.009)           (0.004)            (0.006)            (0.006)                     (0.002)
Female Disjoint Income Share in Disjoint Income = 1 †            0.007             -0.006             0.003              -0.003                      -0.002
                                                                (0.011)           (0.005)            (0.008)            (0.007)                     (0.002)
Joint Income
Joint Income Share in Total Income = 0 †                          ‐‐                 ‐‐                ‐‐                 ‐‐                          ‐‐

Joint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 1 †                     0.006            0.007**           -0.015***            0.004                       0.000
                                                                (0.008)            (0.004)            (0.005)           (0.005)                     (0.002)
Joint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 2 †                     0.003            0.008**              -0.005            -0.006                      0.001
                                                                (0.008)            (0.004)            (0.006)           (0.005)                     (0.002)
Joint Income Share Conditional Tercile = 3 †                     -0.002            0.007*            -0.010*              0.003                       0.001
                                                                (0.008)            (0.004)            (0.006)           (0.005)                     (0.002)
Joint Income Share in Total Income    =1†                        0.009              -0.001             -0.004            -0.004                      -0.003
                                                                (0.012)            (0.006)            (0.009)           (0.008)                     (0.003)
Time-Variant Household Attributes
Real Annual Household Total Consumption Expenditures             -0.000            -0.000           -0.000***          0.000***                    -0.000***
                                                                (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.000)           (0.000)                      (0.000)
Log Household Size                                               0.003             0.012               0.003             -0.011                       -0.001
                                                                (0.016)           (0.008)             (0.011)           (0.010)                      (0.003)
Dependency Ratio                                                 0.007             -0.002              0.001             -0.005                       -0.002
                                                                (0.005)           (0.002)             (0.003)           (0.003)                      (0.001)
Head of Household: # of Months Away Past 12 Months               0.001             0.000              -0.001             0.000                       -0.001
                                                                (0.002)           (0.001)             (0.001)           (0.001)                      (0.000)
Head of Household is Chronically Ill †                           0.003              0.004              0.005             -0.009                        0.000
                                                                (0.011)           (0.005)             (0.008)           (0.007)                      (0.002)




                                                                                                                                                                  28
                                                                                 Table 4 (Cont'd)
                                                                                  Education/ Health/        Housing/            Alcohol/ Tobacco/           Recreation/ Hotels &
                                                                    Food
                                                                                Clothing/ Furnishings       Utilities      Transport/ Communication Restaurants/ Miscellaneous
Spouse is Chronically Ill †                                              0.005           -0.004                -0.003                   0.005                         0.001
                                                                        (0.011)         (0.005)               (0.008)                 (0.007)                        (0.002)
Household Highest Years of Education                                     -0.000        0.003***                -0.001                  -0.001                         0.001
                                                                        (0.002)         (0.001)               (0.001)                 (0.001)                        (0.000)
Land Holdings (Acres)                                                    -0.001          -0.001             -0.009**                0.012***                          0.002
                                                                        (0.006)         (0.003)               (0.004)                 (0.004)                        (0.001)
Wealth Index                                                          -0.113***         0.031*               0.062**                    0.029                      0.029***
                                                                        (0.035)         (0.017)               (0.025)                 (0.022)                        (0.008)
Year (2013) †                                                          0.056***          -0.002             -0.026**                   -0.007                        -0.000
                                                                        (0.017)         (0.008)               (0.012)                 (0.011)                        (0.004)
Over-Time Household-Specific Means of Covariates Included?                YES             YES                   YES                     YES                           YES
District-Year Fixed Effect Interactions Included?                         YES             YES                   YES                     YES                           YES
Month of Interview Fixed Effects Included?                                YES             YES                   YES                     YES                           YES
Observations                                                                                                               3,858
Note: */**/*** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively. Constant, Over-Time Household-Specific Means of All Covariates, District-Year Fixed
Effect Interactions, Month of Interview Fixed Effects included but not reported. Sample is comprised of 1,929 couple households that were interviewed in 2010 and 2013 and that were
residing in rural areas in both years. † indicates a dummy variable.




                                                                                                                                                                                 29
 Appendix I - Solving for Wife’s Labor, Private Consumption and Public Good Provision

The first-order conditions from maximizing over Equations 1 and 2 are as follows:

Wife:

        U f         a
                         f cxf  0                                                    [A1]
        x f         xf
        U f         b
                         f cg  0                                                     [A2]
        g f         gf
        U f                     rf
                   f w f          Lf  0                                             [A3]
        L f                     
        U f
                   w f L f  cxf x f  cg g f                                          [A4]
         f

Setting [A1] equal to [A2] gives the following:

                     bc xf x f
        cg g f                                                                          [A5]
                           a

From [A5], we solve for L f ,
                  2 f w f
        Lf                                                                              [A6]
                      rf


Substituting [A5] and [A6] into [A4], and solving for g f gives the following:
         3  f w2
                 f                 bc x 
                       cxf x f   xf f   0 , which after some manipulation, gives:
            rf                     a 
                  a 3 f w2
                           f
        xf                                                                              [A7]
                 rf cxf  a  b 


Substituting back into [A2], and re-arranging the terms gives:
                b 3 f w2f
        gf                                                                              [A8]
              rf cxf  a  b 




                                                                                                30
                                                    a
Next, by re-arranging [A1], we note that x f            and setting this equal to [A7] enables us to
                                                  f cxf
solve for  f , which after some manipulation can be written as:

               rf.5  a  b 
                              .5

        f                                                                                 [A9]
                   1.5 w f

This results in the following consumption goods and labor supply for the wife:
                  a 1.5 w f
        xf                                                                                [A10]
              cxf rf.5  a  b 
                                .5



                   b 1.5 w f
        gf                                                                                [A11]
               cgf rf.5  a  b 
                                     .5



                .5  a  b 
                                .5

        Lf                                                                                [A12]
                     rf.5




                                                                                                   31
               Appendix II – Computation of Intra-Household Income Shares

To derive sole-female, sole-male and joint income estimates, we start out by working separately
in each income domain, namely crop, livestock, off-farm wage employment, on-farm wage
employment, off-farm self-employment, transfer, and other income; follow the Rural Income
Generating Activities (RIGA) methodology (Carletto et al., 2007) for generating cross-country
comparable income aggregates from household survey data; and build on the existing do-files for
the Malawi Third Integrated Household Survey (IHS3) 2010/11 income aggregate, which can be
accessed through the RIGA website (http://www.fao.org/economic/riga/riga-database/riga-
request/en/) free of charge.

Following the RIGA methodology permits us to create outlier-corrected sub-components of
domain-specific income aggregates at the same level at which intra-household control-related
information is solicited in the survey instrument. In other words, we know whether each unique
source of income is controlled solely by females, solely by males, or jointly by females and males.
With this information, and prior to aggregating constructed variables to compute household-level
domain-specific income aggregates, we calculate the estimated share of income in each domain in
each of the intra-household control-related categories of interest.

Following the creation of household-level domain-specific income aggregates that are further
reviewed for outliers and possibly adjusted per RIGA methodology, we apply the estimated intra-
household control shares to each domain-specific income aggregate to derive domain-specific
sole-female, sole-male and joint income estimates. In the last step, we sum the sole-female, sole-
male and joint income estimates across domains to compute their household-level sums, which are
in turn used to create the share of joint income in total gross income that is used as a proxy for
intra-household cooperation, and the share of female disjoint income in total disjoint gross income
that is used as a proxy for wives’ empowerment.

Table A1 provides an overview of constructed variables underlying domain-specific income
aggregates and the survey questions used for the computation of intra-household income shares.




                                                                                                32
                                                               Table A1: Breakdown of Income Aggregate Components & Key Questionnaire Information for Intra-Household Income Share Calculations
 Income Domain              Constructed Variable(s) Underlying        Reference Period(s)          Level of Observation for Constructed Variables,   Key Survey Question(s) for Female Disjoint, Male             Notes
                            Domain-Specific Income Aggregate                                       Prior to Household-Level Aggregation              Disjoint and Joint Income Share Calculations
1 Crop                      Season-Specific Value of Crop Sales       Reference Rainy Season       Crop                                              If the household sold any portion of a given crop:           This question, as well as the specific question on
                                                                      (2009/10 Rainy Season in                                                       1. Who in your household kept/decided what to do with the    earnings, are asked at the crop-level and for up to 3 sales
                            Season-Specific Imputed Value of          2010 & 2012/13 Rainy                                                           earnings from [CROP]?                                        outlets that a given crop could have been sold to. The
                            Consumption of Own Production             Season in 2013)                                                                                                                             question uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.]

                                                                      Reference Dry Season
                                                                      (2010 Dry Seaosn in 2010 &
                                                                      2013 Dry Season in 2013)


                                                                                                                                                     If the household did not sell a given crop during the        This question is asked at the plot-level for plots that are
                                                                                                                                                     reference season:                                            reported to have a title, and uniquely identifies up to 2
                                                                                                                                                     2. Who in the household is listed on the title as owner of   household members. This information is used if a given
                                                                                                                                                     [PLOT]?                                                      household-crop record does not "control" related
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  information per question 1.
                                                                                                                                                     3. Who in this household owns [PLOT]?                        This question is asked at the plot-level for plots that do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  not have a title, and uniquely identifies up to 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  household members. This information is used if a given
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  household-crop record does not "control" related
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  information per question 1, and the associated household-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  plot record does not have information for question 2.

                                                                                                                                                     4. Who in the household makes the decisions concerning       This question is asked at the plot-level for all plots, and
                                                                                                                                                     crops to be planted, input use and the timing of cropping    uniquely identifies up to 2 household members. This
                                                                                                                                                     activities on [PLOT]?                                        information is used if a given household-crop record
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  does not "control" related information per question 1,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and the associated household-plot record has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  information neither for question 2 nor for question 3.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  To bring in plot-level information for questions 2 through
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4, the household-plot-level data are merged first the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  household-plot-crop-level data on production, which are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  in turn merged with the household-crop-level data on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sales and disposition that actually contain the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  information tied to question 1.
2 Livestock                 Annualized Value of Livestock Sales, Gifts Last 12 Months              Livestock Group                                   Who in your household owns [LIVESTOCK]?                      This question is asked at the livestock group-level, and
                            and Births                                                             (16 Categories)                                                                                                uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
3 Livestock                 Annualized Value of Livestock Product      Last 12 Months              Livestock Products                                If the household sold any portion of a given product:        This question is asked at the livestock product-level, and
                            Sales                                                                  (7 Categories)                                    1. Who in your household kept/decided what to do with        uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
                                                                                                                                                     earnings from [PRODUCT]?
                            Annualized Imputed Value of
                            Consumption of Own Production
                                                                                                                                                     If the household did not sell a given product:               This question is asked at the livestock group-level, and
                                                                                                                                                     2. Who in your household owns [LIVESTOCK]?                   uniquely identifies up to 2 household members. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  information is matched with the associated livestock
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  product that was produced but not sold by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  household and that is missing information for question 1.

4 Off-Farm Wage Employment Annualized Payments for Wages/Salary - Last 12 Months                   Individual                                        Who in the household controls/decides on the use of your     This question is asked at the individual-level, separely
                           Main Wage Job                                                                                                             salary payment?                                              for main wage and secondary wage job in the last 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  months, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household
                            Annualized Payments for Wages/Salary -                                                                                                                                                members.
                            Secondary Wage Job

5 Off-Farm Wage Employment Annualized Payments In -Kind or Payment Last 12 Months                  Individual                                        Who in the household controls/decides on the use of your     This question is asked at the individual-level, separely
                           for Allowances/Gratuities - Main Wage                                                                                     allowances or gratuities?                                    for main wage and secondary wage job in the last 12
                           Job                                                                                                                                                                                    months, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  members.
                            Annualized Payments In -Kind or Payment
                            for Allowances/Gratuities - Secondary
                            Wage Job


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           33
                                                                                                                    Table A1 (Cont'd)
   Income Domain           Constructed Variable(s) Underlying        Reference Period(s)   Level of Observation for Constructed Variables,     Key Survey Question(s) for Female Disjoint, Male           Notes
                           Domain-Specific Income Aggregate                                Prior to Household-Level Aggregation                Disjoint and Joint Income Share Calculations
 6 On-Farm Wage Employment Annualized Ganyu Earnings                 Last 12 Months        Individual                                          Who in the household controls/decides on the use of your   This question is asked at the individual-level, and
                                                                                                                                               ganyu earnings?                                            uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
 7 Off-Farm Self-Employment   Annualized Gross Enterprise Earnings   Last 12 Months        Enterprise                                          Who in the household owns [ENTERPRISE]?                    This question is asked at the enterprise-level, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                          uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
 8 Transfer                   Annualized Cash Remittances            Last 12 Months        Child Living Elsewhere                              Who in the household kept/decided on the use of this       This question is asked at the child-level, and uniquely
                                                                                                                                               income?                                                    identifies up to 2 household members.
 9 Transfer                   Annualized Value of In-Kind Remittances Last 12 Months       Child Living Elsewhere                              Who in the household kept/decided on the use of this in-   This question is asked at the child-level, and uniquely
                                                                                                                                               kind assistance?                                           identifies up to 2 household members.
10 Transfer                   Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Cash Transfers/Gifts from Friends/Other Relatives   Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
11 Transfer                   Annualized Value of of Food Receipts   Last 12 Months        Food Transfers/Gifts from Friends/Other Relatives   Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
12 Transfer                   Annualized Value of of Non-Food In-Kind Last 12 Months       Non-Food In-Kind Transfers/Gifts from               Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                              Receipts                                                     Friends/Other Relatives                             [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
                                                                                           (Single Category)
13 Transfer                   Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Savings, Interest or Other Investment Income        Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
14 Transfer                   Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Pension Income                                      Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
15 Other Income               Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Income from Non-Agricultural Land Rental            Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
16 Other Income               Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Income from Apartment, House Rental                 Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
17 Other Income               Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Income from Shop, Store Rental                      Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
18 Other Income               Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Income from Car, Truck, Other Vehicle Rental        Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Exclusive of Enterprise Income)                    [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
                                                                                           (Single Category)
19 Other Income               Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Income from Real Estate Sales                       Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                                                                               [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
20 Other Income               Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Household Non-Agricultural Asset Sales              Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
21 Other Income               Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Household Agricultural/Fishing Asset Sales          Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
22 Other Income               Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Inheritance                                         Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
23 Other Income               Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Lottery/Gambling Winnings                           Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
24 Other Income               Annualized Cash Receipts               Last 12 Months        Other Income                                        Who in the household kept/decided what to do with          This question is asked at the income source-level, and
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   [SOURCE]?                                                  uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
25 Transfer                   Annualized Cash Value                  Last 12 Months        Free Maize                                          Who in your household controls/decides on the use of       This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   assistance from [PROGRAM]?                                 level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.

26 Transfer                   Annualized Cash Value                  Last 12 Months        Free Food (Other than Maize)                        Who in your household controls/decides on the use of       This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   assistance from [PROGRAM]?                                 level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.

27 Transfer                   Annualized Cash Value/Receipts         Last 12 Months        Food/Cash-for-Work Programme                        Who in your household controls/decides on the use of       This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   assistance from [PROGRAM]?                                 level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.

28 Transfer                   Annualized Cash Value                  Last 12 Months        Inputs-For-Work Programme                           Who in your household controls/decides on the use of       This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   assistance from [PROGRAM]?                                 level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.

29 Transfer                   Annualized Cash Value                  Last 12 Months        School Feeding Programme                            Which household members received this assistance in this   This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   last 12 months?                                            level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.

30 Transfer                   Annualized Cash Value                  Last 12 Months        Free Distribution of Likuni Phala to Children and   Which household members received this assistance in this   This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                                           Mothers                                             last 12 months?                                            level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
                                                                                           (Single Category)
31 Transfer                   Annualized Cash Value                  Last 12 Months        Supplementary Feeding for Malnourished Children     Which household members received this assistance in this   This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                                           (Single Category)                                   last 12 months?                                            level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                34
                                                                                                      Table A1 (Cont'd)
   Income Domain   Constructed Variable(s) Underlying   Reference Period(s)   Level of Observation for Constructed Variables,   Key Survey Question(s) for Female Disjoint, Male           Notes
                   Domain-Specific Income Aggregate                           Prior to Household-Level Aggregation              Disjoint and Joint Income Share Calculations
32 Transfer        Annualized Cash Receipts             Last 12 Months        Scholarships/Bursaries for Secondary Education    Which household members received this assistance in this   This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                              (Single Category)                                 last 12 months?                                            level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.

33 Transfer        Annualized Cash Receipts             Last 12 Months        Scholarships for Tertiary Education               Which household members received this assistance in this   This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                              (Single Category)                                 last 12 months?                                            level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.

34 Transfer        Annualized Cash Receipts             Last 12 Months        Tertiary Loan Scheme                              Which household members received this assistance in this   This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                              (Single Category)                                 last 12 months?                                            level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.

35 Transfer        Annualized Cash Receipts             Last 12 Months        Agggregate Category of Direct Cash Transfers from Who in your household controls/decides on the use of       This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                              Government                                        assistance from [PROGRAM]?                                 level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.

36 Transfer        Annualized Cash Receipts             Last 12 Months        Direct Cash Transfers from others (Development    Who in your household controls/decides on the use of       This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                              Partners, NGOs)                                   assistance from [PROGRAM]?                                 level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.
                                                                              (Single Category)
37 Transfer        Annualized Cash Receipts             Last 12 Months        Other Social Assistance                           Who in your household controls/decides on the use of       This question is asked at the social safety net/program-
                                                                              (Single Category)                                 assistance from [PROGRAM]?                                 level, and uniquely identifies up to 2 household members.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                35
