      JOBS
  WORKING
    PAPER
Issue No. 6




            Expanding Social
       Insurance Coverage to
            Informal Workers
    Hernan Winkler, Elizabeth Ruppert Bulmer and Hilma Mote
©	2017	International	Bank	for	Reconstruction	and	Development	/	The	World	Bank.	

1818	H	Street	NW,	Washington,	DC	20433,	USA.	
Telephone:	202-473-1000;	Internet:	www.worldbank.org.	

Some	rights	reserved	

This	work	is	a	product	of	the	staff	of	The	World	Bank	with	external	contributions.	The	findings,	interpretations,	and	
conclusions	expressed	in	this	work	do	not	necessarily	reflect	the	views	of	The	World	Bank,	its	Board	of	Executive	
Directors,	or	the	governments	they	represent.	The	World	Bank	does	not	guarantee	the	accuracy	of	the	data	
included	in	this	work.	The	boundaries,	colors,	denominations,	and	other	information	shown	on	any	map	in	this	
work	do	not	imply	any	judgment	on	the	part	of	The	World	Bank	concerning	the	legal	status	of	any	territory	or	the	
endorsement	or	acceptance	of	such	boundaries.		

Nothing	herein	shall	constitute	or	be	considered	to	be	a	limitation	upon	or	waiver	of	the	privileges	and	immunities	
of	The	World	Bank,	all	of	which	are	specifically	reserved.	

Rights	and	Permissions	


                      	
This	work	is	available	under	the	Creative	Commons	Attribution	3.0	IGO	license	(CC	BY	3.0	IGO)	
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/igo.	Under	the	Creative	Commons	Attribution	license,	you	are	free	to	
copy,	distribute,	transmit,	and	adapt	this	work,	including	for	commercial	purposes,	under	the	following	conditions:	

Attribution—Please	cite	the	work	as	follows:	Winkler,	Hernan,	Elizabeth	Ruppert	Bulmer	and	Hilma	Mote.	2017.	
“Expanding	social	insurance	coverage	to	informal	workers”.	World	Bank,	Washington	DC.			

Translations—If	you	create	a	translation	of	this	work,	please	add	the	following	disclaimer	along	with	the	
attribution:	This	translation	was	not	created	by	The	World	Bank	and	should	not	be	considered	an	official	World	
Bank	translation.	The	World	Bank	shall	not	be	liable	for	any	content	or	error	in	this	translation.	

Adaptations—If	you	create	an	adaptation	of	this	work,	please	add	the	following	disclaimer	along	with	the	
attribution:	This	is	an	adaptation	of	an	original	work	by	The	World	Bank.	Views	and	opinions	expressed	in	the	
adaptation	are	the	sole	responsibility	of	the	author	or	authors	of	the	adaptation	and	are	not	endorsed	by	The	
World	Bank.	

Third-party	content—The	World	Bank	does	not	necessarily	own	each	component	of	the	content	contained	within	
the	work.	The	World	Bank	therefore	does	not	warrant	that	the	use	of	any	third-party-owned	individual	component	
or	part	contained	in	the	work	will	not	infringe	on	the	rights	of	those	third	parties.	The	risk	of	claims	resulting	from	
such	infringement	rests	solely	with	you.	If	you	wish	to	re-use	a	component	of	the	work,	it	is	your	responsibility	to	
determine	whether	permission	is	needed	for	that	re-use	and	to	obtain	permission	from	the	copyright	owner.	
Examples	of	components	can	include,	but	are	not	limited	to,	tables,	figures,	or	images.	

All	queries	on	rights	and	licenses	should	be	addressed	to	World	Bank	Publications,	The	World	Bank	Group,	1818	H	
Street	NW,	Washington,	DC	20433,	USA;	fax:	202-522-2625;	e-mail:	pubrights@worldbank.org.	
	
Project	Number:	P164623 	

Images:	©	World	Bank.	Further	permission	required	for	reuse.	

	                                   	
	



ABSTRACT
	

The	 high	 incidence	 of	 informality	 in	 developing	 countries	 implies	 that	 many	 workers	 are	 not	 covered	
against	 important	 risks,	 such	 as	 unemployment,	 illness	 and	 old-age	 poverty.	 Given	 that	 expanding	 the	
Bismarckian	 system	 to	 include	 informal	 workers	 presents	 many	 challenges,	 several	 countries	
implemented	 non-contributory	 social	 insurance	 programs	 to	 expand	 coverage.	 However,	 these	
contributed	 to	 labor	 market	 segmentation	 and	 are	 unlikely	 to	 be	 financially	 sustainable.	 This	 note	
reviews	 the	 economic	 literature	 dealing	 with	 the	 expansion	 of	 social	 insurance	 programs	 and	
summarizes	 the	 main	 policy	 insights.	 	 	 It	 draws	 on	 international	 evidence	 on	 social	 insurance	 system	
design	and	innovations,	and	the	resulting	impact	on	coverage.	It	also	provides	general	design	principles	
that	can	apply	to	unemployment	benefits,	health	insurance,	and	pensions.				

	




	                                                                                                                 1	
	



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
	

This	note	was	prepared	by	the	World	Bank	Group’s	(WBG)	Jobs	Group.	The	principal	authors	are	Hernan	
Winkler,	 Elizabeth	 Ruppert	 Bulmer	 and	 Hilma	 Mote.	 The	 report	 was	 prepared	 under	 the	 general	
direction	and	ongoing	support	of	Alvaro	Gonzalez	and	David	Robalino.	The	authors	acknowledge	the	rich	
comments	provided	by	Truman	Packard,	peer	reviewer	of	this	document.		

The	 publication	 of	 this	 report	 has	 been	 made	 possible	 through	 a	 grant	 from	 the	 World	 Bank’s	 Jobs	
Umbrella	Trust	Fund,	which	is	supported	by	the	Department	for	International	Development/UK	AID,	and	
the	 Governments	 of	 Norway,	 Germany,	 Austria,	 the	 Austrian	 Development	 Agency,	 and	 the	 Swedish	
International	Development	Cooperation	Agency.	

The	report	was	prepared	under	project	Firms,	Access	to	Markets,	Value	Chains	and	Jobs	(P164623).	

	

	

	                                 	




	                                                                                                              2	
	



CONTENTS
	
ABSTRACT	............................................................................................................................................	1	
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS	.........................................................................................................................	2	
1.	 INTRODUCTION	............................................................................................................................	4	
2.	INTERNATIONAL	EXPERIENCE	IN	EXTENDING	SOCIAL	INSURANCE	TO	INFORMAL	WORKERS	.............	8	
3.	DESIGN,	IMPLEMENTATION	AND	POLICY	OPTIONS	.........................................................................	12	
3.1	       Registering	and	enrolling	workers	.................................................................................................	12	
3.2	       Linking	contributions	to	benefits	..................................................................................................	14	
3.3	       Designing	redistributive	arrangements	.........................................................................................	15	
3.4	       Providing	information	and	incentives	to	contribute/save	............................................................	16	
3.5	       Monitoring	and	enforcement	........................................................................................................	18	
4	     CONCLUSIONS	............................................................................................................................	20	
REFERENCES	.......................................................................................................................................	21	
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	



	                                                                                                                                                    3	
	



1.         INTRODUCTION
	

The	 high	 incidence	 of	 informality	 in	 developing	 countries	 implies	 that	 many	 workers	 are	 not	 covered	
against	 important	 risks,	 such	 as	 unemployment,	 illness	 and	 old-age	 poverty	 (Figure	 1).	 In	 Sub-Saharan	
Africa,	 for	 example,	 typically	 not	 more	 than	 5	 to	 10	 percent	 of	 the	 workforce	 is	 in	 formal	 work	 with	
access	 to	 social	 insurance	 (Van	 Ginneken,	 2010).	 In	 many	 Latin	 American	 countries,	 informality	 rates	
exceed	 60	 percent	 (Tornarolli	 et	 al.,	 2014).	 This	 reality	 of	 the	 predominance	 of	 informal	 employment	
typically	translates	into	low	and	unstable	earnings	in	low	productivity	activities	and	a	high	incidence	of	
poverty.	Not	all	informal	workers	are	poor,	particularly	among	highly	skilled	workers	in	undeclared	self-
employment	and	informal	wage	work.	But	even	these	non-poor	are	vulnerable	to	income	shocks	from	
unemployment,	illness	and	longevity.				
Figure	1		
Snapshot	of	Informal	Employment	around	the	World	(%	of	total	employment)	




                                                                                                                              	
Source:	ILOSTAT.	Informal	employment	comprises	all	workers	of	the	informal	sector	(in	unregistered	firms)	and	informal	
workers	outside	the	informal	sector	(own-account	workers,	and	employees	not	contributing	to	social	security,	paying	income	
taxes,	or	who	lack	certain	benefits	such	as	family	leave	or	sick	leave).	
	
Observed	 employment	 trends	 suggest	 that	 formal	 wage	 employment	 is	 unlikely	 to	 become	 the	 main	
source	 of	 jobs.	 	 The	 development	 process	 that	 in	 the	 past	 brought	 economies	 dominated	 by	
decentralized	 primary	 production	 to	 modern	 industrial	 sectors	 comprised	 of	 mostly	 formal	 jobs	 is	 no	
longer	the	prevalent	path	for	economic	development	today	(Cho	et	al.,	2012;	Gindling	and	Newhouse,	
2014).	 Rather,	 the	 structural	 transformations	 currently	 underway	 in	 the	 developing	 world	 are	
characterized	 by	 transitions	 out	 of	 agricultural	 activities	 and	 other	 primary	 production	 into	 mainly	
service	 activities,	 much	 of	 which	 in	 non-wage	 employment.	 Stable	 and	 formal	 wage	 employment	 is	
becoming	less	common	even	in	middle-	and	high-income	countries,	with	the	emergence	of	alternative	
work	arrangements	such	as	self-employment,	part-time	work	or	temporary	contracts	–	all	of	which	tend	
to	lack	social	insurance	coverage	and	other	labor	protections	(Kelly	et	al.,	2017).		

	




	                                                                                                                             4	
	BOX	1:	SOCIAL	INSURANCE	SYSTEMS:	SOME	CONCEPTS	
    Social	insurance	systems	have	two	goals:	consumption	smoothing	and	poverty	prevention.	A	social	
    insurance	system	seeks	to	provide	people	with	resources	to	smooth	the	impacts	of	negative	income	
    shocks	 on	 their	 consumption.	 To	 prevent	 poverty,	 social	 insurance	 aims	 not	 only	 to	 protect	
    individuals	from	negative	shocks,	but	also	to	guarantee	them	with	a	minimum	level	of	consumption	
    that	 is	 socially	 acceptable.	 These	 goals	 are	 many	 times	 indistinguishable	 from	 each	 other,	
    particularly	in	low	income	countries	and	in	cases	where	a	negative	shock	pushes	the	non-poor	into	
    poverty.	

    To	 achieve	 these	 goals,	 social	 insurance	 systems	 have	 two	 instruments.	 The	 first	 one	 is	 a	 risk-
    pooling	mechanism,	where	individuals	and	employers	contribute	to	a	collective	fund	to	finance	the	
    transfers	 to	 those	 who	 face	 a	 negative	 shock.	 While	 it	 is	 not	 always	 the	 case	 in	 practice,	 these	
    contributions	are	supposed	to	be	actuarially	fair	to	incentivize	participation.	The	second	instrument	
    includes	savings	arrangements,	where	individuals	save	money	in	individual	savings	accounts	to	pay	
    for	their	consumption	when	they	face	a	negative	shock.		

    Because	 of	 liquidity	 constraints,	 social	 insurance	 systems	 also	 require	 redistributive	 arrangements	
    that	 can	 operate	 in	 two	 ways:	 by	 subsidizing	 contributions	 (either	 in	 the	 form	 of	 subsidized	
    premiums	 or	 topping-up	 savings),	 or	 by	 subsidizing	 benefits	 (for	 instance,	 by	 guaranteeing	 a	
    universal	minimum	pension	level).	

    Another	important	aspect	of	a	social	insurance	system	is	its	financing.	In	addition	to	individual	and	
    employer	 contributions,	 the	 sources	 of	 finance	 could	 include	 general	 government	 revenues	 and	
    earmarked	taxes.	

	

The	 coverage	 of	 current	 Bismarckian	 social	 insurance	 systems	 is	 unlikely	 to	 expand	 considerably.		
Indeed,	 these	 systems	 are	 financed	 by	 employer	 and	 employee	 contributions,	 and	 designed	 for	 a	
traditional	 employment	 relationship	 where	 workers	 hold	 formal	 salaried	 jobs	 with	 the	 same	 employer	
throughout	their	working	lives.1	Expanding	the	Bismarckian	system	to	include	informal	workers	presents	
many	 challenges.	 	 First,	 Informal	 workers	 are	 unlikely	 to	 be	 registered,	 especially	 in	 developing	
economies,	 thereby	 governments	 struggle	 to	 identify,	 locate	 and	 monitor	 individuals	 in	 this	 category.	
Second,	enforcing	social	insurance	contributions	for	micro-,	small-	and	medium-sized	firms	or	from	small	
agricultural	producers	is	difficult,	as	inspection	costs	are	high,	and	can	lead	to	administratively	inefficient	
systems	that	add	distortions	to	the	labor	market	(Almeida	and	Carneiro,	2012).	Third,	the	productivity	
levels	 of	 informal	 workers	 and/or	 firms	 are	 often	 too	 low	 for	 them	 to	 afford	 social	 insurance	
contributions	and	the	associated	transaction	costs.		

	
Several	 countries	 implemented	 non-contributory	 social	 insurance	 programs	 to	 expand	 coverage	 but	
these	contributed	to	increase	labor	market	segmentation,	and	are	likely	to	be	financially	unsustainable.		
Social	pensions	or	non-contributory	health	insurance	are	effective	mechanisms	to	reach	out	to	workers	
who	 are	 “outside”	 the	 mandatory	 contributory	 systems.	 	 The	 problem	 is	 that	 these	 programs	 can	
become	an	implicit	tax	on	formal	jobs	and	reduce	incentives	to	enroll	and	contribute;	particularly	where	
																																																													
1
 	 This	 system	 design	 was	 effective	 in	 settings	 of	 young	 population	 age	 structures	 where	 most	 workers	 in	 an	 economy	 made	
payroll	 contributions	 throughout	 a	 40-year	 career,	 and	 retirement	 periods	 averaged	 less	 than	 10	 years	 due	 to	 shorter	 life	
expectancies.		



	                                                                                                                                       5	
	


transitions	 between	 formal	 and	 informal	 jobs	 are	 frequent.	 	 There	 are	 also	 questions	 about	 the	 fiscal	
sustainability	of	the	programs	and	whether	it	make	sense	to	subsidize	benefits	for	informal	workers	who	
have,	at	least	partially,	the	capacity	to	pay.	
	
This	note	reviews	the	economic	literature	dealing	with	the	expansion	of	social	insurance	programs	and	
summarizes	 the	 main	 policy	 insights.	 	 	 It	 draws	 on	 international	 evidence	 on	 social	 insurance	 system	
design	 and	 innovations,	 and	 the	 resulting	 impact	 on	 coverage	 of	 and	 participation	 by	 formal	 and	
informal	 workers.	 The	 focus	 is	 on	 general	 design	 principles	 that	 can	 apply	 to	 unemployment	 benefits,	
health	insurance,	and	pensions	(old-age,	disability,	and	survivorships).				

The	 rest	 of	 this	 note	 proceeds	 as	 follows.	 Section	 2	 discusses	 three	 different	 types	 of	 social	 insurance	
schemes	 and	 argues	 that	 well-designed	 integrated	 programs	 are	 the	 best	 policy	 option.	 Section	 3	
discusses	 the	 common	 implementation	 challenges	 and	 outlines	 alternative	 approaches	 to	 overcome	
them,	 highlighting	 the	 role	 of	 digital	 technologies	 to	 promote	 take-up	 and	 retention,	 and	 the	 design	
options	that	would	minimize	potential	distortionary	effects.	Finally,	Section	4	concludes.	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	



	                                                                                                                     6	
	BOX	2:	EFFICIENCY	AND	EQUITY	GROUNDS	FOR	GOVERNMENT-PROVIDED	SOCIAL	INSURANCE	

    	

    There	 are	 important	 efficiency	 and	 equity	 considerations	 to	 justify	 the	 public	 provision	 of	 social	 insurance.	
    The	existence	of	significant	market	failures	and	individuals’	diverse	risk	aversion	profiles	are	key	reasons	for	
    government	involvement.	

    Insurance	 Market	 Failures.	 Unemployment	 and	 health	 insurance	 are	 affected	 by	 adverse	 selection,	 which	
    arises	 because	 insurers	 cannot	 determine	 the	 unemployment	 and	 health	 risks	 with	 sufficient	 accuracy,	 as	
    work	or	health	histories	are	imperfect	and	in	some	cases	nonexistent	predictors	(Vodopivec,	2004).	Low-risk	
    individuals	 do	 not	 have	 strong	 incentives	 to	 obtain	 insurance,	 skewing	 the	 pool	 of	 insured	 individuals	 to	
    those	 with	 higher	 average	 risk.	 Adverse	 selection	 therefore	 leads	 to	 under-provision	 of	 insurance.	
    Unemployment	 and	 health	 insurance	 are	 also	 affected	 by	 moral	 hazard,	 which	 leads	 to	 over-utilization	 of	
    unemployment	 benefits	 or	 health	 services.	 For	 example,	 unemployment	 insurance	 may	 reduce	 work	 effort	
    when	 employed	 and	 job	 search	 efforts	 when	 receiving	 benefits,	 and	 health	 insurance	 may	 lead	 to	 riskier	
    behaviors.	 Finally,	 some	 of	 the	 risks	 in	 question	 are	 highly	 correlated	 across	 a	 wide	 range	 of	 individuals.	
    More	 specifically,	 some	 risks,	 such	 as	 unemployment,	 are	 correlated	 across	 individuals	 during	 the	 business	
    cycle,	 making	 it	 difficult	 for	 private	 insurers	 to	 diversify	 risk.	 A	 similar	 issue	 arises	 in	 terms	 of	 uninsurable	
    risks,	 whereby	some	socio-demographic	groups	face	risks	so	high	 that	 they	are	priced	out	of	the	insurance	
    market.	For	instance,	the	chances	of	re-employment	for	workers	close	to	retirement	age	may	be	so	low	that	
    private	insurance	may	not	be	viable.	Similarly,	pre-existing	health	conditions	may	prevent	some	people	from	
    qualifying	for	private	health	insurance.	

    Capital	market	failures.	Imperfect	capital	markets	represent	another	important	impediment	for	individuals	to	
    access	private	financing	to	cope	with	a	short-term	shock,	even	when	the	probability	of	repayment	is	high.	For	
    instance,	 individuals	 who	 become	 unemployed	 because	 their	 skills	 become	 obsolete	 may	 find	 it	 difficult	 to	
    obtain	a	loan	to	finance	education	or	training,	given	the	delayed	returns	to	human	capital	investments.	

    Myopia.	 The	 existence	 of	 individual	 barriers	 to	 participation	 may	 result	 in	 insufficient	 demand	 and	 sub-
    optimal	levels	of	social	insurance	coverage.	Inadequate	long-term	planning	on	the	part	of	individuals	can	be	
    attributed	to	many	factors,	including	lack	of	information,	awareness	or	financial	skills,	behavioral	factors	that	
    impede	 individuals	 from	 accurately	 perceiving	 and	 weighing	 risks,	 or	 outright	 psychological	 barriers	 for	
    longer	 term	 planning	 (Holzmann,	 2014).	 There	 is	 a	 large	 body	 of	 literature	 on	 the	 individual	 barriers	 to	
    participation	 in	 pension	 schemes,	 where	 individuals	 may	 rationally	 postpone	 deciding	 on	 whether	 to	
    contribute	to	a	pension	fund	because	the	cost	of	gathering	the	information	needed	to	decide	coupled	 with	
    the	 complexity	 involved	 in	 evaluating	 the	 information	 may	 exceed	 the	 short-run	 benefit	 from	 doing	 so	
    (Madrian	 and	 Shea,	 2001).	 There	 are	 similar	 examples	 for	 unemployment	 and	 health	 insurance	 take-up	
    decisions	(Madrian,	2014).	

    Poverty	 and	 liquidity	 constraints.	 Some	 of	 the	 failures	 that	 characterize	 insurance	 markets	 are	 particularly	
    burdensome	 for	 informal	 workers,	 especially	 those	 for	 whom	 informal	 employment	 is	 a	 last	 resort	 due	 to	
    lack	 of	 alternatives.	 For	 example,	 unskilled	 workers	 in	 precarious	 or	 irregular	 work	 are	 more	 likely	 to	 face	
    credit	 constraints,	 lack	 the	 resources	 to	 make	 complex	 decisions,	 or	 be	 affected	 by	 uninsurable	 risks.	 They	
    are	also	more	likely	to	live	in	impoverished	communities	or	lagging	regions	with	limited	work	opportunities,	
    and	therefore	are	less	able	to	self-insure	against	risks.	Moreover,	problems	of	adverse	selection	are	likely	to	
    be	heightened	 compared	to	formal	counterparts	 whose	health	or	job	records	are	 more	readily	available	or	
    verifiable	for	potential	insurance	providers	to	make	risk	assessments.	


	

	                                                                                                                             7	
	



2. INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCE IN
EXTENDING SOCIAL INSURANCE TO
INFORMAL WORKERS
	

The	 performance	 of	 Bismarckian	 contributory	 social	 insurance	 programs	 has	 been	 disappointing	 in	
developing	countries.	Given	the	challenges	of	extending	its	coverage	to	informal	workers,	several	low-	
and	 middle-income	 countries	 introduced	 new	 social	 insurance	 schemes	 to	 cover	 individuals	 who	 work	
(permanently	 or	 intermittently)	 in	 the	 informal	 sector	 and	 have	 low	 or	 limited	 capacity	 to	 pay	 regular	
contributions.	While	some	of	these	new	systems	have	a	universal	design	targeting	 workers’	economy-
wide,	 such	 as	 Seguro	 Popular	 in	 Mexico,	 others	 focus	 on	 a	 specific	 segment	 of	 the	 economy,	 such	 as	
Ecuador’s	 efforts	 to	 expand	 coverage	 in	 rural	 areas.	 Some	 programs	 are	 fully	 subsidized,	 requiring	 no	
individual	 contribution	 –	 for	 example,	 the	 “30	 Baht”	 in	 Thailand	 –	 	 whereas	 others	 take	 a	 mixed	
approach	 incorporating	 a	 targeted	 subsidy	 for	 vulnerable	 workers,	 and	 an	 actuarially	 fair	 contribution	
system	 for	 formal	 workers,	 such	 as	 the	 Chilean	 pension	 system.2	 Social	 insurance	 systems	 that	
incorporate	 informal	 workers	 can	 be	 broadly	 sorted	 into	 three	 categories:	 non-contributory	 universal	
programs,	parallel	schemes,	and	nationally	integrated	programs	with	explicit	subsidies.		

Non-contributory	 universal	 programs	 include	 social	 pensions,3	 universal	 health	 insurance	 and	
unemployment	assistance	where	eligibility	is	not	based	on	past	contributions	and	is	instead	financed	out	
of	 general	 taxation.	 While	 social	 pensions	 have	 been	 in	 place	 for	 a	 long	 time,	 they	 expanded	
substantially	 since	 the	 1990s	 (Palacios	 and	 Knox-Vydmanov,	 2014).	 According	 to	 the	 HelpAge	
International	 Social	 Pensions	 Database,	 110	 countries	 have	 a	 social	 pension,	 albeit	 some	 with	 low	
coverage	rates	(Figure	2).	For	instance,	New	Zealand’s	pension	system	is	based	around	a	social	pension	
for	those	aged	65	years	or	older,	which	is	financed	from	general	revenues.	Another	example	comes	from	
the	 National	 Health	 Service	 (NHS)	 of	 the	 United	 Kingdom,	 which	 provides	 public	 healthcare	 to	 all	
permanent	residents,	and	it	is	paid	out	of	general	taxation.	

	                                                          	




																																																													
2
  	 While	 the	 contributory	 part	 of	 the	 Chilean	 pension	 system	 is	 fully	 funded	 by	 workers’	 contributions,	 the	 government	 is	
responsible	 for	 financing	 the	 Basic	 Solidarity	 Pension	 for	 persons	 who	 did	 not	 contribute,	 and	 the	 Pension	 Solidarity	
Complement	for	persons	whose	contributions	are	below	a	threshold.	The	government	also	guarantees	pension	benefits	in	cases	
where	a	pension	fund	is	shut	down	or	becomes	insolvent	(Shelton,	2012).	
3
  	 Broadly	 defined,	 social	 pensions	 are	 cash	 transfers	 not	 linked	 to	 contributions	 that	 occur	 after	 retirement	 or	 after	 a	 given	
eligibility	age	(Holzmann	et	al.	2009).		



	                                                                                                                                               8	
	


Figure	2	
Social	Pension	Coverage	across	the	World		




                                                                                                                    	




                                                                                                                	
Source:	Based	on	data	from	HelpAge	International,	Social	Pensions	Database	

Parallel	 schemes	 include	 those	 where	 several	 fragmented	 contributory	 systems	 coexist,	 such	 as	 in	
Tunisia,	where	there	are	different	pension	programs	for	public	and	private	sector	workers.	Even	within	
the	 private	 sector,	 workers	 have	 multiple	 schemes	 that	 depend	 on	 where	 they	 work	 (Robalino	 et	 al.,	
2012).	Parallel	programs	also	include	cases	where	a	Bismarckian	system	coexists	with	non-contributory	
program,	 where	 eligibility	 for	 the	 former	 depends	 on	 labor	 market	 status	 and	 workers	 cannot	 be	
included	in	both	simultaneously,	as	it	is	the	case	with	Mexico’s	health	insurance	system.	Mexico	in	2002	
introduced	 Seguro	 Popular,	 a	 large	 program	 designed	 to	 provide	 health	 insurance	 to	 all	 workers	 not	
affiliated	with	social	security	and	that	covers	a	pre-determined	set	of	procedures	and	treatments	(Pages,	
Rigolini	and	Robalino,	2014).	Whereas	Mexico’s	formal	social	security	system	provides	better	coverage,	
the	difference	in	benefits	between	the	two	programs	has	narrowed	over	time.	Moreover,	the	program	is	
virtually	 free	 of	 charge	 to	 users,	 with	 costs	 borne	 by	 the	 government.	 Overall,	 the	 program	 has	 been	
very	effective	at	increasing	health	coverage,	and	reducing	health	expenditures	for	Mexican	families	by	
an	 amount	 equivalent	 to	 4.2	 percent	 of	 the	 household	 budget	 (Barros,	 2009).	 The	 program	 has	 also	
reduced	infant	mortality	rates	by	about	0.5	percentage	points,	a	significant	improvement	(Pfutze,	2014).	

	

	



	                                                                                                                       9	
	


	

Integrated	 national	 programs.	 Some	 governments	 have	 reinforced	 the	 solidarity	 mechanism	 by	
integrating	 a	 Bismarckian	 system	 and	 new	 social	 insurance	 schemes	 aimed	 at	 including	 informal	
workers,	into	a	single	system	for	beneficiaries	across	the	income	spectrum.	Chile	did	this	by	reforming	
its	pension	system	in	2008	in	response	to	the	fact	that	many	individuals	did	not	contribute	frequently	
enough	to	the	system,	particularly	among	groups	with	low	formal	labor	market	attachment	(Attanasio	et	
al.,	2011).	To	incentivize	workers	to	join	the	formal	sector	and	raise	contributions,	the	reform	replaced	
the	 redistributive	 component	 of	 the	 pension	 system	 with	 two	 new	 components:	 one	 consists	 of	 a	
means-tested	pension	for	those	not	entitled	to	the	contributory	pension	benefit;	the	other	is	a	welfare	
pension	 complement	 to	 sustain	 consumption	 by	 topping-up	 the	 contributory	 pension	 for	 those	 with	
insufficient	 contributions.	 In	 addition,	 the	 new	 system	 introduced	 incentives	 to	 encourage	 the	
participation	in	the	contributory	system	for	groups	with	historically	low	attachment	to	the	formal	labor	
market,	such	as	women,	young	workers	and	the	self-employed.	The	reform	included	subsidies	to	women	
for	each	child	they	have,	a	wage	and	contribution	subsidy	to	young	workers,	and	pension	eligibility	for	
the	self-employed	(including	eligibility	for	the	redistributive	component).		

Parallel	 and	 universal	 non-contributory	 systems	 face	 different	 sets	 of	 challenges.	 Universal	 non-
contributory	 systems	 can	 add	 important	 fiscal	 pressures	 because	 benefits	 are	 typically	 not	 linked	 to	
revenues.	 Parallel	 systems	 can	 create	 implicit	 subsidies	 or	 taxes	 as	 workers	 move	 between	 jobs	 that	
have	 different	 formality	 status	 and	 are	 thus	 covered	 by	 different	 social	 insurance	 schemes.	 They	 are	
more	prone	to	be	regressive	and	distortive	when	they	are	highly	fragmented.		

An	 integrated	 system	 can,	 in	 principle,	 address	 the	 limitations	 inherent	 to	 parallel	 and	 universal	 non-
contributory	 schemes	 by	 being	 more	 financially	 sustainable	 and	 not	 exacerbating	 labor	 market	
distortions	 that	 constrain	 labor	 mobility.	 Integrated	 systems	 do	 have	 an	 income	 effect,	 since	
beneficiaries	 receive	 larger	 or	 smaller	 subsidies	 depending	 on	 their	 earnings;	 and	 they	 may	 still	 be	
distortionary,	 if	 the	 income	 threshold	 to	 qualify	 for	 subsidies	 is	 high	 enough	 to	 incentivize	 early	
retirement	 or	 reduced	 job-search	 effort.	 The	 next	 section	 provides	 some	 guidelines	 for	 an	 effective	
implementation	of	an	integrated	social	insurance	system.	

	

	                                  	




	                                                                                                                10	
	
    BOX	 3:	 THE	 TRADE-OFFS	 BETWEEN	 UNIVERSAL	 SOCIAL	 INSURANCE	 AND	 INCREASING	 FORMAL	
    WORK	

    	

    Despite	 the	 equity	 and	 efficiency	 arguments	 in	 favor	 of	 extending	 social	 insurance	 to	 informal	
    workers,	 legitimate	 concerns	 arise	 around	 the	 potentially	 distorting	 effects	 on	 labor	 supply	 and	
    labor	demand.		

    Social	 insurance	 programs	 can	 affect	 labor	 supply	 and	 demand	 decisions	 when	 they	 are	 linked	 to	
    the	 labor	 market,	 either	 through	 eligibility	 requirements	 or	 financing	 mechanisms.	 When	 social	
    insurance	 is	 financed	 through	 payroll	 taxes	 (paid	 by	 employers)	 and	 workers’	 contributions,	 the	
    wedge	 between	 the	 cost	 of	 labor	 and	 take-home	 pay	 increases.	 This	 could	 reduce	 formal	
    employment,	especially	in	low	and	middle	income	countries	with	low	enforcement	capacity.		

    The	magnitude	of	the	impact	on	formal	labor	demand	and	supply	will	depend	on	the	 perceived	size	
    of	this	wedge,	not	just	the	actual	size	of	the	wedge.	 Perceived	tax-wedges	are	larger	 when	people	
    do	not	value	the	benefits	offered	by	the	scheme	and	thereby	would	prefer	not	to	participate	in	the	
    program,	 or	 prefer	 to	 contribute	 less.	 These	 perceptions	 regarding	 the	 value	 of	 a	 social	 insurance	
    program	 are	 partially	 driven	 by	 a	 rational	 and	 informed	 process,	 such	 as	 when	 individuals	 do	 not	
    value	 the	 systematic	 and	 often	 implicit	 redistribution	 mechanisms	 included	 in	 risk-pooling	
    arrangements.	The	perceived	wedge	may	also	increase	if	the	services	provided	are	of	poor	quality,	if	
    there	 is	 excessive	 “bundling”	 of	 benefits	 that	 many	 participants	 do	 not	 value,	 and	 if	 contributions	
    are	 not	 linked	 to	 the	 expected	 benefits.	 The	 perceived	 wedge	 is	 also	 driven	 by	 myopia.	 Myopia	
    includes	cases	where	individuals	face	information,	awareness	and/or	psychological	barriers,	or	lack	
    the	financial	skills	for	long-term	planning.		

    A	large	tax-wedge	may	provide	incentives	for	employers	to	hire	workers	informally	or	to	hire	fewer	
    workers,	because	it	becomes	more	difficult	to	pass	on	the	cost	of	insurance	to	workers	in	the	form	
    of	lower	wages.	A	large	tax-wedge	–	perceived	or	real	–	can	also	provide	incentives	for	workers	to	
    take	 informal	 jobs.	 Moreover,	 it	 can	 interact	 with	 implicit	 or	 explicit	 subsidies	 offered	 by	 social	
    insurance	to	informal	workers.	Explicit	subsidies	given	to	workers	in	the	informal	sector	in	the	form	
    of	 non-contributory	 benefits	 may	 provide	 incentives	 to	 work	 informally,	 because	 whereas	 formal	
    workers	pay	for	these	benefits,	informal	workers	get	them	for	free.	Implicit	subsidies	–	in	the	form	
    of	 “above	 market”	 rates	 of	 return	 on	 contributions,	 minimum	 pension	 guarantees,	 minimum	
    unemployment	benefits,	or	early	retirement	provisions	that	are	not	actuarially	fair	–	can	also	distort	
    incentives	and	 encourage	 early	retirement,	shorter	 enrollment	periods	 in	social	security	or	reduce	
    job-search	effort.		

    The	 literature	 provides	 significant	 evidence	 that	 extending	 social	 insurance	 to	 informal	 workers	
    distorts	 labor	 supply	 decisions	 and	 labor	 outcomes	 in	 the	 aggregate	 (see	 Frölich	 et	 al.	 2014).	 It	 is	
    nevertheless	important	to	recognize	that	it	is	impossible	to	design	social	insurance	mechanisms	and	
    protect	 workers	 without	 changing	 economic	 incentives	 (Barr	 and	 Diamond,	 2006).	 The	 potentially	
    distortive	 effects	 of	 extending	 social	 insurance	 to	 informal	 workers	 must	 be	 weighed	 against	 the	
    associated	welfare	and	economic	benefits.		

    Source:	Pages,	Rigolini	and	Robalino	(2014) 	

	



	                                                                                                                           11	
	



3. DESIGN, IMPLEMENTATION AND POLICY
OPTIONS
	

Introducing	 a	 social	 insurance	 system	 for	 informal	 workers	 is	 fraught	 with	 challenges,	 ranging	 from	
practical	issues	of	enrolling	and	registering	participants,	to	getting	the	incentives	right	to	contribute	or	
save,	 and	 not	 exacerbating	 labor	 market	 distortions	 (see	 Box	 3).	 Identifying	 eligible	 participants	 is	
complicated	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 informal	 work	 is	 mainly	 unorganized	 and	 takes	 place	 in	 a	 variety	 of	
sometimes	 changing	 locations	 or	 within	 homes.	 In	 the	 case	 of	 self-employed	 or	 seasonal	 workers,	
maintaining	 up-to-date	 and	 accurate	 records	 is	 administratively	 complicated	 due	 to	 intermittent	 and	
irregular	work	for	different	employers,	and	irregularity	of	incomes.	And	given	workers’	myopia	and	time	
preferences	 for	 spending	 versus	 saving	 or	 self-insuring,	 incentivizing	 informal	 workers	 to	 contribute	
voluntarily	is	difficult.	These	factors	are	obstacles	for	registering	beneficiaries,	attracting	enrollees	and	
collecting	 contributions	 (Van	 Ginneken,	 1999,	 Holmes	 and	 Scott,	 2016).	 Furthermore,	 establishing	 the	
level	of	benefits	as	a	replacement	rate	of	income	cannot	be	easily	determined	in	most	cases.	And	unlike	
health	 status,	 employment	 status	 is	 not	 directly	 verifiable	 as	 individuals	 cannot	 easily	 prove	 that	 they	
are	unemployed	when	they	might	be	out	of	the	labor	force	or	working	informally.		
	
To	overcome	these	challenges,	it	is	critical	to	delink	access	to	social	insurance	programs	from	the	labor	
contract.	All	workers	would	have	access	to	the	same	social	insurance	program	regardless	of	work	status	
or	 sector.	 Within	 a	 single	 integrated	 system,	 rather	 than	 in	 two	 parallel	 systems,	 contributions	 would	
remain	mandatory	for	formal	workers	(and	their	employers,	when	available),	and	the	system	would	be	
open	 to	 informal	 workers	 on	 a	 voluntary	 basis.	 	 To	 this	 end,	 informal	 workers	 would	 need	 to	 be	
identified	 and	 enrolled,	 and	 there	 would	 be	 a	 system	 of	 financial	 and	 non-financial	 incentives	 to	
promote	 contributions	 and	 savings.	 	 Within	 this	 broad	 framework,	 this	 note	 summarizes	 some	 of	 the	
main	issues	related	to	design	and	implementation	(see	summary	in	Table	2	below).	
	

3.1 REGISTERING	AND	ENROLLING	WORKERS	
	
A	key	factor	driving	workers	into	informality	are	the	burdensome	requirements	for	participating	in	social	
insurance	systems.	In	addition	to	the	high	cost,	payment	processes	and	bureaucratic	procedures	can	be	
very	complex.	Advances	in	technology	can	be	effective	in	spurring	the	enrollment	of	informal	workers,	
starting	with	robust	ID	systems.			
	
3.1.1	Digital	ID	systems	
	
Identifying	 informal	 workers	 is	 a	 pre-condition	 for	 enrollment	 in	 social	 insurance	 programs.	 	 New	 IT-
based	systems	can	greatly	facilitate	the	process.		For	instance,	India’s	massive	Aadhaar	program,	which	
has	so	far	enrolled	over	830	million	people,	replaced	the	physical	ID	card	altogether	(World	Bank,	2016).	
Other	countries	developing	digital	ID	systems	include	Bangladesh,	Kenya	and	Guinea.			
	




	                                                                                                                  12	
	


Digital	IDs	are	in	principle	universal	and	thereby	cover	both	formal	and	informal	workers.	In	addition	to	
facilitating	service	delivery,	digital	ID	systems	were	effective	in	reducing	leakages	in	benefits	for	social	
protection	 programs,	 health	 insurance	 and	 pension	 schemes	 stemming	 from,	 for	 example,	 duplicate	
claims,	ghost-workers,	quasi-ghosts,	and	corruption	(World	Bank,	2016).		
	
Digital	 technologies	 can	 also	 help	 improve	 coordination	 and	 consistency	 across	 concurrent	 social	
protection	systems.	Since	2005,	the	main	social	security	institutions	in	the	Philippines	relied	on	a	unified	
smart	 card	 that	 can	 store	 information	 and	 perform	 transactions	 in	 all	 these	 institutions.	 The	 system	
enables	 authorities	 to	 identify	 participants,	 and	 facilitates	 and	 streamlines	 implementation	 of	
procedures	and	monitoring	(Duran-Valverde	et	al.,	2013).	
	
3.1.2	Facilitating	enrollment	and	financial	transactions		
	
Reducing	 the	 time	 required	 to	 enroll	 in	 a	 social	 insurance	 scheme	 is	 an	 important	 way	 to	 expand	
coverage	to	informal	workers,	for	whom	time	away	from	work	can	mean	significant	foregone	earnings.	
Nicaragua	introduced	a	program	in	2007	that	highlights	the	importance	of	time	to	informal	workers.	This	
program	 extended	 voluntary	 health	 insurance	 to	 informal	 workers	 by	 randomly	 allocating	 monetary	
subsidies	 for	 enrollment,	 implementing	 an	 aggressive	 dissemination	 strategy	 and	 reducing	 the	 time	
required	 to	 enroll	 by	 allowing	 enrollment	 on	 the	 spot.	 The	 results	 indicate	 that	 time	 and	 convenience	
costs	 matter	 almost	 as	 much	 as	 monetary	 subsidies	 (Hatt	 et	 al.	 2009).	 Whereas	 these	 factors	 were	
successful	in	promoting	take-up,	they	did	not	contribute	to	long-term	retention.	Other	factors	such	as	
the	inconvenience	of	making	payments,	the	pricing	of	premiums	and	the	higher	perceived	quality	and	
convenience	 of	 private	 medical	 providers	 were	 key	 reasons	 behind	 low	 retention	 rates.	 Addressing	
these	considerations	will	be	crucial	for	sustaining	participation	over	time.	

New	advances	in	technology	can	also	help	firms	formalize	their	workers.	For	instance,	the	Mbao	micro-
pension	 scheme	 in	 Kenya,	 which	 covers	 small-	 and	 medium-sized	 firms,	 uses	 mobile	 transfer	 services	
such	as	M-PESA	and	Airtel	to	facilitate	payments	(Holmes	and	Scott,	2016).	

Encouraging	 the	 enrollment	 of	 informal	 workers	 may	 require	 establishing	 new	 institutions	 and	
infrastructure,	 but	 relying	 on	 existing	 infrastructure	 to	 the	 extent	 possible	 is	 likely	 to	 be	 both	 more	
effective	and	less	costly.	Hu	and	Stewart	(2009)	cite	the	case	of	India,	where	the	government	planned	to	
extend	 the	 existing	 mandatory	 pension	 scheme	 for	 government	 officials	 into	 a	 new	 National	 Pension	
Scheme	(NPS)	that	would	be	voluntary	for	informal	workers.	The	financial	sector	infrastructure	related	
to	 the	 NPS	 was	 designed	 to	 be	 as	 wide-ranging	 as	 possible	 by	 utilizing	 existing	 infrastructure	 (banks,	
post	offices,	etc.),	to	facilitate	access	by	informal	workers,	particularly	in	remote	rural	areas.	

Given	 the	 differences	 in	 characteristics	 of	 informal	 and	 formal	 workers	 and	 their	 distinct	 earning	
patterns,	 any	 attempt	 to	 foster	 the	 enrollment	 of	 informal	 workers	 will	 require	 new	 institutional	
arrangements	 (Ribe,	 Robalino	 and	 Walker,	 2012).	 In	 the	 first	 place,	 because	 mandatory	 contributions	
cannot	 be	 imposed	 or	 enforced	 on	 most	 informal	 workers,	 participation	 must	 be	 voluntary	 and	
therefore	attractive.	Secondly,	governments	introducing	new	social	insurance	schemes	will	need	to	be	
proactive	in	marketing	and	in	collecting	contributions,	such	as	through	using	mobile	agencies	operating	
in	street	markets	or	remote	areas.	Thirdly,	transaction	costs	must	be	low	given	the	limited	resources	of	
informal	workers.	Some	of	these	problems	could	be	addressed,	in	part,	by	operating	through	facilitating	



	                                                                                                                  13	
	


agencies	that	aggregate	the	contributions	of	low-income	workers	in	the	informal	sector.	Explicit	financial	
incentives	might	be	required	to	attract	individuals	with	limited	disposable	income	or	saving	capacity.	

Relying	 on	 financial	 agencies	 such	 as	 microfinance	 institutions	 (MFIs)	 which	 are	 more	 focused	 on	 the	
informal	sector,	could	be	a	good	strategy.	For	example,	the	Grameen	Bank	in	Bangladesh	started	to	offer	
a	product	for	old-age	protection	beginning	in	2000,	whereby	borrowers	were	required	to	make	a	small	
deposit	 each	 month	 into	 a	 personal	 savings	 account.	 A	 similar	 plan	 was	 introduced	 in	 the	 Philippines,	
where	 individuals	 can	 make	 contributions	 at	 a	 level	 as	 low	 as	 USD	 0.12	 per	 week.	 Counter	 evidence	
comes	 from	 a	 program	 in	 Nicaragua	 that	 aimed	 to	 extend	 health	 insurance	 to	 informal	 workers	 using	
subsidies	and	MFIs;	it	showed	that	the	latter	were	less	successful	than	the	central	agency	at	encouraging	
enrollment	(Hatt	et	al.	2009).4		
	

3.2 LINKING	CONTRIBUTIONS	TO	BENEFITS	
	
The	level	of	contributions	and	benefits	will	vary	across	countries,	reflecting	social	preferences	regarding	
the	 balance	 between	 individuals’	 and	 governments’	 responsibilities	 (i.e.,	 the	 social	 contract).	 Three	
essential	criteria	for	setting	benefits	are:		 adequacy,	efficiency,	 and	affordability	(Ribe	et	al.	2012).	More	
specifically,	benefits	would	be	high	enough	to	allow	a	decent	standard	of	living	and	prevent	individuals	
from	falling	into	poverty	(adequacy).	However,	they	would	not	be	set	so	high	that	individuals	would	be	
discouraged	from	saving,	working	or	looking	for	a	job	(efficiency),	or	that	would	place	an	unsustainable	
strain	on	public	finances	(sustainability).		
	
These	levels	are	difficult	to	define	and	will	depend	on	certain	key	factors	such	as	the	level	of	economic	
development,	 demographic	 structure,	 labor	 productivity,	 income	 distribution,	 efficiency	 of	 the	 tax	
system,	 and	 level	 of	 informality.	 In	 the	 case	 of	 pensions	 and	 unemployment	 insurance,	 the	 key	
parameters	for	defining	the	level	of	benefits	are	the	replacement	rate,	the	minimum	benefit	level	(a	way	
to	increase	the	replacement	rate	for	low	income	workers),	and	a	ceiling	on	covered	earnings	(to	reduce	
the	 replacement	 rate	 for	 high	 earners).	 In	 the	 case	 of	 health	 insurance,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 find	 the	
balance	 between	 the	 goal	 of	 improving	 health	 outcomes	 and	 protecting	 people	 against	 the	 financial	
consequences	of	illness.	The	main	parameters	to	be	defined	are	the	list	of	health	interventions	that	are	
covered	and	not	covered	by	the	system,	and	the	level	of	cost-sharing	through	health	plan	deductibles	
and	copayments	for	treatments	to	be	paid	by	the	individual.	These	cost-share	ratios	could	vary	by	the	
level	of	the	beneficiary’s	income.	
	
	
	                                 	




																																																													
4
	Hatt	et	al.	(2009)	suggest	that	people	had	doubts	about	the	expertise	of	MFIs	to	deal	with	health-related	issues,	and	others	
were	suspicious	that	the	MFIs	would	try	to	profit	from	the	arrangement.	



	                                                                                                                         14	
	


Table	1	
Key	parameters	of	old-age	and	unemployment	insurance	systems	
       Type	of	benefits	                                                                    Parameters	
Old-age		                                                       Replacement	rates:	in	a	risk-pooling	scheme,	pensions	would	be	
                                                                higher	than	40	to	50	percent	of	previous	earnings	after	30	years	
                                                                of	contributions	(ILO,	2012).	The	minimum	would	be	between	20	
                                                                to	25	percent	of	economy-wide	average	earnings.	The	ceiling	
                                                                would	be	60	percent	of	earnings	for	the	system	to	be	financially	
                                                                viable	(Holzmann	and	Hinz,	2005),	or	2	to	2.5	times	the	economy-
                                                                wide	average	earnings.	
Unemployment		                                                  Replacement	rates:	50	to	70	percent	of	covered	earnings.	The	
                                                                minimum	could	be	equal	to	the	minimum	wage.	The	ceiling	could	
                                                                be	equal	to	2.5	to	3.5	times	the	economy-wide	average	earnings	
                                                                (Robalino	and	Weber,	2013;	Kuddo	et	al.,	2015)	
	
	
It	is	also	important	to	reduce	uncertainty	about	how	benefits	will	evolve	over	time	(Ribe	et	al.	2012).	To	
avoid	 any	 distortionary	 impacts	 of	 inflation,	 for	 instance,	 minimum	 pensions	 and	 contribution	 ceilings	
can	be	established	as	a	fraction	of	economy-wide	average	earnings,	and	benefits	can	be	automatically	
indexed	to	inflation.	Per	capita	benefits	need	to	have	an	explicit	financing	mechanism;	a	combination	of	
individual	 contributions	 (or	 contributions	 from	 employers	 when	 available)	 and	 government	 transfers	
financed	from	general	taxation.			
	
In	 the	 case	 of	 pensions,	 the	 contribution	 rate	 (expressed	 as	 a	 share	 of	 covered	 earnings)	 needs	 to	 be	
linked	 to	 the	 accrual	 rate	 and	 life	 expectancy	 at	 retirement.	 For	 unemployment	 benefits	 the	
contribution	rate	is	usually	set	at	a	level	where	it	generates	sufficient	revenues	to	pay	benefits	during	a	
given	period	(e.g.,	a	year).5	For	health	insurance,	contrary	to	standard	practice,	the	contribution	would	
take	the	form	of	a	premium	that	reflects	the	expected	cost	of	the	health	insurance	package.			
	

3.3 DESIGNING	REDISTRIBUTIVE	ARRANGEMENTS	
	
Redistribution	is	critical	within	the	social	insurance	system	to	fund	contributions	and/or	top	up	benefits	
(e.g.,	 minimum	 pension)	 of	 low	 income	 individuals.	 	 A	 proper	 redistributive	 arrangement	 involves	
explicit	 subsidies/transfers	 and	 an	 eligibility	 criteria,	 as	 well	 as	 dedicated	 taxes.	 	 Subsidies	 would	 be	
based	 on	 earnings	 or	 savings	 capacity,	 and	 not	 on	 workers’	 occupation,	 economic	 sector,	 or	
employment	 in	 the	 formal	 or	 informal	 sector	 (Ribe	 et	 al,	 2012).	 The	 amount	 of	 the	 subsidy	 would	 be	
kept	below	a	certain	threshold	to	avoid	any	adverse	behavioral	effects	such	as	early	retirement	or	low	
job	effort.		
	
Eligibility	for	subsidies	can	be	universal	or	means-tested.	Universal	benefits	have	more	predictable	costs,	
and	are	less	expensive	to	administer.	On	the	other	hand,	given	the	magnitude	of	informal	employment	
in	developing	countries,	extending	social	insurance	through	universal	benefits	risks	unsustainable	fiscal	
costs,	or	benefit	levels	that	are	too	low	to	make	a	significant	dent	in	poverty	(Grosh	and	Leite,	2009).	
																																																													
5
    	Robalino	et	al.	(2009)	



	                                                                                                                                   15	
	


The	 experience	 of	 Bolivia’s	 universal	 income	 transfer	 illustrates	 the	 potential	 for	 unintended	 negative	
consequences.	The	program	is	expensive	and	benefits	many	middle-	or	high-income	individuals,	since	no	
restrictions	 were	 imposed	 on	 those	 already	 receiving	 benefits	 from	 the	 contributory	 pension	 system,	
while	many	of	the	poorest	individuals	are	excluded	due	to	administrative	problems.	Another	downside	
of	universal	benefits	is	the	potential	to	crowd	out	contributions	by	individuals	with	saving	capacity.	The	
total	costs	of	means-tested	benefits	may	be	lower	initially,	but	they	could	increase	in	the	face	of	political	
pressure	for	less	stringent	eligibility	criteria	or	more	generous	benefits.	Even	means-tested	benefits	can	
affect	incentives	for	workers	close	to	the	eligibility	threshold	who	may	decide	to	work	informally	or	work	
fewer	hours	to	avoid	the	contribution	and/or	retain	the	subsidy.		
	
Ribe,	Robalino	and	Walker	(2012)	recommend	means-testing	for	any	subsidies	within	a	social	insurance	
system,	 and	 downward	 adjustment	 to	 subsidy	 levels	 as	 beneficiary	 income	 rises,	 with	 the	 subsidy	
component	financed	by	general	tax	revenues.	To	minimize	the	potential	distortionary	effects	of	means-
tested	 benefits,	 it	 would	 be	 important	 to	 keep	 the	 size	 of	 the	 transfer	 modest	 and	 avoid	 setting	 the	
income	 threshold	 for	 eligibility	 too	 high	 (to	 minimize	 the	 number	 of	 potential	 beneficiaries).	 This	
arrangement	would	lead	to	a	more	progressive	income	redistribution	and	avoid	distorting	the	incentives	
facing	workers	and	employers.		

In	 terms	 of	 financing	 mechanisms,	 it	 is	 recommended	 not	 to	 rely	 on	 labor	 taxes	 that	 can	 reduce	
incentives	 to	 create	 or	 take	 formal	 jobs.	 	 The	 alternative	 is	 to	 rely	 on	 general	 revenues	 funded	 out	 of	
income	 taxes,	 consumption	 taxes,	 or	 property	 taxes.	 	 Minimum	 pensions,	 for	 instance,	 would	 have	 a	
separate	funding	mechanism;	their	cost	would	not	be	included	in	the	calculation	of	the	contribution	rate	
described	in	the	previous	section.		The	same	applies	to	the	share	of	the	health	insurance	premium	that	
is	subsidize	for	a	given	category	of	workers.		

In	 the	 case	 of	 unemployment	 benefits	 things	 can	 be	 more	 complicated.	 	 In	 traditional	 unemployment	
insurance	 systems	 redistribution	 is	 financed,	 implicitly,	 through	 taxes	 on	 the	 savings	 of	 “low	 risk”	
workers;	i.e.	those	who	are	at	a	low	risk	of	unemployment	(Robalino	and	Weber,	2013).		If	this	tax	was	
eliminated,	 the	 UI	 system	 would	 become	 a	 pure	 unemployment	 savings	 account	 system	 (UISA)	 where	
redistribution	would	need	to	be	funded	out	of	general	revenues.	Essentially,	these	would	be	transfers	to	
top-up	the	contributions	of	“high-risk”	workers	who	are	unable	to	save	enough	on	their	own	to	fund	the	
benefits	they	receive.		In	practice,	the	optimal	financing	arrangements	are	likely	to	involve	both	taxes	on	
savings	and	general	revenues.			

	

3.4 PROVIDING	INFORMATION	AND	INCENTIVES	TO	CONTRIBUTE/SAVE	
	
When	social	insurance	systems	have	a	voluntary	component,	it	is	crucial	to	remove	information	barriers	
and	 strengthen	 the	 incentives	 to	 contribute.	 These	 goals	 can	 be	 achieved	 through	 communications	
campaigns,	 financial	 literacy	 programs,	 and	 by	 introducing	 financial	 and	 non-financial	 incentives	 to	
contribute.	

	




	                                                                                                                     16	
	


3.4.1	Communications	campaigns	and	financial	literacy	
	
Low	 levels	 of	 education	 or	 literacy	 can	 be	 a	 fundamental	 barrier	 to	 participation	 in	 a	 social	 insurance	
system.	In	Ghana,	for	example,	educational	attainment	is	a	significant	determinant	of	enrollment	in	the	
expanded	 health	 insurance	 program.	 This	 suggests	 that	 program	 information	 would	 have	 to	 be	
disseminated	 in	 a	 variety	 of	 ways	 that	 can	 reach	 those	 with	 little	 or	 no	 education	 (Holmes	 and	 Scott,	
2016).	 The	 Self-Employed	 Women’s	 Association	 (SEWA)	 in	 India	 has	 adopted	 several	 innovative	
approaches	to	help	members	submit	claims,	which	is	a	challenge	for	poor	individuals	with	low	education	
or	where	submission	requires	travel	to	another	city	(Holmes	and	Scott,	2016).	These	innovations	include	
the	use	of	extension	agents	as	well	as	a	barcode	scanner	system	that	allows	illiterate	members	to	make	
a	 claim	 by	 attaching	 a	 sticker	 to	 a	 prepaid	 envelope	 and	 sending	 it	 to	 the	 micro-insurer.	 Education-
related	 barriers	 can	 be	 large	 in	 developed	 countries	 as	 well.	 In	 the	 United	 States,	 information	 and	
administrative	 costs	 are	 estimated	 to	 be	 significant	 obstacles	 to	 enrollment	 in	 the	 public	 health	
insurance	 system	 (Medicaid),	 especially	 for	 Hispanics	 and	 Asians	 (Aizer,	 2007),	 implying	 the	 need	 for	
targeted	outreach.	

Targeting	the	population	of	interest	can	have	large	impacts	on	coverage.	This	strategy	was	key	for	Cape	
Verde	to	increase	the	social	security	coverage	of	independent	workers	from	zero	to	9	percent	in	about	a	
year	 (Duran-Valverde,	 2013).	 The	 government	 took	 a	 pro-active	 approach	 consisting	 of	 targeted	
communications	 campaigns,	 together	 with	 a	 set	 of	 education	 and	 awareness-raising	 activities	 at	 the	
local	 level,	 both	 in	 urban	 and	 rural	 areas.	 To	 get	 closer	 to	 independent	 workers,	 the	 social	 security	
institute	opened	service	centers	in	locations	with	a	high	concentration	of	independent	workers.	

Bhargava	 and	 Manoli	 (2012)	 provide	 empirical	 evidence	 that	 better	 dissemination	 of	 information	 on	
eligibility	–		such	as	through	improving	the	explanation	of	potential	benefits	–	can	have	a	positive	impact	
on	take-up.	Simplification	is	another	approach	that	has	been	successfully	applied	to	increase	coverage	
and	contribution	levels;	Madrian	(2014)	suggests	that	reducing	the	number	of	program	options	(e.g.,	set	
contribution	levels,	limited	choice	of	investment	vehicles),	and	incorporating	decision	aids,	personalized	
information	 and	 standardized	 options	 would	 help	 encourage	 the	 participation	 of	 informal	 workers	 in	
voluntary	social	insurance	programs.		
	
3.4.2	Financial	incentives	
         	
Transfers	 to	 subsidize	 workers	 with	 limited	 saving	 capacity	 can	 take	 the	 form	 of	 ex	 ante	 matching	
contributions	or	of	additional	ex	post	noncontributory	benefits.	Social	pensions	are	an	example	of	an	ex	
post	benefit.	Unemployment	insurance	can	take	the	form	of	an	ex	ante	transfer	(if	government	matches	
individual	 contributions	 to	 a	 savings	 account)	 or	 ex	 post	 (if	 the	 government	 pays	 subsidized	
unemployment	 benefits	 when	 the	 savings	 account	 runs	 out).	 The	 costs	 of	 services	 would	 be	 pre-paid	
rather	than	reimbursed	to	the	user,	to	encourage	contributions.		
	
Ex-ante	 transfers	 tend	 to	 produce	 better	 incentives	 to	 contribute	 and	 may	 cost	 less	 than	 ex	 post	
transfers,	 at	 least	 in	 the	 case	 of	 unemployment	 insurance	 and	 pensions	 (Ribe	 et	 al.,	 2012).	 The	 main	
advantage	of	matching	contributions	for	unemployment	insurance	is	that	it	gives	workers	an	incentive	
to	 work.	 While	 there	 is	 empirical	 evidence	 for	 the	 United	 States	 on	 the	 effectiveness	 of	 matching	
pension	contributions,	there	is	no	solid	evidence	for	developing	economies.				



	                                                                                                                   17	
	


	
3.4.3	Non-financial	incentives	
	
Non-financial	 nudges	 such	 as	 sending	 personal	 reminders	 can	 be	 effective	 in	 incentivizing	 saving	
behavior.	 In	 a	 recent	 example	 from	 Kenya,	 Akbas	 et	 al.	 (2016)	 implemented	 an	 experiment	 among	
participants	 of	 the	 Mbao	 Savings	 Plan,	 which	 resembles	 a	 regular	 bank	 account	 with	 a	 commitment	
device,	that	is,	a	three-year	restriction	on	withdrawals	after	registering.	Among	other	interventions,	they	
randomly	 sent	 a	 “coin”	 to	 the	 treated	 group	 at	 the	 start	 of	 the	 intervention	 and	 each	 week,	 and	
participants	were	asked	to	keep	track	of	their	own	weekly	deposits	to	the	savings	account.	The	results	
show	 that	 this	 intervention	 incentivized	 the	 most	 savings,	 at	 levels	double	 those	 in	 the	 control	 group.	
This	 type	 of	 intervention	 was	 also	 the	 least	 costly,	 especially	 when	 compared	 to	 a	 less	 effective	
alternative	 involving	 matching	 contributions.	 Kast	 et	 al.	 (2012)	 find	 that	 simply	 announcing	 a	 savings	
goal	and	then	regularly	reporting	to	peers	the	levels	of	achieved	savings	also	increase	saving	rates.	This	
evidence	 highlights	 the	 potential	 for	 interventions	 based	 on	 behavioral	 economics	 to	 promote	
individuals’	contributions	at	a	lower	cost	compared	to	financial	incentives.	
	

3.5 MONITORING	AND	ENFORCEMENT	
	
Adequate	 monitoring	 and	 enforcement	 capacity	 is	 crucial	 for	 successful	 implementation	 of	 a	 social	
insurance	program.	In	some	cases,	poor	capacity	meant	that	relatively	complex	program	components	do	
not	get	implemented,	often	leading	to	the	exclusion	of	the	poorest	households.	For	instance,	Ghana’s	
health	 insurance	 program	 exempts	 poor	 people	 from	 paying	 premiums,	 but	 administrators	 face	
challenges	in	implementing	the	means	test,	such	that	in	practice,	they	set	the	premium	at	a	flat	rate	at	
the	district	level,	which	may	exceed	the	level	affordable	by	the	poorest	(Alatinga	and	Williams,	2014	and	
Brugiavini	and	Pace,	2016,	cited	in	Holmes	and	Scott,	2016).	

Increasing	 enforcement	 may	 improve	 the	 incentives	 for	 firms	 and	 individuals	 to	 contribute	 to	 the	
system.	However,	it	may	also	have	some	unintended	consequences	by	raising	the	incentives	for	workers	
to	be	in	the	informal	sector	if	earnings	are	too	low	to	afford	contributions	to	the	system	(Almeida	and	
Carneiro,	 2012).	 Moreover,	 if	 inspections	 are	 inefficient	 or	 affected	 by	 corruption,	 firms	 and	
independent	 contractors	 may	 find	 new	 ways	 to	 remain	 undetected	 by	 authorities.	 Lessons	 from	
transition	economies	indicate	that	making	the	labor	inspectorates	and	tax	authorities	more	efficient	and	
professional	can	foster	higher	contributions	to	the	system	(Cordova-Novion	and	Sahovic,	2010).	This	can	
be	achieved	through,	for	example,	making	inspectors	more	accountable,	increasing	the	transparency	of	
inspections	(by	establishing	time	limits	on	visits	and	requiring	written	visit	summaries),	and	randomizing	
the	 assignment	 of	 inspectors	 to	 firms.	 This	 could	 be	 complemented	 by	 efforts	 to	 improve	 the	 hiring	
process	of	inspectors,	and	investing	in	training	to	develop	a	more	client-oriented	service	mindset,	which	
would	enhance	firms’	willingness	to	cooperate.	




	                                                                                                                 18	
	
Table	2	
Summary	of	Design	Options	for	Social	Insurance	System	Parameters	
    Design	Options	                                                Opportunities	                                                            Risks	

    Registering	workers	and	facilitating	payments	

    Digital	technologies	                                      -       Improve	access	and	administrative	efficiency	                     -       Greater	exclusion	if	the	system	requires	digital	literacy	


    Streamlining	registration	procedures	                      -       Encouraging	take-up	among	workers	whose	time	away	from	           -       Too	much	focus	on	registration	may	distract	from	
                                                                       work	means	foregone	earnings	                                             retention	efforts.	
                                                               -       Cost	savings	when	compared	to	other	methods	(e.g.,	matching	
                                                                       contributions)	
    Relying	on	non-government	agencies	for	outreach	or	        -       More	take-up	among	hard-to-reach	groups	                          -       Higher	monitoring	costs	
    payment	collection	                                                                                                                  -       Not	effective	if	potential	beneficiaries	mistrust	these	
                                                                                                                                                 organizations	
    Defining	Benefits	and	Costs	
    Level	of	benefits	and	costs	                               -       Find	the	right	balance	between	adequacy,	efficiency	and	          -       Excessively	high	benefits	can	add	distortions	and	make	
                                                                       sustainability	                                                           the	system	unsustainable	
                                                               -       Benefits	would	be	linked	to	contributions	                        -       Too	low	benefits	may	not	prevent	poverty	
                                                                                                                                                 	
    Designing	Subsidies	
                            Universal	benefits	                -       More	predictable	costs	and	less	expensive	to	administer	          -       Risks	of	leakage	to	richer	households	

    Mean-tested	benefits	                                      -       More	progressive	redistribution	and	less	distortive	incentives	   -       Political	pressure	to	expand	coverage	could	result	in	
                                                                                                                                                 fiscal	pressures	
                                                                                                                                         -       Higher	distortive	effects	if	the	transfer	and	thresholds	
                                                                                                                                                 are	high	
    Implicit	subsidies	                                                	                                                                 -       Labor	market	distortions	

    Providing	Information	and	Incentives	to	Contribute/Save	
    Communications	campaigns	and	financial	literacy	           -       Greater	awareness	about	the	costs	and	benefits	of	take-up	        -       The	costs	and	benefits	of	targeted	outreach	to	small	
                                                               -       Improving	take-up	among	hard-to-reach	groups	                             groups	of	potential	beneficiaries	should	be	weighed	
                                                                                                                                                 against	those	of	universal	outreach.	
    Financial	incentives	                                      -       Promote	contributions	among	lower	income	groups	                  -       Financially	unsustainable	

    Non-financial	incentives	                                  -       Improving	take-up	                                                	
                                                               -       Cost	savings	when	compared	to	financial	incentives	


    Monitoring	and	Enforcement	

    Better	monitoring	                                             -       Increasing	inclusion	and	efficiency	                                   	


    Greater	enforcement	                                           -       Increasing	registration	and	retention	                            -    Increased	incentives	for	firms	to	remain	in	the	
                                                                                                                                                  shadows,	if	inspections	are	corrupt	or	inefficient;	or	if	
                                                                                                                                                  they	are	unable	to	afford	contributions.	
	


	                                                                                                                                                                                                              19	
	



4 CONCLUSIONS
	

Social	 insurance	 can	 be	 an	 effective	 tool	 for	 addressing	 income	 shocks	 to	 workers	 by	 providing	 for	
consumption	 smoothing	 through	 a	 risk-pooling	 approach.	 Whereas	 most	 countries	 have	 some	 type	 of	
social	insurance	system	in	place,	few	are	efficient	or	equitable	because	of	their	partial	coverage	of	the	
labor	 force.	 This	 is	 particularly	 true	 in	 developing	 countries	 with	 a	 large	 shadow	 economy.	 The	
traditional	 contributory	 design	 of	 these	 programs	 was	 appropriate	 fifty	 years	 ago	 in	 the	 highly	
industrialized	middle-	and	upper-income	economies	where	most	workers	were	formally	employed.	But	
this	 is	 not	 the	 reality	 in	 developing	 economies	 today.	 Moreover,	 the	 ongoing	 transformation	 of	 labor	
markets	in	advanced	economies	where	occupational	mobility	and	informality	are	both	rising	means	that	
traditional	social	insurance	programs	are	losing	relevance.		

As	policymakers	consider	how	to	extend	the	coverage	of	social	insurance	to	informal	workers,	there	are	
key	lessons	to	be	drawn	from	experience.	Integrated	social	insurance	systems	(such	as	Chile’s	pension	
system)	 that	 combine	 an	 actuarially	 fair	 contributory	 system	 with	 explicit	 subsidies	 for	 the	 poor	 and	
informal	 seem	 to	 be	 more	 financially	 sustainable	 than	 universal	 non-contributory	 systems,	 and	 less	
distortionary	 than	 fragmented	 parallel	 schemes.	 Within	 an	 integrated	 system,	 there	 are	 key	 choice	
parameters	to	minimize	unintended	impacts	of	social	insurance	on	labor	supply	and	demand,	provide	an	
adequate	level	of	benefits	and	improve	financial	sustainability.	These	parameters	include	the	eligibility	
criteria,	the	level	of	contributions	and	benefits,	and	the	mix	of	funding	sources	(contributions	vs.	general	
taxation).		

To	promote	take-up	and	efficiency,	contributions	would	be	linked	to	the	individual	and	not	to	the	job.	
Beneficiaries	 need	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 the	 contribution	 requirements	 for	 each	 benefit	 level.	 And	 if	 social	
insurance	 includes	 any	 redistribution	 mechanism,	 it	 would	 be	 transparent;	 that	 is,	 the	 program	 would	
make	 clear	 the	 amount	 of	 the	 subsidy,	 the	 eligibility	 criteria,	 and	 how	 it	 is	 financed.	 Finally,	 it	 will	 be	
important	 to	 adapt	 this	 general	 framework	 to	 the	 specific	 needs	 of	 a	 country’s	 informal	 workers	 to	
ensure	a	social	insurance	system	that	is	inclusive,	fair,	efficient	and	effectively	implemented.		

	

		




	                                                                                                                         20	
	



REFERENCES
                                                    	
Aizer,	Anna.	"Public	health	insurance,	program	take-up,	and	child	health."	The	Review	of	Economics	and	
        Statistics	89.3	(2007):	400-415.	

Akbas,	M.,	Ariely,	D.,	Robalino,	D.	A.,	&	Weber,	M.	(2016).	How	to	Help	Poor	Informal	Workers	to	Save	a	
       Bit:	Evidence	from	a	Field	Experiment	in	Kenya.	

Alatinga,	K.A.	and	Williams,	J.J.	(2014)	‘Development	policy	planning	in	Ghana:	The	case	of	health	care	
        provision’,	European	Scientific	Journal	10(3):	359–82.	

Almeida,	Rita,	and	Pedro	Carneiro.	"Enforcement	of	labor	regulation	and	informality."	American	
       Economic	Journal:	Applied	Economics	4.3	(2012):	64-89.	

Aterido,	R.,	M.	Hallward-Driemeier	and	C.	Pages.	(2011).	“Does	expanding	health	insurance	beyond	
        formal-sector	workers	encourage	informality?	Measuring	the	impact	of	Mexico’s	Seguro	
        Popular”,	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	Series	5785,	The	World	Bank.	

Attanasio,	Orazio,	Costas	Meghir,	and	Andres	Otero.	Formal	Labor	Market	and	Pension	Wealth:	
        Evaluating	the	2008	Chilean	Pension	Reform.	Mimeo.	Department	of	Economics,	UCL,	2011.	

Barr,	A.,	and	T.	Packard.	2004.	“Preferences,	constraints,	and	substitutes	for	coverage	under	Peru's	
         pension	system”,	background	paper	for	regional	study	on	social	security	reform.	Washington,	
         DC:	World	Bank	(mimeo).		

Barr,	Nicholas,	and	Peter	Diamond.	"The	economics	of	pensions."	Oxford	review	of	economic	policy	22.1	
        (2006):	15-39.	

Bertrand,	Marianne,	Senhil	Mullainathan,	and	Douglas	Miller.	"Public	Policy	and	Extended	Families:	
       Evidence	from	Pensions	in	South	Africa."	World	Bank	Economic	Review	17.1	(2003):	27-50.	

Bhargava,	Saurabh,	and	Day	Manoli.	"Why	are	benefits	left	on	the	table?	Assessing	the	role	of	
       information,	complexity,	and	stigma	on	take-up	with	an	IRS	field	experiment."	NA-Advances	in	
       Consumer	Research	Volume	40	(2012).	

Bosch,	Mariano,	and	William	Maloney.	"Cyclical	Movements	in	Unemployment	and	Informality	in	
       Developing	Countries."	(2008).	

Bosch,	Mariano,	Ana	Belen	Cobacho	and	Carmen	Pages.	“Effects	of	Non-Contributory	Systems	on	
       Informality:	Taking	Stock	of	Eight	Years	of	Implementation	of	Mexico's	Seguro	Popular”,	chapter	
       in	Social	Insurance,	Informality,	and	Labor	Markets:	How	to	Protect	Workers	While	Creating	
       Good	Jobs,	by	Markus	Frölich,	David	Kaplan,	Carmen	Pages,	Jamele	Rigolini,	and	David	Robalino	
       (eds),	Oxford	University	Press,	2014.	

Brugiavini,	A.	and	Pace,	N.	(2016)	‘Extending	health	insurance	in	Ghana:	Effects	of	the	National	Health	
        Insurance	Scheme	on	maternity	care’,	Health	Economics	Review	6:	7.	doi:	10.1186/s13561-016-
        0083-9	




	                                                                                                       21	
	


Cho,	Y.,	Margolis,	D.	N.,	Newhouse,	D.,	&	Robalino,	D.	(2012).	Labor	markets	in	low	and	middle	income	
         countries:	trends	and	implications	for	social	protection	and	labor	policies.	Washington	DC:	
         World	Bank,	World	Bank	Social	Protection	Discussion	Papers,	(67613).	

Cordova-Novion,	Cesar,	and	Tarik	Sahovic,	"Inspection	Reform	-	Do	Models	Exist?".	The	World	Bank	
       Group,	2010.	

	Durán	Valverde,	F.,	Flores	Aguilar,	J.,	Ortiz	Vindas,	J.	F.,	Muñoz	Corea,	D.,	de	Lima	Vieira,	A.	C.,	&	Tessier,	
        L.	(2013).	Innovations	in	extending	social	insurance	coverage	to	independent	workers:	
        Experiences	from	Brazil,	Cape	Verde,	Colombia,	Costa	Rica,	Ecuador,	Philippines,	France	and	
        Uruguay.	ESS	Document,	(42).	

Encina,	Jenny.	"Pension	reform	in	Chile:	A	difference	in	difference	matching	estimation."	Estudios	de	
        economía	40.1	(2013):	81-95.	

Galiani,	Sebastian,	Paul	Gertler,	and	Rosangela	Bando.	"Non-contributory	pensions."	Labour	
         Economics	38	(2016):	47-58.	

Gasparini,	Leonardo,	and	Leopoldo	Tornarolli.	"Labor	informality	in	Latin	America	and	the	Caribbean:	
       Patterns	and	trends	from	household	survey	microdata."	Desarrollo	y	Sociedad	63	(2009):	13-80.	

Gindling,	T.	H.,	and	David	Newhouse.	"Self-employment	in	the	developing	world."	World	
        Development	56	(2014):	313-331.	

Grosh,	Margaret,	and	Philippe	Leite.	"Defining	eligibility	for	social	pensions:	A	view	from	a	social	
       assistance	perspective."	Closing	the	Coverage	Gap:	The	Role	of	Social	Pensions	and	Other	
       Retirement	Income	Transfers	(2009):	161-86.	

Hatt,	L.,	Thornton,	R.,	Magnoni,	B.,	&	Islam,	M.	(2009).	Extending	social	insurance	to	informal	sector	
         workers	in	Nicaragua	via	microfinance	institutions:	Results	from	a	randomized	evaluation.		

HelpAge	International.	2017.	Social	pensions	database—	http://www.pension-watch.net/about-social-
       pensions/about-social-pensions/social-pensions-database/	[Accessed	on	June	12	2017]	

Hirose,	Kenichi	and	Miloslav	Hettes.	“Extending	social	security	to	the	informal	economy	-	Evidence	from	
        Bosnia	and	Herzegovina	and	the	Republic	of	Moldova”	(2016).	ILO.	

Holmes,	Rebecca,	and	Lucy	Scott.	"Extending	social	insurance	to	informal	workers:	A	gender	analysis."	
       (2016).	ILO.		

Holzmann,	Robert	and	Richard	Hinz	(2005)	Old-age	income	support	in	the	21st	century:	An	international	
      perspective	on	pension	systems	and	reform.	Washington	D.C.:	The	World	Bank.	

Holzmann,	Robert,	David	A.	Robalino,	and	Noriyuki	Takayama,	eds.	Closing	the	coverage	gap:	Role	of	
      social	pensions	and	other	retirement	income	transfers.	World	Bank	Publications,	2009.	

Holzmann,	Robert.	"Participation	in	mandated	and	voluntary	social	risk	management	arrangements:	The	
      role	and	limits	of	financial	education	and	other	interventions."	Social	Insurance,	Informality,	and	
      Labour	Markets:	How	to	Protect	Workers	While	Creating	Good	Jobs	7879	(2014):	191.	

Hu,	Yu-Wei,	and	Fiona	Stewart.	"Pension	Coverage	and	informal	sector	workers."	(2009).	OECD.	



	                                                                                                            22	
	


ILO.	INCOME	SECURITY	IN	OLD-AGE,	DISABILITY	AND	DEATH	OF	A	BREADWINNER.	2012.		

ILO.	The	Informal	Economy	and	Decent	Work:	A	Policy	Resource	Guide	supporting	transitions	to	
        formality.	2013.	

Kelly,	Tim,	Aleksandra	Liaplina,	Shawn	W.	Tan,	and	Hernan	Winkler.	"Reaping	Digital	Dividends."	(2017).	

Kuddo,	Arvo,	D.	Robalino,	and	Michael	Weber.	"Balancing	regulations	to	promote	jobs:	from	
       employment	contracts	to	unemployment	benefits."	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank	Group	(2015).	

Madrian,	Brigitte	C.,	and	Dennis	F.	Shea.	"THE	POWER	OF	SUGGESTION:	INERTIA	IN	401	(k)	
       PARTICIPATION	AND	SAVINGS	BEHAVIOR."	Quarterly	Journal	of	Economics	116.4	(2001).	

Madrian,	Brigitte.	Forthcoming,	2014.	Applying	Insights	from	Behavioral	Economics	to	Policy	Design.	
       Annual	Review	of	Economics.	

Packard,	T.	2002.	“Pooling,	Savings,	and	Prevention:	Mitigating	the	Risk	of	Old	Age	Poverty	in	Chile”,	
       Policy	Research	Working	Paper	2849.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	

Pagés,	Carmen,	Jamele	Rigolini,	and	David	Robalino.	"Social	Insurance,	Informality,	and	Labor	Markets:	
        How	to	Protect	Workers	While	Creating	Good	Jobs."	Social	Insurance,	Informality,	and	Labour	
        Markets:	How	to	Protect	Workers	While	Creating	Good	Jobs	7879	(2014):	9.		

Palacios,	Robert,	and	Charles	Knox-Vydmanov.	"The	growing	role	of	social	pensions:	history,	taxonomy	
        and	key	performance	indicators."	Public	Administration	and	Development	34.4	(2014):	251-264.	

Perry,	G.,	W.	Maloney,	O.	Arias,	P.	Fajnzylber,	A.	Mason	and	J.	Saavedra-Chanduvi.	2007.	Informality:	
        Exit	and	Exclusion.	International	Bank	for	Reconstruction	and	Development.	Washington,	DC:	
        World	Bank.	

Pfutze,	Tobias.	"The	effects	of	Mexico’s	Seguro	Popular	health	insurance	on	infant	mortality:	An	
        estimation	with	selection	on	the	outcome	variable."	World	Development	59	(2014):	475-486.	

Ribe,	Helena,	David	Robalino,	and	Ian	Walker.	From	right	to	reality:	incentives,	labor	markets,	and	the	
        challenge	of	universal	social	protection	in	Latin	America	and	the	Caribbean.	World	Bank	
        Publications,	2012.	

Robalino,	David	A.,	Milan	Vodopivec,	and	András	Bodor.	"Savings	for	unemployment	in	good	or	bad	
       times:	options	for	developing	countries."	(2009).	

Robalino,	David	A.,	Laura	Rawlings,	and	Ian	Walker.	"Building	Social	Protection	and	Labor	Systems:	
       Concepts	and	Operational	Implications."	(2012).	

Robalino,	David	A.,	and	Michael	Weber.	"Designing	and	implementing	unemployment	benefit	systems	in	
       middle	and	low	income	countries:	beyond	risk-pooling	vs	savings."	IZA	Journal	of	Labor	Policy	
       2.1	(2013):	12.	

Ruppert	Bulmer,	E.,	A.	Kuddo	and	M.	Weber.	“Firms’	Perspectives	on	Reducing	the	Costs	and	Enhancing	
       the	Benefits	of	Formality”,	World	Bank	Jobs	CCSA	(2017).	




	                                                                                                          23	
	


Tornarolli,	L.,	Battistón,	D.,	Gasparini,	L.,	&	Gluzmann,	P.	(2014).	Exploring	trends	in	labor	informality	in	
       Latin	America,	1990-2010	(No.	159).	Documento	de	Trabajo.	

Van	Ginneken,	Wouter.	"Social	security	for	the	informal	sector:	A	new	challenge	for	the	developing	
       countries."	International	Social	Security	Review	52.1	(1999):	49-69.	

Van	Ginneken,	Wouter.	"Social	security	coverage	extension:	A	review	of	recent	evidence."	International	
       Social	Security	Review	63.1	(2010):	57-76.	

Vodopivec,	Milan.	Income	support	for	the	unemployed:	Issues	and	options.	World	Bank	Publications,	
       2004.	

Wagstaff,	Adam,	and	Wanwiphang	Manachotphong.	"The	health	effects	of	universal	health	care:	
       evidence	from	Thailand."	(2012a).	

Wagstaff,	Adam,	and	Wanwiphang	Manachotphong.	"Universal	health	care	and	informal	labor	markets:	
       the	case	of	Thailand."	(2012b).	

World	Bank.	2016.	World	Development	Report	2016:	Digital	Dividends.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	
       doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0671-1.	License:	Creative	Commons	Attribution	CC	BY	3.0	IGO	

	

	                                 	




	                                                                                                            24	
	


	      More	Jobs	Working	Papers:	

    1. Fostering	Quality	of	Employment	for	Women	
    2. Where	to	Create	Jobs:	Cities	or	Towns?	
    3. Targeted	SME	Financing	and	Employment	Effects	:	What	Do	We	Know	and	What	Can	We	Do	
       Differently?	
    4. Zambia:	A	Review	of	the	World	Bank	Group	Jobs	Portfolio	
    5. Job	Creation	in	the	Private	Sector	-	An	Exploratory	Assessment	of	Patterns	and	Determinants	at	
       the	Macro,	Sector,	and	Firm	Levels	
       	




	                                                                                                   25	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	
                              	




                                                          	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
          Address:	1776	G	St,	NW,	Washington,	DC	20006	
Website:	http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/jobsanddevelopment	
                        Twitter:	@WBG_Jobs	
              Blog:	https://blogs.worldbank.org/jobs/	
