WATER GLOBAL PRACTICE      TECHNICAL PAPER




                         Water Management
     AUGUST 2017         in Israel
     Philippe Marin,     Key Innovations and Lessons Learned
     Shimon Tal,
     Joshua Yeres, and
                         for Water-Scarce Countries
     Klas Ringskog
About the Water Global Practice
Launched in 2014, the Word Bank Group's Water Global Practice brings
together financing, knowledge, and implementation in one platform.
By combining the Bank's global knowledge with country investments,
this model generates more firepower for transformational solutions to
help countries grow sustainably.

Please visit us at www.worldbank.org/water or follow us on Twitter
at https://twitter.com/search?q=%40WorldBankWater&src=tyah.
Water Management
in Israel
Key Innovations and
Lessons Learned for
Water-Scarce Countries
AUGUST 2017




Philippe Marin, Shimon Tal, Joshua Yeres,
and Klas Ringskog
© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank

1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433

Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,

interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The

World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,

colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any

judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement

or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of

its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long

as full attribution to this work is given.

Please cite the work as follows: Marin, Philippe, Shimon Tal, Joshua Yeres, and Klas Ringskog.
2017. Water Management in Israel: Key Innovations and Lessons Learned for Water-Scarce Countries.
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank

Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;

e-mail: pubrights​@­worldbank.org.

Cover photos: Wastewater pumping station: RnDmS / Shutterstock.com; Desert farming irrigation in

the Negev, Israel: ChameleonsEye / Shutterstock.com; Reverse osmosis water desalination plant: Yaniv

Schwartz / Shutterstock.com.

Cover design: Jean Franz, Franz & Company, Inc.
Contents

Preface	v
Acknowledgments	vii
Executive Summary	                                                                  ix
Abbreviations	xiii


Chapter 1  Introduction	                                                             1


Chapter 2  Overview of the Israeli Water Sector	                                     3
Hydrological Situation: One of the Most Water-Stressed Countries in the World	       3
The Israeli Water Story: Achieving Water Security Despite Extreme Scarcity 	         3
Political Economy of Reforms: How Successive Crises Have Driven Change 	             5
Institutional Framework: Key National Players in the Water Sector	                   6
Legal and Regulatory Framework of the Israeli Water Sector	                          8
Notes	8


Chapter 3  Moving toward Full Cost Recovery through Tariffs	                         9
Achieving Self-Financing of the Water Sector, Despite Acute Water Scarcity	          9
Mekorot Has Been Transformed into a Corporatized Public Sector Company	             10
Potable Water and Sanitation Utilities: Corporatization and Regionalization	        10
Salient Features of the Corporatization of Water Supply and Sanitation Utilities	   11
Partnering with the Private Sector for Financing Infrastructure Investment
     and to Improve Performance	                                                    12
Regulation and Tariff-Setting Mechanisms for Water and Sanitation Utilities	        12
Prices of Irrigation Services Are among the Highest in the World	                   14
Notes	15


Chapter 4  Key Innovations in the Israeli Water Sector	                             17
First Innovation: National Water System to Connect All Water Infrastructure 	       17
Second Innovation: Large-Scale Reuse of Treated Wastewater for Irrigation	          18
Third Innovation: Large-Scale Desalination PPPs for Potable Water Independence	     21
Fourth Innovation: Using Aquifers as Reservoirs	                                    25
Fifth Innovation: Interception of Surface Water Run-Off and Recharge	               27
Sixth Innovation: Promoting Crop Selectivity and Importation of Virtual Water 	     27
Seventh Innovation: Efficient Irrigation Technologies	                              28
Eighth Innovation: Promoting Demand Management and Public Awareness	                29
Ninth Innovation: Creating a Supporting Environment for Water Innovation	           30
Notes	32




Water Management in Israel                                                           iii
     Chapter 5  Key Lessons Learned from the Israeli Water Sector 	         33


     References	37


     Boxes
     4.1.	 Introducing New Wastewater Reuse Regulations in 2010-15	         20
     4.2.	 Groundwater Monitoring Practices	                                26


     Figures
     2.1.	 Breakdown of Water Sources in Israel, 1985, 1995, 2005, 2014 	    5
     3.1.	 Average Municipal Water Tariff in Israel 1996-2017 	             13
     3.2.	 Breakdown of Consumer Water Tariff, 2017	                        14
     4.1.	 Collected, Treated, and Used Sewage, 1963–2015 	                 18
     4.2.	 Shafdan Soil Aquifer Treatment Method, Israel	                   21
     4.3.	 Time for Tendering and Construction of Build-Operate-Transfer
         Desalination Plants, Israel 	                                      25
     4.4.	 Water Use Productivity, 1950–2008 	                              28
     4.5.	 Water Consumption in Israel, 1997–2013	                          30
     4.6.	 Triangle of Water Technology Innovation	                         31


     Tables
     2.1.	 Legal and Institutional Setting for Water Management	             6
     4.1.	 Major Wastewater Treatment Plants in Israel	                     19
     4.2.	 Major Seawater Desalination Plants in Israel 	                   22




iv   Water Management in Israel
Preface

This technical paper focuses on identifying and presenting elements of the Israeli water
experience that will be of value to World Bank Group client countries and partners. It exam-
ines this experience within the ever-evolving context of climate change, urbanization, and
water scarcity. The paper deliberately selected elements of policy and delivery mechanisms
that highlight key aspects of water management in Israel and lessons that may be replicable
and scalable elsewhere. It is technical in nature and focuses on the best practices of Israel in
managing and providing water services.
  The paper does not purport to present a comprehensive picture and analysis of the Israel
water story nor claims to make any representations about the wider political economy asso-
ciated with water resources management or development in the region. The paper focuses
exclusively on the technical innovation and lessons that have arisen and that may be of
interest to World Bank clients and member states around the world suffering from increasing
water scarcity. The World Bank acknowledges that water issues in the region continue to be
a point of contention.




Water Management in Israel                                                                     v
Acknowledgments

This report was written by Philippe Marin (Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist at the
World Bank), Shimon Tal (former Water Commissioner of Israel, Consultant), Joshua Yeres
(Water and Private Sector Expert, Consultant), and Klas Ringskog (former World Bank staff
and currently a Consultant).
 During the preparation of the report, the project team met with a number of Israeli water
experts in government, civil society and the private sector. Their contributions in providing
information and sharing their experiences is gratefully acknowledged: Dr. Doron Markel,
Sarah  Elhanani, Dr. Anat Levingart, Chezy Bilik, Amir Shakarov, Leonid Mariachin, Amir
Shisha, Michael Zaida, Avraham Ben Yosef, Dr. Gavriel Weinberger, Dr. Yakov Livshitz, Dr. Amir
Giavti, Effy Dvir, Ilan Shomrat, Mario Kummel, Arnon Meir, Dr. Eng. Avital Dror Ehre, Hila Gil,
Gil Doron, Amnon Alon, Oded Neumann, Adiel Cohen, Mr. Zohar Yinon, Mr. Aharon Rosenberg,
Avraham Stav, Zeev Efrat, Oded Distel, Gil Shaki, Romy Dar.
 Funding for this publication was provided by the Government of Israel under a grant
from the Ministry of Trade and Economy.
 The report benefited from insightful and useful comments from several World Bank col-
leagues, including: William Kingdom, Steven Schonberger, Maria Angelica Sotomayor, Joel
Kolker, Thierry Davy, David Meerbach, Gustavo Saltiel, Francois Onimus, Amal Talbi, Zael
Sanz Uriarte, Victoria Delmon, Alex McPhail, Anders Jägerskog and Ye-Rin Um. Appreciation
goes to Amanda Goksu, Demilour Reyes and Alona Danuk for their administrative support
throughout this assignment, to Tony Allan, Professor Emeritus, Kings College London and
Marina Djernaes, Director, EcoPeace Program on Water Security, who provided thoughtful
guidance and advice during the development of this report.




Water Management in Israel                                                                   vii
Executive Summary

Israel is one of the most water-stressed countries in the world. To provide its rapidly growing
economy with sufficient and reliable water and achieve water security, it has gradually
implemented a policy that combines institutional and regulatory reforms with massive
infrastructure investment structured along the following:

•	 Strong demand management to increase water productivity, to reduce per capita potable
  water consumption, and shift water to higher value irrigated crops.

•	 Using aquifers as reservoirs with recharge of aquifers with treated wastewater during
  low-demand months, capture of occasional flash floods, and comprehensive monitoring
  and control of aquifers’ levels and abstraction.

•	 Reuse of treated wastewater for irrigation to replace and release scarce fresh water for
  domestic and industrial uses and to safeguard the environment. More than 87 percent of
  treated wastewater effluents are reused for agriculture, representing approximately half
  of all irrigation water nationwide. Widespread tertiary wastewater treatment make unre-
  stricted reuse for irrigation possible.

•	 Large-scale desalination of seawater and brackish water to supply almost all potable water
  that municipal and regional utilities distribute in the country. Five “mega” seawater
  reverse osmosis (SWRO) desalination plants supply 85 percent of domestic urban water.

•	 A national bulk water conveyance system that allows to optimize the distribution of water
  across the country from various sources depending on demand. It conveys 95 percent of
  Israel’s potable water resources (surface water, groundwater, desalinated water) to the
  regional providers that supply end-users.

•	 Major legal and institutional reforms, implemented over the course of the last 15 years, with
  regulatory and pricing policies to approach financial sustainability of the water sector as a
  whole. This included changing the pricing principles of water from a public and social
  good to a commodity, institutional reforms with corporatization of service providers
  and the establishment of a strong national regulator.

  Despite a situation of acute water scarcity, implementation of this policy for sustainable
water  management has allowed Israel to achieve water security while at the same time
drastically reduce overexploitation of aquifers. This has been achieved through a massive
increase in the production of non-conventional waters – wastewater reuse (since 1998) and
seawater desalination (since 2006) – together with a legal framework that makes metering
compulsory and asserts a strong government’s control over water resources.
  It is noteworthy that change in the Israeli water sector has been largely driven by crisis,
since it took several major droughts to strengthen the political will to undertake ambitious
water reforms. The drought that took place in 1998 resulted for the first time in shortages




Water Management in Israel                                                                    ix
    and water rationing in major Israeli cities, and generated sufficient public outcry for the
    government to start embarking on far-ranging institutional reforms. A law was passed in
    ­
    2001 requiring ring-fencing of municipal water services. A Parliamentary Investigation
    Committee for the water sector was launched in 2002. This inaugurated far-reaching reforms
    in water management over the course of the next 15 years.
      A landmark of the reform was the establishment in 2007 of the Israel Water Authority (IWA)
    as an autonomous government agency combining planning and regulatory responsibilities for
    all the elements of the water chain (potable water and sanitation, irrigation, water resources
    management). This allowed Israel to draw a line between the political level, which is respon-
    sible for policy setting, and the professional level, which manages the water sector. All the
    various regulatory bodies in the water and sewage sectors became gradually transferred to
    the IWA within a few years.
      Implementation of these ambitious reforms over the last decade has put the Israeli water
    sector on a course toward financial viability, based on the principles of full cost recovery
    through  tariffs. A new financial framework was put in place gradually, under the direct
    control of IWA which as national water regulator sets tariffs for all water users. The national
    bulk water operator Mekorot (in charge of all potable water production and the national
    water conveyor) was corporatized and transformed into a regulated public company.
    Municipal water and sanitation services have been gradually transformed into corpora-
    tized regional utilities. Water tariffs for all users were gradually increased to approach full
    cost recovery for the overall water chain (although there are also significant cross-subsi-
    dies between water uses), while the regulator set performance targets for improved
    efficiency.
      After many years of reforms and massive investment, the Israeli water sector has now
    achieved almost full financial autonomy—with the exception of wastewater reuse (still rely-
    ing on investment subsidies)—together with water security. Almost all the costs of investing
    and operating the water infrastructure are now paid by users through tariffs. Furthermore,
    the country is in a position to meet all future demand from multiple users.
      How was this achieved? Out of the whole “Israel water story,” there are nine water innova-
    tions that stand out and are analyzed in this report:

    First Innovation:	     National Water System to Connect all Water Infrastructure
    Second Innovation:	    Large-Scale Reuse of Treated Wastewater for Irrigation
    Third Innovation: 	    Large-Scale Desalination PPP for Potable Water Independence
    Fourth Innovation: 	   Using Aquifers as Reservoirs
    Fifth Innovation: 	    Interception of Surface Water Run-Offs
    Sixth Innovation:	     Promoting Crop Selectivity and Imports of Virtual Water
    Seventh Innovation:	 Efficient Irrigation Technologies
    Eighth Innovation:	    Demand Management and the Successful 2008 Campaign
    Ninth Innovation:	     Creating a Supporting Environment for Water Innovation



x   Water Management in Israel
  In addition to these innovations, along the road to national sustainable water balance,
nine key lessons have been learned that should be of interest to other water-scarce
countries:

First Lesson Learned: Importance of public awareness and demand management for being able
to carry out efficient water management under scarcity. Public awareness campaigns have
been carried out on a massive scale, so as to emphasize the value of water in a country suf-
fering from acute water scarcity. This was accompanied by the move toward full cost recov-
ery and pricing water at its actual cost, as a strong signal to users that water is a precious
resource not to be wasted.

Second Lesson Learned: Strong control and enforcement of water allocations is crucial for miti-
gating extreme water scarcity. Pricing incentives are not sufficient. The Water Law of 1959
brought water under state control and gave state organizations the authority to regulate and
allocate consumption for alternative uses. Control of consumption has been successful
because of strong enforcement with sanctions – it has not relied exclusively on incentives.

Third Lesson Learned: Comprehensive, probabilistic, and timely data are crucial for efficient inte-
grated management of water. The IWA relies on its Hydrological Services Unit to collect, ana-
lyze, and model water data and factors in the effects of global warming on Israel’s natural
water resources. This allows IWA and Mekorot to allocate and manage all water resources on
a real-time basis.

Fourth Lesson Learned: A national conveyance water system can help optimize water manage-
ment under conditions of scarcity, allocating supplies and uses of water across the country.
Israel’s small size and the institutional reforms made it possible to create a national
integrated water infrastructure that is economically efficient and well managed. It proved
essential to bringing efficiency, promoting alternative water resources, and being able to
mitigate adverse hydrological variations.

Fifth Lesson Learned: Investing massively in new water infrastructure is not enough; this
needs to be done in a financially sustainable manner through appropriate institutional
reforms. This includes putting in place a clear separation of roles between policy setting,
regulation and planning, and operation of infrastructure. In the specific case of Israel, the
vesting of all planning and regulatory powers of the water sector (water supply and waste-
water, irrigation, water resources management) under a single autonomous agency (IWA)
proved a beneficial decision, since it is managed professionally and largely insulated from
political influence.

Sixth Lesson Learned: The relatively low price obtained for desalinated water through Build-
operate-transfer (BOT) schemes for Israel’s desalination plants was contingent on a careful
design of the PPP contracts—with more government guarantees being provided to pri-
vate  investors than what is typical for such public-private partnerships (PPP) projects.



Water Management in Israel                                                                       xi
      This allowed Israel to get bid prices for desalinated water that are among the lowest in the
      world, in turn making large-scale access to desalination financially viable.

      Seventh Lesson Learned: Wastewater reuse is beneficial when dealing with water scarcity, but
      is also costly and requires significant public subsidies – even in the case of Israel where farmers
      have achieved high levels of efficiency and are able to pay significant prices for reclaimed
      water. Subsidies are concentrated to the treatment of wastewater and storage of recycled
      water, while farmers do pay the incremental costs of conveying treated wastewater effluents
      to irrigated areas.

      Eighth Lesson Learned: Corporatization and aggregation of water and sanitation services is a
      long process, that requires sound regulation and heavy-handed supervision to be successful.
      The regionalization of utilities has been a gradual process that is still not completed 15 years
      later. The performance of the newly ring-fenced utilities started to improve only after 2009,
      when the IWA started to regulate them and putting in place a mix of financial incentives
      through tariffs with enforcement of sanctions for the worst performers.

      Ninth Lesson Learned: Even in a country with strong capacity and where huge efforts have been
      put on water reforms, there can still be areas for improvements. Despite the progress achieved,
      the optimization of the water sector is still incomplete. Not all of the Israeli water experi-
      ences can be qualified as best practice, and mistakes have been made along the way. The use
      of uniform water tariffs nationwide, both for municipal and now agricultural consumers,
      has introduced economic inefficiencies in the allocation of the water resources. The agglom-
      eration of regional utilities is proving a lengthy process. Some large infrastructure projects
      have suffered set-backs, such as with the recent Ashdod desalination plant. Finally, the allo-
      cation of water and restrictions on aquifers abstraction for the Palestinian population is a
      contentious issue that remains outstanding.




xii   Water Management in Israel
Abbreviations

BOT	Build–Operate-Transfer
BOO	Build-Own-Operate
IPP	      Independent Power Production
IWA	      Israel Water Authority
MUA	      Municipal Utilities Administration
NIS	      New Israeli Shekel
NRW	      Non-Revenue Water
O&M	      Operation & Maintenance
PPP	      Public-Private Partnership
SWRO	     Sea Water Reverse Osmosis
WSS	      Water Supply and Sanitation
WWTP	     Wastewater Treatment Plant


US$ 1=NIS 3.56 (New Israeli Shekel) as of July 26, 2017




Water Management in Israel                                xiii
Chapter 1   Introduction

            The objective of this technical report is to document the key innovations and lessons
            learned from the Israeli water management experience, for the benefit of other countries
            around the world facing increasing challenges in dealing with water scarcity.
              This technical report does not purport to present a comprehensive picture and analysis of
            the Israel water story. It focuses solely on identifying and presenting the technical elements
            of the Israeli water experience that can be valuable for other countries around the world, in
            a global context of climate change and increased water stress across all continents.
              The report has been structured in order to provide a synthetic view of key elements in the
            water management reforms that have been carried out in Israel over the last 15 years, and
            that have led the country to achieve water security:

            •	 The second chapter provides a brief overview of the Israeli water sector, outlining inter
              alia the overall situation and presenting the key players;

            •	 The third chapter discusses how the reforms have allowed the Israeli water sector to
              achieve financial sustainability through a move toward full cost recovery through tariffs
              for all users. It presents the new financial and regulatory framework that was put in place
              under the national water regulator (Israel Water Authority [IWA]), along with the corpora-
              tization of national bulk water operator Mekorot and regional ring-fenced utilities;

            •	 The fourth chapter discusses successively the nine innovations that have been identified
              as key in the success of the Israeli water story. These innovations represent the key
              ­
              elements of the reforms that have allowed Israel to achieve water security despite acute
              water scarcity in a financially sustainable manner;

            •	 The fifth and concluding chapter identifies and discusses nine lessons learned from the
              Israel water story, that are deemed the most valuable for other countries facing increasing
              water scarcity.




            Water Management in Israel                                                                  1
Chapter 2   Overview of the Israeli Water Sector
            Hydrological Situation: One of the Most Water-Stressed
            Countries in the World
            Israel is located on the southeastern coast of the Mediterranean. Spread across four distinct
            regions—the Mediterranean coastal plain, the central hills (average altitude 600 meters), the
            Jordan Rift valley (the Dead Sea in the rift being the lowest point on Earth at 400 meters
            below sea level), and the Negev—most of the country has a semi-arid climate, and the
            Negev in the south is a desert. Within a 200-kilometer radius, annual rainfall varies from
                millimeters in the north to less than 150 millimeters in the south. Extreme variations in
            600 ­
            precipitation between years are normal, and multiple years of drought are not uncommon.
              Winter rainfall is characteristic of the Mediterranean climate, with 75 percent of annual
            precipitation falling within three months (December to February). Normally there are
            ­
            60 to 70 rainy days with a few short rainstorms. The Sea of Galilee,1 from which the Jordan
            River flows, is the only natural fresh surface water reservoir between the Jordan River and
            the Mediterranean. It provides approximately 20 percent to 30 percent of the state’s fresh
            water supply and is the country’s largest freshwater reservoir (at approximately 200 meters
            below sea level). Floods are also short but intense and contain up to 9 percent suspended
            solids, making it difficult to store and reuse flood flows. Most rainfall is lost to evapotranspi-
            ration (approximately 70 percent), and approximately 25 percent infiltrates to groundwater
            or remains in the soil to support vegetation and crops; only 5 percent flows as surface water.
              Israel is one of the most water-scarce countries in the world. Since the establishment of the
            State of Israel in 1948, the population had grown to 8.6 million people in 2015. According to
            Troop  and Jägerskog (2006), the total renewable volume of water per capita stands at
            276 cubic meters per year, which is about half of the “shortage red line” of 500 cubic meters
            per capita per year, which defines a situation of water shortage.2


            The Israeli Water Story: Achieving Water Security Despite Extreme Scarcity
            Water scarcity has shaped the development of the Israeli water sector over the last five decades.
            The country has had no choice but to adapt and gradually develop a series of water innova-
            tions in operational practices, technologies, and institutions. Many valuable lessons about
            water reforms have been learned along the way.
              Extreme changes in water yields between years have dictated the need to apply key principles
            for managing water variability. To ensure reliability, two fundamental rules must be observed.
            The first is that average water demands and average water resources must be broadly
            ­
            balanced—but this alone is not enough. The second is that water storage capacity sufficient
            to compensate for seasonal rainfall variability and multiyear droughts must be provided,
            with water stored in an economical manner. When the two sides of the equation are not




            Water Management in Israel                                                                      3
    balanced, overexploitation of natural water resources occurs, with deterioration of aquifers
    and deterioration of water quality due to increased salinity.
      To achieve a reliable water supply, Israel has gradually implemented a policy that combines
    institutional reforms and massive infrastructure investment that includes the following six
    major elements.


    •• Strong demand management to control aquifers abstraction (water permits, metering),
      improve efficiency, reduce domestic consumption (potable water per capita), and shift
      water use to higher value irrigated crops. Domestic per capita consumption of potable
      water now stands at approximately 90 cubic meters per capita per year, and farmers have
      switched to high-value production.

    •• Reuse of treated wastewater for irrigation to replace and release scarce fresh water for
      domestic uses and the environment. More than 87 percent of wastewater effluent is
      currently reused for agriculture, representing approximately half of total water that farm-
      ­
      ers use nationwide. A large proportion of wastewater receives tertiary treatment and can
      be used for any crops without restrictions.

    •• Developing large-scale desalination of seawater and brackish water, with 85 percent of all
      potable water that municipal and regional utilities distribute in the country now being
      desalinated water. This has allowed Israel to achieve potable water security for the popu-
      lation, with domestic potable water supply becoming largely independent from rainfall
      and aquifers abstraction.

    •• Developing a national bulk water conveyance infrastructure in order to optimize the use
      and distribution of water from various sources (aquifers, desalination, water treatment
      from Sea of Galilee, recycled wastewater)—depending on local demand and hydrological
      conditions—conveying surpluses of water from one place to the other.
      ­

    •• Using aquifers as reservoirs (in the absence of surface reservoirs and dams), with recharge
      of aquifers with treated wastewater during low-demand months, capture of occasional
      flash floods, and comprehensive monitoring and control of aquifers’ levels and abstrac-
      tion regime.

    •• Institutional reforms to promote financial sustainability of the water sector as a whole, and
      separate political decisions from infrastructure planning and operations. Corporatization of
      ­
      services providers and the establishment of a strong national regulator responsible for the
                                                                                     (abstraction,
      whole water chain and setting tariffs across the whole spectrum of water users ­
      potable water for utilities, irrigated water, sanitation, reuse) have allowed Israel to move to
      full cost recovery through tariffs for most of the water infrastructure and services.


      Despite a situation of acute water scarcity, implementation of this policy for sustainable
    water  management has allowed Israel to gradually reduce overexploitation of aquifers
    through a massive increase in the volume of wastewater reuse (since 1998) and seawater
    desalination (since 2006). This is illustrated in figure 2.1, which compares the breakdown of


4   Water Management in Israel
FIGURE 2.1.   Breakdown of Water Sources in Israel, 1985, 1995, 2005, 2014


              1985                            1995                                2005                            2014




                                        Natural water     Recycled water     Desalinated water

Source: IWA 2015.


                                  water resources used for meeting national demand between 1985, 1995, 2005, and 2014.
                                  Thanks to the measures taken over the last two decades, the total amount of water produc-
                                  tion in 2014 has been maintained broadly at the 1985 level, despite a sharp drop in natural
                                  water supplied, and as a result, the recent major shortage of rainfall in 2014 (comparable to
                                  1998 when a major drought occurred) had no effect on users.


                                  Political Economy of Reforms: How Successive Crises
                                  Have Driven Change
                                  It took several major droughts in Israel to strengthen the political will to undertake ambitious
                                  water reforms. Despite the manifold political risks and resistance from end users, the reform
                                  process illustrates well the common wisdom that “there is opportunity in crisis.”
                                    Until 1996, the water sector was managed by the Ministry of Agriculture. The priority
                                  then was to rely on (and over-pump) natural water resources to meet all water demands,
                                  with agriculture being the main user. Shortages in some years were dealt with by reducing
                                  water supply to farmers during droughts and expecting the following rainy years to refill
                                  water resources. One major political objective was to keep tariffs low for farmers. Domestic
                                  water supply and wastewater collection were also heavily subsidized, but with constant
                                  population growth, this approach proved ever less sustainable and kept the Israeli water
                                              permanent state of vulnerability.
                                  sector in a ­
                                    Three major water crises built gradual momentum for major reforms in the 2000s. In 1986, a
                                  major drought caused water allocations for agriculture to be reduced by 15 percent, for the first
                                  time. Then in 1989/90, a more significant drought occurred—requiring severe and unpopular
                                  water restrictions—but the consequences were rapidly forgotten because it was immediately
                                  followed by an extremely rainy winter in 1991–92 (a “once in 150 years” occurrence) that
                                  entirely replenished natural resources. An even harsher crisis was inevitable, and it finally
                                  happened with the 1998 drought, when shortages affected not just agriculture, but also munic-
                                  ipal and industrial demand, with severe water shortages and rationing in most Israeli cities.


                                  Water Management in Israel                                                                      5
      The 1998 water crisis provided a political window for action, and was the one that
    finally ­triggered far-reaching policy reforms. In 2000, the Government of Israel changed the
    policy for water sector management, to gradually adopt a sustainable approach to guaran-
    teeing water security for the country. A Parliamentary Investigation Committee of the
    Water Sector was established. This led to the gradual establishment over the last 15 years
    of a modern institutional framework for water management.
      Some of the reforms have necessitated years of implementation, followed by refinement,
    to optimize results. This required some difficult political decisions along the way, such as
    with the sharp rise in domestic water tariff in the aftermath of another major drought,
    this time in 2008. It also stimulated a series of innovations that succeeded in gradually
    restoring a sustainable water balance. As of 2017, the availability of quality water in Israel
    is deemed to be sufficient to meet the foreseeable needs of the country, even accounting
    for steady population growth and the foreseeable effects of climate change. Future growth
    in domestic and industrial demand is expected to be met through desalination, generat-
    ing an equivalent increase in the amount of treated wastewater available to farmers for
    reuse.


    Institutional Framework: Key National Players in the Water Sector
    Table 2.1 provides a snapshot of the key institutional actors in Israel’s water sector. Together,
    they represent the cornerstone of the country’s water management, and are briefly described
    below.
      Since the 2000 reform, the Ministry of Energy and Water has been the line ministry in
    charge of formulating and enforcing policies in the water sector. It directly supervises the




    TABLE 2.1.     Legal and Institutional Setting for Water Management

     Institution                                Scale                            Main responsibilities
     Ministry of Energy              National                Policy
     and Water

     Israel Water Authority          National                Planning, allocation, and tariff regulation for all water use

     Mekorot Water Company           National                Production and transmission of bulk water

                                                             •	 Aquifer pumping and potable water treatment from the
                                                               Sea of Galilee

                                                             •	 Desalination of seawater (as off-taker under BOTs) and
                                                               brackish water

                                                             •	 Operation of national bulk water network

     Municipal and regional          Municipal or regional   Distribution of potable water to domestic and industrial
     water utilities                                         consumers, sewage collection and wastewater treatment

     Drainage and river              Basin                   Management of basins, aquifers, flash floods, and
     authorities                                             surface waters

    Note: BOT = build-operate-transfer.



6   Water Management in Israel
drainage and river basin authorities, the Israel Water Authority (IWA), and Mekorot and
indirectly supervises the water and sanitation providers through IWA.
­
  Mekorot is the national bulk water provider, managing most of bulk water production and
transmission to municipal utilities and farmers association. It was established in 1937 and as
a company fully owned by the government has become the operating arm of the water sec-
tor. It has approximately 2,200 employees and supplies 1,600 million cubic meters of water
per year (2016)3—85 percent of Israel’s domestic potable water consumed and 70 percent of
Israel’s total water consumed—through the operation of as many as 3,000 installations and
12,000 kilometers of pipeline.4
  The governmental authority for water and sewerage (IWA) is the national regulator for
the whole water sector—covering the entire spectrum of potable water supply and wastewater
services, irrigation services, and water resources management. It is in charge of planning over-
all investments, allocating and supervising water rights, and regulating tariffs and
performance of services providers (including local water utilities).
­
  IWA is the de facto “ruler” of the Israeli water sector, combining the functions of both
national regulator and planning body. It was established in 2007 to replace the previous Office
                                                                                ­ ector and
of the Water Commissioner as the cornerstone of the reorganization of the water s
in response to the 2002 Parliamentary Investigation Committee of the Water Sector, which
                                                                        recommendation
had recommended replacing it with a strong, independent authority. This ­
was based on two key findings of the committee: (a) too many entities were involved in the
management of the water sector, and the division of responsibilities was not clear, and
(b) the political level was excessively involved in the day-to-day management of the water
sector (e.g., tariffs were mainly determined according to political considerations)—a situa-
tion that was deemed to be largely responsible for the weaknesses of the water sector and
the water crisis.
  The establishment of IWA as an autonomous agency was essential to drawing a line
between  the  political level, which is responsible for policy, and the professional level, which
manages the water sector. All the regulatory bodies in the water and sewage sectors became
gradually transferred to the IWA within a few years. This included the transfer from the
Ministry of Interior of the departments in charge of supervising the municipal water and
sanitation services—the Sewage Infrastructure Development Authority in 2009 and the
Commissioner of Municipal Corporations, which the Municipal Utilities Authority (MUA)
replaced in 2009—ultimately placing control of the whole water supply chain under direct
IWA management.5
  Other important government players include the Ministry of Agriculture (sets the criteria
for the IWA to allocate water use between crops and ecological regions), the Ministry of
Health (drinking water quality and reuse standards and regulates permits for agriculture
reuse), the Ministry of Finance (responsible for the budgets), the Ministry of Environmental
Protection (prevention of water resource contamination and effluent discharge monitoring),
and the Ministry of Interior Affairs (local governments).


Water Management in Israel                                                                     7
    Legal and Regulatory Framework of the Israeli Water Sector
    A codex of four laws was approved in the decade after the establishment of the State of
    Israel to establish the principles upon which the water sector was to be managed.

    •• The Law for Water Measurement (1955) establishes the crucial importance of metering
       water to enable water management and control of water flows and uses.

    •• The Law for Supervision of Water Drillings (1955) was passed to assert national control
       over the production of the water. Before the establishment of Israel, part of the coastal
       aquifer had already been depleted, and saline intrusion was occurring, threatening
       long-term damage of the aquifer.
       ­

    •• The Law for Drainage and Flood Prevention (1957) was enacted to help reduce and prevent
       floods due to the rapid urbanization.

    •• Finally, the Water Law (1959) is the cornerstone of Israel’s legal water framework, setting the
                                                                                             public
       overall principles for managing the sector. It specifies that all water resources are ­
       properties controlled by the state (there is no private ownership of water resources in
       Israel, even beneath privately owned land) and establishes the mechanisms for allocation
       of water rights.

    It is remarkable that more than half a century since being enacted, these four fundamental laws
    are still in place—witness to the fact that they were based on sound water management princi-
    ples. Other key legislations have been added in the last two decades, including the following:

    •• The Municipal Water and Sewage Incorporation Law (2001) requires local authorities and
       municipalities to establish public ring-fenced corporations to manage local water supply
       and sewage services, to improve performance and to promote the agglomeration of ser-
       vices into regional utilities.

    •• Two public health regulations set quality standards for reclaimed water (Sewage Effluents
       Quality Standards and Sewage Treatment Rules, 2010), and drinking water (Sanitary
       Quality of Drinking Water Law, 2013).


    Notes
    1.	 Also called Lake Kinneret or Lake Tiberias. The terminology Sea of Galilee will be used in the rest of the report.

    2.	 Minimum allocation for a “nonwater-stressed country” is 1,100 cubic meters to 1,400 cubic meters per capita per year
       (Tropp and Jägerskog 2006).

    3.	 Breakdown of water sources transported by Mekorot: desalinated seawater 601 million m3, desalinated brackish water 143
       million cubic meters, natural freshwater 581 million cubic meters, and treated wastewater 270 million cubic meters.

    4.	 Including 39 brackish water desalination plants, five seawater desalination plants (BOT, BOO), 8 potable water filtration
       plants (the one on the Sea of Galilee is the fourth largest in the world), 13 wastewater treatment plants, and approximately
       1,200 boreholes and 1,000 pools and reservoirs.

    5.	 The Water Authority Council, which serves as the IWA board of directors and comprises senior officials from government
       ministries (Finance, Agriculture, Interior, Environment, Water, Energy) and two representatives of the general public, facil-
       itates stakeholder dialogue regarding the management and decision-making process in the water sector.



8   Water Management in Israel
Chapter 3   Moving toward Full Cost Recovery
            through Tariffs

            A crucial element in the modernization of water management in Israel has been the move
                                                                                                    cities
            toward self-financing of the water sector—not just for domestic potable water supply in ­
            and towns but for all users of the water cycle chain, including farmers. This was achieved
            through a combination of institutional reforms—including inter alia the creation of a national
            regulator in charge of all water uses—together with pricing mechanisms based on full cost
            recovery, incentives for operational performance and the implementation of partnerships
            with the private sector. Direct budget subsidies to the sector were gradually phased out, and
            even though this was achieved with, at the end, still significant cross-subsidies between
            users, the move toward self-financing is still notable for a country where scarcity makes
            water particularly expensive to produce and deliver to users.


            Achieving Self-Financing of the Water Sector, Despite
            Acute Water Scarcity
            Implementation of reforms over the last decade has put the Israeli water sector on a course
            toward financial viability, based on full cost recovery through tariffs. Having a single regulator
            for all water activities and services (potable water, sanitation, irrigation, water resources
            management) has made possible to pursue this in an integrated manner.
              As of 2017, the Israeli water sector has achieved almost full financial autonomy—with the
            exception of wastewater reuse (still relying on investment subsidies) and to a lesser extent
            seawater desalination (with government’s financial guarantees for build-operate-transfer
            [BOT] and build-own-operate [BOO] schemes with the private sector). Considering the
            massive investments required to deal with extreme water scarcity, and the high cost of oper-
            ­
            ating the associated infrastructure, reaching almost full financial autonomy is a significant
            achievement.
              This has been achieved by putting in place a new financial framework under the direct control
            of the Israel Water Authority (IWA), which as the national water regulator sets tariffs for all
            water users. Although essentially self-financed through tariffs revenues, it nonetheless relies
            significantly on cross-subsidies between users. The tariff-setting principles and mechanisms
            for Mekorot, for the regional and municipal potable water and sanitation utilities, and for
            irrigation services are outlined below.




            Water Management in Israel                                                                      9
     Mekorot Has Been Transformed into a Corporatized Public
     Sector Company
     Mekorot was strongly impacted by the reform since it went from being a government-owned
     company operating in a cost-plus environment (with government transfers covering
     any  cost overruns) to becoming a regulated public sector company, still owned by the
     government but designed to operate as a completely commercial entity. In practice, this
     ­
     meant that the price of bulk water had to reflect henceforth its actual costs of production and
     bulk transportation.
       Mekorot tariffs are now set by IWA annually based on five-year business plans, which
     ­incorporate performance targets in order to foster incentives for efficient infrastructure oper-
     ation. Capital expenditures and private financing costs must be reflected fully in the bulk
     tariffs. Even though Mekorot does remain a government owned company operating in a
     monopolistic sector, the establishment of an arm’s-length relationship with its owner,
     together with economic regulation by IWA, has fostered incentives for performance.
     For instance, the overall level of water losses for the national bulk water transportation sys-
     tem is reported at only three percent.


     Potable Water and Sanitation Utilities: Corporatization and
     Regionalization
     The disappointing performance of municipal water and sewerage departments1 in the early
     2000s prompted the government to implement an ambitious reform of water and sanitation
     services over the last 15 years. The law approved in 2001, under the auspices of the Ministry
     of Interior (as responsible for regulating the municipalities and local authorities), directed
     local governments to establish public ring-fenced corporations to manage local water supply
     and sewerage services.
       Initial progress was slow until in 2009, when the responsibility of the Municipal Utilities
     Association (MUA) in charge of supervising potable water and sanitation services was transferred
     from the Ministry of Interior to the IWA. Municipal water and sanitation services have been
     gradually transformed into corporatized utilities, owned by local municipalities and regulated
     under licenses by the IWA. There was a steep rise in tariff levels in 2009 as a result of the appli-
     cation of the full cost recovery principle. Almost all investment is now funded through com-
     mercial debt financing.2 In parallel, a process of consolidation has been taking place, with
     56 regional water and sanitation utilities now serving 187 municipalities and local councils.3
       Since it was transferred to the IWA, the MUA has taken a proactive role in helping the Israeli
                                                                                     ­ erformance.
     water and sanitation utilities improve their governance and overall operational p
     Significant improvements have been achieved, including for improving bill collections,
     performing network maintenance, and reducing nonrevenue water (NRW) ­
     ­                                                                   levels. In the
     aggregate, many water utilities are now generating a small operating profit.
       The reform process of Israeli water utilities is still very much ongoing. The agglomeration
     process has not yet been completely implemented.4


10   Water Management in Israel
Salient Features of the Corporatization of Water Supply
and Sanitation Utilities
There are several interesting features of the corporatization reform of water supply and
­sanitation (WSS) utilities that deserve to be highlighted. Not necessarily innovative by them-
selves, they can nonetheless provide food for thought for other countries engaged in the
challenging task of turning around public water utilities. The originality of the Israeli water
utility reform does not lie in the principles that were introduced, but in the fact that these prin-
ciples were actually implemented. The framework of actions implemented by the MUA
combines financial incentives and technical guidance with strong supervision of utilities—
­
especially with regard to staffing and performance—including sanctions enforcement as
necessary, as outlined below.
­
  First, financial incentives for operational performance were introduced, as tariff revenues
became the sole source of financing for each utility. The MUA uses the tariff-setting process as
a regulatory tool, by establishing the portion of the national water tariff that each utility can
keep. This is based on calculation of recognized expenditures that takes into account perfor-
mance targets and the specific conditions of each utility. Any efficiency gains achieved by
the utility’s management are automatically translated into the utility’s bottom line, and the
regulator allows the resulting dividends to be transferred from the utility to the municipal
                                                                                  ­ upport
budget—providing obvious financial incentives for local governments and mayors to s
the performance improvement of their WSS services.
  Also, special attention was paid to reduce political interference in staffing. Hiring and
salary-setting procedures and salaries are linked to those applied to public sector or
­
government-owned companies and are more demanding than those of local authorities.
­
Managerial positions must meet specific requirements set at the national level with respect
to professional credentials and undergo periodic reviews by a dedicated appointment
­
committee at the national level.
  Recognizing that many local utilities lacked technical capacity, the MUA has been issuing on
a regular basis technical guidance on operational issues. The regular issuance of detailed stan-
dards has been an important tool in improving the efficiency of the water utilities. These
include, among others, salary guidelines (2008), reporting (2010), industrial waste (2013),
customer service (2015), and engineering standards (2016, including methodology for mea-
suring for nonrevenue water [NRW]).
  Benchmarking has also played an important role. The MUA has developed a long list of key
performance indicators relating to a wide range of operational efficiency and customer rela-
tions matters. The MUA regularly audits each water utility and has started publishing5 the
results (excellent, very good, good, requires significant improvement, failed) to put public
pressure on bad performers to improve.
  Finally, the MUA has not shied away from its supervisory role, which includes imposing
sanctions and enforcing them, whenever necessary. Some of the technical guidelines and key
­
performance indicator targets are mandatory, and not achieving them can lead to sanctions.


Water Management in Israel                                                                       11
     For example, if the NRW is not satisfactory, and the utility does not show any improvement,
     MUA-imposed sanctions can include not incorporating some costs into the allowed tariff,
     forced management changes, or even appointing external management. In 2015, five utilities
     received a failing grade, and another five received a not sufficient grade. All the utilities with
     a failing grade had management changes imposed, and all those rated not sufficient had
     extensive management changes.6


     Partnering with the Private Sector for Financing Infrastructure
     Investment and to Improve Performance
     The implementation of public-private partnerships (PPPs) as a tool to improve the opera-
     tional performance of water services, raise private funding for investment, and ensure the sus-
     tainability of major infrastructures has been a key feature of the reforms. The seawater
     desalination program has been implemented through BOT or BOO schemes, in which private
     concessionaires entirely financed the investments and are responsible for operation and
     maintenance for 25 years (this will be analyzed in details under the so-called “third innova-
     tion”). The amount of private investment raised under the four desalination BOT-BOO
     ­projects with private concessionaires (Ashkelon, Palmachim, Hadera and Sorek) represents a
     total of about US$1,300 million. Also, corporatized regional utilities as well as Mekorot are
     now financed through commercial debt with private banks or bonds issuances, without
     ­sovereign guarantees.
       In addition, an important feature of the Israeli corporatization reform is that the water
     utilities have been encouraged to seek a variety of partnership contracts with the national pri-
     vate sector in a move to improve operational performance and reduce costs. Subcontracting
     arrangements are in place for a wide variety of operational tasks, including operations and
     maintenance (O&M) tasks in the plants and networks, commercial services (meter installa-
     tion, meter reading and billing, debt collection, call centers), supervisory control and data
     acquisition systems and sensors typically purchased through a contract including long-term
     O&M. Private contractors now perform a large portion of the tasks of the most-advanced
     Israeli water utilities.7
       Another example of innovative PPP is the independent power production (IPP) contract
     put in place for biogas production at the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) of Kfar Saba-
     Hod Hasharon in the center of Israel (population 160,000). It is limited to the biogas produc-
     tion process (the operation of the WWTP being under the public utility) and began operation
     in 2016. It uses the biogas produced by the anaerobic digestion process to provide about
     80 percent of the electricity needed by the plant, saving about 20 percent of the energy costs.


     Regulation and Tariff-Setting Mechanisms for Water and
     Sanitation Utilities
     As already indicated, tariff setting by the IWA has played a major role in the reform of WSS
     utilities. Following the incorporation of the MUA under IWA in 2009, a major tariff increase


12   Water Management in Israel
FIGURE 3.1.           Average Municipal Water Tariff in Israel 1996-2017                                took place for potable water and
                                                                                                        sanitation tariff (figure 3.1). This
                 11
                                                                                                        was necessary to ensure that the
                 10
                                                                                                        corporatized utilities would have
                 9
                                                                                                        sufficient revenues to cover all
                 8
                                                                                                        their costs and become finan-
                  7
 tari (NIS/m3)




                                                                                                        cially independent from local
                 6
                                                                                                        governments. The magnitude of
                  5
                                                                                                        the tariff increase that took place
                 4
                                                                                                        in just one year—almost doubling—
                  3
                                                                                                        underlines the magnitude of the
                 2
                                                                                                        subsidies to the sector that local
                  1
                                                                                                        authorities were providing before,
                          96



                          98




                          10

                           11

                          12

                          13

                          14

                          15

                          16

                           17
                          97




                         00

                          01

                          02

                          03

                         04

                          05

                         06

                          07

                         08

                         09
                         99




                                                                                                        as well as the strong political will
                        20




                       20
                       20



                       20
                       20



                       20



                       20
                      20




                      20
                       19




                      20
                      20
                      20




                      20
                 19




                       19
                       19




                      20



                      20




                      20
                      20
                      20




                                                             Years
                                                                                                        to implement the reform.
Sources: World Bank staff calculations based on data from IWA 2015.                                       IWA now sets tariffs for all water
                                                                                                        and sanitation services, and a
                                                                                                        uniform tariff level and structure
                                            has been instituted for the country, with all potable water and sanitation customers paying
                                                                                8


                                            the same price,9 the result being cross-subsidies between consumers who live close to water
                                            sources and those who live farther away and require additional pumping costs. The effi-
                                            ciency improvements that were achieved by the regional utilities in the 2009–13 period have
                                            allowed IWA to start reducing the tariff levels since 2014, gradually passing back part of the
                                            savings to consumers.
                                              In 2017, the uniform average tariff for potable water and sanitation—calculated as the
                                            weighted average of a modeled representative home consumption—was NIS 8.92 (approxi-
                                            mately US$2.4) cubic meter (figure 3.2). On average, only 44 percent is allocated to the water
                                            utilities for water distribution and sewage collection, 22 percent goes to Mekorot for bulk
                                            water transport and freshwater production, 18 percent covers sewage treatment costs,
                                            16 percent covers desalination costs, and 4.5 percent goes to subsidies.
                                              The national tariff for potable water and sanitation services is based on a two-tier increas-
                                            ing-block structure. The tariff for the first block, corresponding to consumption up to
                                            3.5 cubic meter per capita per month (115 liters per day) is NIS 6.56 (US$1.8) per cubic meters
                                            (2016). The tariff for the second consumption block imposes a 61 percent markup of NIS
                                            10.56 (US$2.85) per cubic meters.10 This increasing block tariff structure is designed to
                                            encourage demand management while still ensuring that the population has access to a life-
                                            line consumption volume at an affordable price. Approximately 75 percent of residential
                                            consumption is billed at the lower tariff.
                                              It must be noted that the application of a single national tariff for water and sanitation
                                            services poses special challenges for regulation. All households across the country pay the


                                            Water Management in Israel                                                                   13
FIGURE 3.2.    Breakdown of Consumer Water Tariff, 2017



                                                              Uniform average tari
                                                                    NIS 8.92



       44%                    18%                      4.5%                          –4.5%        22%                           16%
                                 Sewage                                  Previous yera’s
     Municipal network                               Subsidies                                   Mekorot             Desalination
                                treatment                               Discrepancies (*)
           3.955                                       0.15                                       1.914                  1.5
                                   1.71                                       –0.31



     Water and sewage
          CAPEX
                                                                                                               Energy
            1.16
                                                                                                                0.42

     Water and sewage
                                                                                                        Fixed operating costs
           OPEX
                                                                                                                0.43
            1.78


     Non-Revenue water                                                                                       Capital costs
          (NRW)                                                                                                 0.88
           1.101

                                                                                                          Sundries ( ltering,
 (*) Change in uniform average tari between 2016 and 2017                                               uoridation, betterment)
 is due to di erent quantity mix in those year.                                                                  0.19


Source: IWA website.




                                    same price, yet the actual cost structure of each utility (for water distribution and sewage
                                    collection) varies widely. This has been solved by using the bulk water tariff paid by the util-
                                    ities to Mekorot as an adjustment factor. The share of the national tariff that each utility is
                                    allowed to retain from its customers’ revenues is determined by IWA based on allowed
                                    expenditures (full cost recovery based on performance targets). The difference between the
                                    allowed expenditures of each utility and the national water tariff then determine the bulk
                                    water tariff billed by Mekorot which is therefore different for each utility, and therefore
                                    incorporates significant cross-subsidies between them.


                                    Prices of Irrigation Services Are among the Highest in the World
                                    Irrigation prices in Israel are well above what farmers pay in most other countries around the
                                    world. This has ensured that farmers are using water in the most efficient manner, and has
                                    ­
                                    promoted the development of modern farming practices for high value crops. The price
                                    structure is supported by a financial framework for irrigation which is also based on moving
                                    toward full cost recovery, albeit different from WSS services.
                                      Overall, Mekorot provides more than 55 percent of water for agriculture, at prices that
                                    are  set by the regulator IWA. Water sales from other suppliers, mainly private regional


14                                  Water Management in Israel
associations, are billed at price that are also set by IWA and are supposed to reflect their
actual production costs. In 2006, the government signed an agreement with farmers’ repre-
sentatives that linked water prices for agriculture to the average Mekorot cost of water
supplied to the sector, including agriculture’s share of desalinated water.
­
  For irrigation water, tariffs have varied widely depending on the source of water, the
region, and the time of the year. Extraction levies vary with the site and season of the water
withdrawn. Freshwater prices are between NIS 0.8 (US$0.22) and NIS 2.6 (US$0.70) per m3
depending on the supplier and the region. The price of brackish water depends on the salin-
ity and varies from NIS 0.9 (US$0.24) to NIS 1.6 (US$0.43) per cubic meter. The price of
treated wastewater (NIS 0.8–1.25 (US$0.22–0.34) per cubic meter) has been set below those
of fresh and brackish as an incentive for farmers to use it.
  The price of treated wastewater for irrigation is significantly subsidized to encourage farmers
to substitute them for fresh water in irrigation. It reflects the cost of conveyance but does not
cover treatment and storage costs (which other users pay through cross-subsidies and state
subsidies for a portion of capital expenditure).11 The government also subsidizes up to
60 percent of the marginal conveyance costs for reclaimed and brackish water.12
  The above-mentioned framework for irrigation tariffs is due to change later in 2017, with
the approval of new legislation by the national parliament to equalize agriculture water
prices across the country, thus ending the prevailing wide variations in water prices between
different regions and supply sources. As all Israeli farmers will pay henceforth the same tariff
for irrigated water, this will result in wider ranging cross-subsidies between regions and
water supply sources.


Notes
1.	 The 2000 report from the State Comptroller documents in details the waste, neglect, insufficient investments, and high
   levels of nonrevenue water in Israel’s urban water utilities.

2.	 In special cases, based upon stringent criteria and during the initial organizational period, certain utilities are still awarded
   state grants to finance construction of sewage treatment facilities.

3.	 Twenty-seven municipalities serving approximately 4.5 percent of the population remain without a corporatized water
   utility.

4.	 The current plan is to have only 11 regional water utilities (water distribution and sewage collection) and seven regional
   sewerage companies (wastewater treatment).

5.	 The IWA has published only four audits to date, in 2014 and 2015.

6.	 As an example of MUA sanctions: one municipal water utility accumulated a debt of over NIS 100 million for not collecting
   payment for water supplied to local cultural and religious facilities. After other measures were not successful, the MUA
   intervened to replace the entire utility’s management (board of directors and CEO).

7.	 For instance, Hagihon, which serves approximately 1 million people in Jerusalem and its Western suburbs, has a permanent
   workforce of 230 employees but also 150 workers under private contractors.

8.	 In addition to tariffs, setup fees (formerly called building taxes) that developers are required to pay are a major source of
   funding for infrastructure construction of municipal and regional utilities.

9.	 There remains a difference in price level and structure between the 56 municipal utilities supply and some local authorities
   that do not have corporatized utilities and pay a lower tariff supply.



Water Management in Israel                                                                                                        15
     10.	The reduced tariff for local authorities without corporatized utilities in 2017 is NIS 4.17 per cubic meter for the first
        consumption block and NIS 9.21 per cubic meter above that.
        ­

     11.	 It is estimated that full wastewater treatment costs are approximately US$3.15 per cubic meter, of which US$1.73 is for
        ­
        annuitized capex and US$1.42 for operational expenditures.

     12.	 The incremental cost of inter-seasonal storage (treated wastewater is produced year-round, but agricultural demand
        is  concentrated in the summer) and conveyance is estimated at US$0.28 per m3 (approximately 9 percent of total
        treatment costs).




16   Water Management in Israel
Chapter 4   Key Innovations in the Israeli Water Sector
            First Innovation: National Water System to Connect
            All Water Infrastructure
            Faced with the unequal spatial and seasonal variability of rainfall, Israel implemented early
            on an innovative system of storing and conveying water from its wetter north to the drier
            center and south—the main agricultural areas. The integrated use of surface and groundwa-
            ter initially started with the first National Water Carrier, a giant pipeline that Mekorot devel-
            oped and has operated since 1964 to transport water from the Sea of Galilee to the main
            population centers in the center and the Negev Desert in the south.
              Since then, Mekorot has developed more water conveyance infrastructure, establishing
            a  national bulk water transmission system that conveys 95 percent of  Israel’s potable water
            resources (surface water, groundwater, desalinated water) to the regional providers that supply
            end-users (domestic, industrial, agriculture). This massive water infrastructure includes as
            many as 3,000 installations and 12,000 kilometers of transmission pipelines controlled by
            10 main command centers across the country. The overall level of water losses in the bulk
            transportation system is reported to stand at 3 percent.
              Connecting almost the entire country (with exception of Eilat), this water transmission
            infrastructure has enabled Israel to regulate the use of natural water resources depending on
            hydrological conditions, conveying surpluses of water from one resource to store in other
            resources, in order to meet demand in various regions. The operational flexibility that the
            National Water System provides has been essential for the strategic combination of water sup-
            ply based on desalination and reuse with sustainable exploitation of natural water resources.
              Two recent infrastructure developments have supported the massive development over
            the last decade of seawater desalination and wastewater reuse.

            •• The new National Water Carrier transports desalinated potable water from five plants
              along the coast (75 percent of all potable water transmitted by Mekorot) and integrates it
              into the national water system for supply nationwide. The cost of this 10-year develop-
              ment is NIS 5 billion (US$1.3 billion) —including 100 kilometers of 2.0- to 2.5-meter diam-
              eter pipeline. The last segment (the fifth pipeline to Jerusalem) is expected to be completed
              by 2021.

            •• The Third Line to the Negev for the supply of reclaimed water supplies effluent that has
              undergone tertiary treatment (through aquifer recharge after secondary treatment at the
              Shafdan wastewater treatment plant ([WWTP] near Tel Aviv) for irrigation of all types of
              crops in the Negev. It was put into operation in 1989.

              Developing and ensuring the sustainability of an infrastructure of such magnitude
            and  strategic importance has required a financially solid operator. Mekorot has been
            able to maintain, so far, a healthy financial situation with total revenues of approximately
                  billion per annum and a AAA national rating (Ma’alot Standard & Poor, 2015).
            US$1  ­


            Water Management in Israel                                                                    17
                                                          As a regulated public utility owned by the state and operating as a monopoly in a strategic
                                                          sector, Mekorot has been able to raise as much as NIS 6,661 million (US$1,800 million) of
                                                          commercial debt through its balance sheet, with a debt gearing ratio of about 67 percent
                                                          and a rate of return on equity of only 3.2 percent ((Ma’alot Standard & Poor, 2015). This has
                                                          allowed Mekorot to raise on average approximately US$300 million each year for investment
                                                          over the last decade, at low interest rates through issuance of nonnegotiable bonds to insti-
                                                          tutional investors (without any explicit government guarantees).


                                                          Second Innovation: Large-Scale Reuse of Treated
                                                          Wastewater for Irrigation
                                                          The constraints of water scarcity, combined with a fast-growing population and the decision
                                                          to  stop over-exploiting the aquifers, made it compulsory for Israel to engage in a massive
                                                          program of reuse of treated wastewater. Gradually, reclaimed wastewater has become a
                                                          ­
                                                          major source of water for farmers, supplying more than 40 percent of the country’s needs
                                                          for irrigation and more than 87 percent of wastewater being reused. As such, Israel is today
                                                          one of the few countries in the world that has managed to almost entirely close the urban
                                                          water cycle.1 In addition to providing a major alternative water source for agriculture, reuse
                                                          is environmentally less damaging than the traditional methods of disposing of treated sew-
                                                          age into the environment, especially for ensuring the quality of bathing water in coastal
                                                          tourist resorts.
                                                            Figure 4.1 shows how the share of reused treated sewage has risen from approximately
                                                          10 percent of 130 million cubic meters of collected wastewater in the early 1960s, to as much
                                                          as 87 percent of 500 million cubic meters in 2015. It also shows that the reuse of treated


      FIGURE 4.1.                    Collected, Treated, and Used Sewage, 1963–2015


                              600


                              500
Million cubic meters / year




                              400


                              300


                              200


                              100


                               0
                                    1963   1967   1971   1975   1978   1980      1982   1985   1987   1989     1994   2000 2004     2007   2010   2012   2015
                                                            Total sewage water      Total wastewater treated     Total wastewater reused

      Sources: Israel 2012; Israel Water Authority website.



      18                                                  Water Management in Israel
effluents remained low until the first water crisis that occurred in 1985, which accelerated
the reuse of treated sewage effluents.
  Many of Israel’s WWTPs were built in the 1950s and 1960s under the responsibility of
municipalities, and water reuse was limited for many years. They were not well supervised
and sometimes poorly managed. The situation started to change in the mid-1980s as large-­
scale immigration (mostly from the former Soviet Union) resulted in significant population
increases. The volume of wastewater increased, several WWTPs experienced serious opera-
tional problems, and several outbreaks of infectious diseases were attributed to pollution
from wastewater. Political pressure rose to improve wastewater treatment and better moni-
tor the quality of reclaimed water.
  Today, the country has 67 large WWTPs (greater than 1,500 cubic meters per day), and the
10 largest WWTPs treat approximately 298.5 million cubic meters per year (56 percent of
total volume), most of which were developed by local authorities using traditional construc-
tion contracts such as design-build or turnkey. Figure 4.1 lists the major plants.
  Apart from the Shafdan plant in Tel Aviv, most WWTPs are only now upgrading to tertiary
treatment after the enactment of new wastewater reuse treatment standards in 2010
(box 4.1)—the goal being to allow treated wastewater to be used for all types of agricultural
uses, without restrictions.


TABLE 4.1.    Major Wastewater Treatment Plants in Israel

                                          Treated effluent 2015
               WWTP                                               Population (thousands)   Type of treatment
                                               1,000 m3/year
 Shafdan                                           134,188                2,500            Tertiary

 Haifa                                             37,960                  550             Secondary(a)

 Jerusalem (Sorek)                                  33,772                 635             Secondary(a)

 Ayalon                                             20,173                 358             Secondary(a)

 Netanya                                           15,796                  236             Tertiary

 Beer Sheva                                         15,025                 256             Secondary(a)

 Ashdod                                             11,544                 216             Tertiary

 Hadera                                            10,420                  184             Secondary

 Kfar Saba – Hod Hasharon                           10,145                 162             Tertiary

 Carmiel                                            9,508                  200             Tertiary

Source: Israel Water Authority 2015.
Note: WWTP = wastewater treatment plant.
(a): Being upgraded to tertiary level treatment.


  Since its commissioning in 1989, Israel’s flagship project for effluent reuse for agricultural
purposes has been the Shafdan WWTP and the Third Line to the Negev pipeline. It supplies
treated effluent that has undergone tertiary treatment after secondary biological treatment
in the Shafdan WWTP—the largest in Israel, it treats 140 million cubic meters of wastewater
per year from Tel Aviv and seven neighboring towns (approximately 2.5 million people) to
farmers in the Negev Desert in the South.


Water Management in Israel                                                                                 19
           BOX 4.1.   Introducing New Wastewater Reuse Regulations in 2010-15


           The Inbar Committee was established in 2001 to develop modern standards for
           quality of effluents in Israel. New regulations were required not only to address the
           sanitary aspect of reuse but also to prevent pollution of water resources and protect
           ecosystems and land while allowing wide use of reclaimed water in irrigation.

           In January 2010, the Knesset approved the Inbar Committee regulations, which were
           officially named the Public Health Regulations (Effluent Quality Standards and Rules
           for Sewage Treatment). The new regulations were gradually introduced between
           2010 and 2015 to give stakeholders time to adjust to major changes. Most wastewa-
           ter in Israel must undergo tertiary treatment, with upgraded requirements for treated
           wastewater quality to allow a wider range of crops to be irrigated using wastewater
           while protecting public health (including, for the first time, requirements for salinity
           and concentrations of toxic metals). Only small WWTP (capacity lower than 5,000
           people equivalent) are allowed for secondary treatment based on restricted use. One
           key feature of the new recycled water regulations is that it divides the country into
           multiple zones according to geographical and hydrological characteristics and fore-
           casts of the different uses in wastewater, with each sub-region subject to different
           reuse standards.




       The Shafdan WWTP achieves tertiary treatment through an innovative aquifer recharge
     method called soil aquifer treatment (figure 4.2). Wastewater treated to a secondary level is
     injected into specially designated recharge basins, where it naturally filtrates through the
     sand. To avoid contamination, there is complete separation between the reclaimed effluents
     introduced and the aquifer water, which is achieved by controlling the shape of an artificially
     created water level depression, which creates a hydrologic trough that prevents the reclaimed
     water from spreading. The treated water is later collected in peripheral reclamation wells
     after 6 to 12 months and pumped to the Negev. In dry months, Mekorot abstracts treated
     water from the aquifer and transports more than 130 million cubic meters to the Negev. The
     high treatment standards allow for unrestricted irrigation of all types of agricultural crops
     without any risk to public health.
       Favorable pricing policies have been put in place to give farmers a strong incentive to use
     treated reclaimed wastewater for irrigation instead of freshwater. Wastewater is priced at
     US$0.3 per cubic meter for unrestricted irrigation and US$ 0.25 per cubic for restricted irriga-
     tion, less than half the tariff for freshwater for agriculture which stands at $0.66 per
     cubic meter. These lower prices of reclaimed wastewater are possible thanks to large invest-
     ment subsidies (60 percent to 70 percent of the investment, at an estimated total cost of
     US$800 million) for wastewater treatment and storage. A large portion of the investment
     was for building artificial reservoirs to store the reclaimed wastewater (produced year-round


20   Water Management in Israel
FIGURE 4.2.    Shafdan Soil Aquifer Treatment Method, Israel


             Recovery                 Observation                                                                     To supply network
               well                      well                 Recharge basin




                                                    Dune sand with silt and clay lenses
                                                                   Mount


                                                           Original water table




                                            Zone dedicated to e ument treatment and storage




                     Recharge                                  Impermeable
                Recovery scheme SAT

                                                       Recharge - Recovery scheme

Source: Mekorot 2016.




                                      but released during the summer growing season): more than 400 reservoirs have been
                                      built since the late 1980s. As an additional incentive for farmers to use reclaimed wastewa-
                                      ter, they were also initially offered to convert their allocation of fresh water to reclaimed
                                      water using a ratio of 1 to 1.2 (20 percent higher allocated water volume).


                                      Third Innovation: Large-Scale Desalination PPPs for
                                      Potable Water Independence
                                      In the early 2000s, realizing that Israel faced structural water scarcity, the government made
                                      the strategic decision to develop desalination plants on a large scale. The aim was that most
                                      of  the water supply for municipal consumption would come from desalinated water, to
                                      ensure the country’s water security.
                                        The parallel discovery of gas reserves offshore (enabling domestic energy supply for the
                                      plants) facilitated this strategic choice. Over the last 15 years, five mega desalination plants
                                      based on seawater reverse osmosis (SWRO) were constructed along the Mediterranean Coast
                                      with a total capacity of 585 million cubic meter per year (table 4.2). Four of them were ­developed
                                                                                                                          operate-
                                      through public private partnerships (PPPs) with private concessionaires under build-­
                                      transfer (BOT) and build-operate-own (BOO) schemes. Desalinated water now supplies


                                      Water Management in Israel                                                                      21
     TABLE 4.2.     Major Seawater Desalination Plants in Israel

                                                                                                            Production         Estimated
                          Year of          O&M                                Business      Price per
      Project                                            Concessionaires                                      capacity        capex (US$
                        operation        duration                              model        m3 (US$)
                                                                                                            (million m3)        billion)
      Ashkelon             2005          25 years        IDE (50%)              BOT            0.78              119              0.27

                                                         Oaktree (50%)

      Palmachim            2007          25 years        Derech HaYam           BOO            0.86              90               0.16
                                                         (100%)

      Hadera               2010          25 years        IDE (50%),             BOT            0.72              127              0.43

                                                         Shikun U’Binui
                                                         (50%)

      Sorek                2013          25 years        IDE (50%),             BOT            0.54              150           0.41−0.54

                                                         Veolia (50%)

      Ashdod               2016          25 years        Mekorot (100%)         BOT            0.65              100           0.41−0.54

     Sources: (a) The Israeli Desalination Sector, Internal Research Paper by Variance-Ascola Economic Consulting, Tel Aviv,
     March 2017; (b) Ministry of Finance of Israel website, http://www.mof.gov.il/, Jerusalem, Feb. 2017; (c) Financing Projects of
     Desalination in Israel, Midroog Credit Rating Agency, Tel Aviv, 2012; (d) Global Issues in Water Policy: Desalination in Israel-
     Erica Spiritos and Clive Lipchin, Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg New York London, January 2013, (e) The National Inquiry
     Commission on water management in Israel, Government of Israel, Jerusalem, 2009; (f) Annual Report of Water Authority
     Activity, Israel Water Authority, Tel Aviv, 2015.
     Note: BOO = build-own-operate; BOT = build-operate-transfer; capex = capital expenditure; O&M = operations and maintenance.




     85  percent of domestic urban water consumption2 and 40 percent of the country’s total
     water consumption.
       This move has allowed Israel to position itself as one of the world leaders in seawater desalina-
     tion. Its large desalination plants have achieved good performance in terms of energy effi-
     ciency and price of desalinated water—from US$0.78 per cubic meter in the first Ashkelon
     plant down to only US$0.54 per cubic meter in the more recent Sorek plant (which is also the
     largest one). The prices for desalinated water are among the lowest in the world and have
     been  key to ensuring the financial viability of the whole system so that desalinated water
     remains affordable for customers despite applying full cost recovery through tariff. They were
     achieved through a combination of two main factors: the size and operational mode of the
     new desalination plants and PPP schemes that were designed to minimize the level of risks for
     the private sector so as to secure large amounts of private financing on the best possible terms.
       The first factor in the low desalinated water price has to do with the inherent cost structure
     of desalination plants and the fact that the Israeli desalination program took advantage of it
     by relying on a few large desalination plants that are mostly operated 24 hours per day, seven
     days per week. These operations made it possible to achieve significant economies of scale
     and absorb large fixed costs. It is important to highlight that the specificities of Israel’s
     ­
     integrated water management made this possible:

     •• First, the existence of a national water carrier made it possible to restrict the number of
        new desalination plants to a few large ones, allowing desalinated water to be delivered


22   Water Management in Israel
  from just a few production plants to all cities and towns across the country. The resulting
  economies of scale translate into lower fixed costs per unit capacity.

•• Second, the strategic decision to use desalinated water as “base load” to meet municipal
  demand, using the aquifer as a strategic reservoir to meet peak demand, translated into
  the plants being operated continuously (24 hours per day, seven days per week through-
  out the year) and close to full capacity. This is the opposite of the strategy of many other
  countries, which use desalinated water mostly to meet peak demand, the result being
  that, in Israel, fixed costs are absorbed through a larger production volume for a given
  plant capacity, resulting in a lower average cost per cubic meter.

The second major factor for low prices has been the adoption of a PPP approach through the BOT
scheme.3 The government’s decision not to finance construction of these large-scale plants
through the national budget and recognition that the plants involved complex technologies
and that the private sector would construct and operate these facilities more efficiently than
public sector entities drove adoption of the PPP model. It represented a major strategic move
in a sector that had been historically dominated by government financing and public man-
agement.4 The Water Desalination Administration was established under the IWA to handle
all aspects of desalination PPPs.
  Adopting the BOT approach for large-scale seawater desalination—rather than a traditional
construction contract approach—brought major benefits. Under such schemes, the private sec-
tor has strong incentives to build a plant that minimizes total costs (operating and capital)
over the life of the plant, with flexibility (at its own risk) to make technological choices.5 In
addition, the concessionaire bears all cost overruns due to delays and change orders—as
opposed to the widespread practice under construction contracts of trying to charge more
capex during construction to the public client than the price set under the tender process.
Finally, the private concessionaire takes all operations and maintenance (O&M) risks during
the operational period of the plant, with swift penalties incurred if the plant does not deliver
the contracted amount and quality of water contracted—fostering, in the end, the sustain-
ability and efficiency of the new plants.
  In addition to the inherent benefits of the BOT approach, the specific design of the Israeli
desalination PPPs included additional crucial elements that allowed the private sector to make
more aggressive financial offers with rather low prices for desalinated water, thanks to the
introduction of some innovative contractual features with significant financial guarantees
provided by the public party. These clearly reflects the fact that the government wanted to
reduce the level of risks for the private investors (compared to what has been the standard
practice for desalination BOTs in other countries) in order to obtain better terms in terms of
price of desalinated water; for example:

•• Interest change risk borne by the government: The concessionaires have been provided
  with full protection against changes in the market base interest rate, allowing them to use
  cheaper variable short-term debt to finance the construction phase and refinance later to


Water Management in Israel                                                                    23
       long-term debt over the operational period. The PPPs were therefore able to take advan-
       tage of historically low interest rates without having to factor in the risk of increasing
       long-term interest rates. This also allowed private financing to be structured with a high
       level of gearing (senior debt of about 80 percent and equity at just 20 percent)—further
       reducing the average cost of capital.

     •• Enhanced indexation mechanism with all fluctuation risks borne by the government:
       the tenders have typically included a hedging mechanism that allows each bidder to
       include in its financial proposal its own indexation formula based on a predefined selec-
       tion of market indices—as opposed to imposing the same pre-established indexation
       formula to all bidders. This hedging mechanism allowed for fine-tuning to the specific
       cost structure of each bidder and was more extensive than typically offered in a BOT
       contract.

     •• Optimizing the fixed payment under the “take-or-pay” guarantee: as is typical with BOTs,
       a portion of the remuneration of the concessionaire is made through a guaranteed fixed
       payment in exchange for a guaranteed volume of water available under a “take-or-pay”
       guarantee. To facilitate access to nonrecourse private debt, the fixed payment should
       cover all fixed costs, including fixed operational costs and debt service. Although the
       ­
       proportion of fixed to variable payment is often established ex ante in typical BOT tender
       documents, in Israel, a formula was introduced in the tender to allow bidders to optimize
       ­
       the proportion of fixed to variable fees based on their own cost structure, allowing each
       one to propose its own optimal mix.6

     •• Cost of land borne by the government: this was a significant factor given the high cost of
       land in Israel’s coastal areas. Only in the case of the Palmachim desalination plant (which
       was a BOO) had the land to be purchased by the private operator—an element that partly
       explains why this plant has the highest price per cubic meter.


     Another crucial factor for the low price of desalinated water is the control of energy costs, which
     typically represents between half to two-third of the price of desalinated water. Most Israeli
     desalination plants have achieved strong performance in energy efficiency (e.g. 3.6 kilowatt-​
                                                                                     compared to
     hours per cubic meter for Sorek), and energy costs in Israel are relatively low ­
     many other countries (Israel uses gas-fired power plants supplied by its own gas fields in the
     Mediterranean).7 Desalination plants do not benefit from any preferential electrical prices
     from the grid, and each concessionaire must make arrangements to buy electricity either
     from the national grid (based on government regulated tariff) or IPPs (with a negotiated
     price). The tariff indexation formula takes into account the evolution of the average domes-
     tic electricity price per kilowatt hour from the grid as a pass-through. In some BOT projects,
     bidders were given the option to build gas-based power plants to reduce energy supply cost
     under a parallel independent power producer contract.8 The recent national program to
     develop IPPs on a large scale may provide opportunities to further reduce the price of desali-
     nated water.


24   Water Management in Israel
 FIGURE 4.3. Time for Tendering and Construction of Build-Operate-Transfer                                  The last large seawater desali-
 Desalination Plants, Israel
                                                                                                          nation plant in Ashdod, which
                                                                                                          started operation in 2016, is an
        80
                                         72                                                               outlier because the BOT contract
        70                                                                    63             63
                   60                                                                                     was signed between Mekorot and
                                                            58
        60
                                         27                                                                                      provides a
                                                                                                          the state. In fact, it ­
        50                                                                    26             27           strong counter-example of the
                                                            23
Month




                   30
        40                                                                                                benefits of the PPP approach—
        30                               28                                   15                          and of what can happen when
                                                            12                               17
        20         14                                                                                     construction and O&M risks are

                                                            23                                            not fully passed to a private party.
        10                                                                    22             20
                   16                    17
                                                                                                          Although the plant was built
        0
               Ashkelon             Palmachim             Hadera            Sorek          Average        “nominally” as a BOT scheme, in
                                    Tender (RfPs)      Financial closing   Construction                   practice the contract was signed
                                                                                                          between the state and a subsidi-
 Source: Variance-Ascola Economic Consulting 2017.
                                                                                                          ary of Mekorot as concessionaire.
                                              This created an obvious conflict of interest that eliminated the inherent incentives of a PPP.
                                                                ­ ubsidiary did sign a turnkey contract with a private consortium for the
                                              While the Mekorot s
                                              construction of the plant, the transfer of risk to an outside private partner that normally take
                                              place under a BOT was not fully effective. This project has experienced major construction
                                              delays, cost overruns, and operational problems.
                                                One last, important lesson from the Israeli seawater desalination experience is that careful
                                              design and tendering of BOT contracts takes time (figure 4.3). On average, the tender process
                                              for the four desalination BOTs with private concessionaires (from request for proposal issu-
                                              ance to award) took 20 months, to which must be added one year for the prequalification
                                              phase and 17 months for the financial closing (securing nonrecourse financing), which adds
                                              to about 4 years for the whole contracting and financial closing process before construction
                                              can start. This is much more than actual construction, which took 2.3 years on average—less
                                              than for many other large desalination plants built in other countries under the traditional
                                              design-build or turnkey approach—because private concessionaires had strong contractual
                                              incentives to avoid construction delays.


                                              Fourth Innovation: Using Aquifers as Reservoirs
                                              The first integrated supply scheme based on the national water system operated by Mekorot
                                              since the 1960s relied on the storage capacity of the Sea of Galilee and the Coastal and
                                              Western Mountain aquifers. Mekorot has added major infrastructure since then to connect
                                              and rationalize the operation of aquifers.
                                                One of the most remarkable innovations of Israel water management is that aqui-
                                              fers  have  been gradually switched from being overexploited resources to becoming major
                                              storage reservoirs. The existence of the National Water Carrier and the large-scale use


                                              Water Management in Israel                                                                   25
     of seawater desalination and reclaimed wastewater as alternative nonconventional water
     sources made this possible. The interconnected nature of the National Water Carrier
     affords the opportunity to optimize the operations of regional water schemes through
     over-pumping from local aquifers in dry years or artificial recharges in wetter years.
     The  aquifers therefore serve as swing suppliers (i.e., buffers) while also minimizing
     ­evaporation losses that would have occurred had this water been stored in open
     reservoirs.
       The hydraulic advantages of this integrated scheme are obvious in terms of higher reliabil-
     ity and lower losses to evaporation, although management of aquifers as reservoirs is deli-
     cate. It relies on an extensive network of piezometers, and solid monitoring of both supplies
     and the various types of demand (including to avoid illegal abstraction). Each aquifer has
     specific operational procedures and constraints, for instance, in the aquifer linked to the Sea
     of Galilee, the need to keep the variation level of the lake within a 4-meter range directs
     pumping, while in the Coastal aquifer, the need to protect against saline intrusion of seawa-
     ter constrains pumping. The main operating approach for monitoring aquifers is described
     in the box 4.2.




           BOX 4.2.   Groundwater Monitoring Practices


           For monitoring of the aquifers, Israel implements the concept of “reporting cells” for
           generating representative hydrological and hydro chemical data, with the following
           methodology:

           •	 The Hydrological Service divides each aquifer into cells with similar hydrogeological
             properties and identifies representative wells in each reporting cell.

           •	 The regional hydrogeologist defines the monitoring needs and formulates a list of
             wells and springs to be monitored and the frequency of the monitoring.

           •	 Wells are divided to pumping wells, monitoring wells and specific purpose
                   industrial areas, gasoline stations) monitoring wells.
             (e.g. ­

           •	 Monitoring requirements are translated into work plan of the Hydrometric Unit of
             the Hydrological Service.

           •	 Groundwater levels are measured in 1,500 wells (pumping and monitoring wells) at
             a frequency varying from monthly to annually. Spring and pumping wells discharge
             is measured monthly, with more than 800 samplings taken from pumping wells and
             springs. EC (electrical connectivity) profiles are performed on monitoring wells.

           •	 Measurements are uploaded to the central database.

           •	 Regional hydrologist reviews the data and if needed request repeat measurements.




26   Water Management in Israel
Fifth Innovation: Interception of Surface Water Run-Off and Recharge
The pattern of short rainstorms coupled with a landscape that often lacks a mitigating cover
of vegetation produces flash floods that, unless captured, are lost to the desert, the
Mediterranean, or the Dead Sea. Early on, Israel invested in infrastructure to capture these
flash floods.
  Typically, such infrastructure combines retention walls and small dams that could
capture and store water that would infiltrate into the underlying aquifers, from which they
­
could subsequently be recovered. The amount that can be recharged varies with rainfall
­
pattern and strength, reaching a maximum of 62 million cubic meters in 1980 and a mini-
mum of 4 million cubic meters in 1990. The average recharge achieved in addition to natural
replenishment has been estimated to be 8 percent. Although small compared to the massive
contribution of the desalination and reuse programs, this infrastructure for flood interception
underlines the efforts that Israel has made to capture all available water.
  Although it is not part sensu stricto of the water sector strategy, the national program of
afforestation, in areas where forests have been absent in historical memory, has also helped
mitigate flash floods and improved rainwater infiltration into the aquifers as one of its bene-
fits. Israel is not the only country to have resorted to expanding tree coverage in order to
reduce runoff, but it did so early on and on a large scale. The forested share of Israel rose from
2 percent in 1948 to more than 8 percent in 2014. An additional benefit has been sequestration
of carbon to combat global warming and for esthetic and recreational benefits. The afforesta-
tion program in the arid Negev is noteworthy because it has revived old techniques for har-
vesting rainwater that the Nabatean people practiced from the fourth century before the
Common Era until the Roman Empire conquered them. The revived techniques focus on areas
with less than 100 millimeters of annual rainfall and where groves of 0.2 to 0.6 hectares thrive
from water collected from watersheds that are 10 to 100 times as large as cultivated areas.9


Sixth Innovation: Promoting Crop Selectivity and Importation
of Virtual Water
The State of Israel was originally established with strong reliance on agriculture, based on the
well-known kibbutz model of collective farming, but as early as in the early 1960s, Israel had
to address a growing scarcity of freshwater for irrigation of food crops, forcing national plan-
ners to reconsider how much food should be produced domestically and how much should
be imported. Because there was not enough water to meet the growing demands, the gov-
ernment was faced early on with a fundamental trade-off of having to choose between water
security and food security.
  A major strategic decision was then made to increase food imports and reduce the coun-
try’s  reliance on domestic crops, effectively compensating for water scarcity by the massive
import of virtual water imbedded in imported foods. The fact that it coincided with a time
when international food prices were falling and imported food supplies were readily



Water Management in Israel                                                                     27
                                                                   available facilitated this decision. In addition, Israel had started to diversify its economy
                                                                   ­
                                                                   and could afford to import most of its food.
                                                                     Greater selectivity of food crops grown for export paralleled the displacement of food
                                                                   crops that could be more cheaply imported than grown domestically. Instead of competing
                                                                   with countries that had cheaper, more abundant water and lower labor costs (e.g., in the
                                                                   production of lower priced oranges or cotton), more emphasis was placed on growing
                                                                   counterseasonal vegetables that could reach developed markets in the winter and fetch
                                                                   higher prices. The growth of counterseasonal crops is now largely done in green houses to
                                                                   reduce evapotranspiration.


                                                                   Seventh Innovation: Efficient Irrigation Technologies
                                                                   Maintaining a competitive agricultural sector has always been a national priority for Israel.
                                                                   Given the situation of extreme water scarcity and the constant emphasis on reducing allocation
                                                                   of water to farmers, this has been entirely contingent on putting in place efficient irrigation
                                                                   practices and farmers focusing on high-value crops so that they could afford to invest in mod-
                                                                   ern irrigation techniques. The widespread development of efficient irrigation technologies,
                                                                   together with growing access to treated wastewater, have made it possible for the ­
                                                                                                                                                     agricultural
                                                                   sector to continue to irrigate despite a sharp reduction in the amount of available fresh water.
                                                                     Even though water quantity has not increased over the past four decades, the output of
                                                                   crops per unit of water has grown sevenfold (due to improved irrigation efficiency and inten-
                                                                   sification of farming practices). Thanks to ever-increasing productivity of water use, the
                                                                   value  of agricultural production has continued to rise in spite of the decreasing allocation of
                                                                   water to farmers (figure 4.4). The efficiency of irrigation systems has been a major factor



     FIGURE 4.4.                       Water Use Productivity, 1950–2008


                            500



                            400
                                                                        y = 7.1322x + 11.454                                                                 394.4
% increase over base year




                            300



                            200



                                                            77.9
                            100



                              0
                                                                                 90



                                                                                 94

                                                                                 96

                                                                                 98
                             50

                                  52

                                        54

                                             56

                                                  58

                                                       60

                                                            62

                                                                   64

                                                                        66

                                                                                 68

                                                                                 70

                                                                                 72

                                                                                 74

                                                                                 76

                                                                                 78

                                                                                 80

                                                                                 82

                                                                                 84

                                                                                 86

                                                                                 88



                                                                                 92




                                                                                 00

                                                                                 02

                                                                                 04

                                                                                 06

                                                                                 08
                                                                               19

                                                                              19
                                  19




                                                                              19

                                                                              19
                                       19




                                                                              19
                                                           19
                                            19




                                                                              19




                                                                              19
                                                 19




                                                                             20
                            19




                                                                              19
                                                                   19




                                                                              19




                                                                              19

                                                                              19
                                                                        19

                                                                             19




                                                                              19

                                                                             19




                                                                             20
                                                                             19
                                                      19




                                                                             20
                                                                             19




                                                                             20
                                                                             20




     Source: IWA 2015.



          28                                                       Water Management in Israel
making possible the reduction in average water supply to agricultural land, down from
7,000 m3/ha in 1990 to 5,000 m3/ha in 2000.
  Israeli companies were pioneers in the early 1950s in the development of efficient
low-­
­   volume irrigation technologies such as drip irrigation and mini sprinklers. These
technologies now include moisture-sensitive automated drips, automatic vales and sprin-
klers, low discharge sprayers, mini-sprinklers and compensated drippers that are
computer-­
         controlled. These technologies enabled the proper volume of water with the
right concentration of fertilizers to be supplied to the crops’ roots and were combined
with control systems to ensure optimal application and timing. These systems can work
efficiently with all types of water resources, including treated wastewater, and in different
environmental regions. The systems work under low pressure (1-2 bars), and each dripper
supplies only a few liters per hour. Drip irrigation enables 90 percent efficiency in water
use as defined by the Food and Agriculture Organization (versus 75 percent for sprinklers
and  less than 60 percent for surface irrigation). The successful development of low-­
consumption irrigation technologies has allowed the development of a thriving irrigation
industry in Israel. Approximately 80 percent of the irrigation equipment made in the
country is exported.
  An important element in the adoption by farmers of efficient irrigation technologies has
been the support that the regional irrigation companies and the Agricultural Extension
Service of Israel have provided (under the auspices of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development). Both have considerable planning and operational experience.


Eighth Innovation: Promoting Demand Management and Public
Awareness
Demand management has always been an important component of Israel’s efforts to
achieve water security. In addition to strong enforcement of water rights for farmers and
industrial users, significant financial incentives have also been put in place. The higher
price of water for irrigation than in most other countries played an obvious role in encour-
aging farmers to improve their efficiency of water use. In the urban utility sector, the two-
tier tariff structure for potable water and sanitation services provides incentives for
customers to conserve water, with the first (reduced) consumption block set at 115 liters per
capita per day since 2010.10
  Effort on demand management was expanded in 2008 when the government initiated a
major water conservation campaign, which proved quite successful. It promoted the installa-
tion of water-saving devices (bathrooms, toilets, kitchens), reaching 55 percent of all house-
holds and all public buildings and government offices. In parallel, a media awareness
campaign was implemented over an 18-month period from 2008 to 2010 to educate consum-
ers about water use. The main motto of the campaign was: “the basis for change is public
acceptance,” and it was structured around a combination of education and media activities,
carefully targeted to the various segments of the population. Clear targets and objectives


Water Management in Israel                                                                 29
FIGURE 4.5.      Water Consumption in Israel, 1997–2013                                                             were set for the campaign, and its
                                                                                                                    implementation was accompa-
             Domestic consumption, MCM                                        Consumption per capita                nied by ongoing polls and focus

                800                                                                            115                  groups to monitor the impact,
                                                                                                                    allowing changes and adaptations
Campaign        750                                                                                    Campaign
“the                                                                                           110     “the         to achieve optimal results.
screaming                                                                                              wrinkled
                700
kid”                                                                                           105
                                                                                                       models” +      The 2008 public awareness cam-
                                                                                                       tari raise
                650                                                                                                 paign has left a strong impact on
                                                                                               100
                600
                                                                                                                    the public. It used models with
                                                                                               95                   wrinkling faces as visual to sym-
                550
                                                                                                                    bolize the consequence of lacking
                                                                                               90
                500
                                                                                                                    water, and proved to be a very
                450                                                                            85                   cost  efficient initiative. While it
                                                                                                                    represented a considerable expen-
                                                                                                                    ­
                400                                                                            80
                       97’ 98’ 99’ 00’ 01’ 02’ 03’ 04’ 05’ 06’ 07’ 08’ 09’ 10’ 11’ 12’ 13’                          diture—its total cost was approxi-
                                                                                                                    mately US$7.5 million—this proved
Source: Zaide 2017.
Note: Left axis: cubic meters per capita per year; right axis: liters per capita per day.                           a valuable investment. Consumers
                                                                                                                    reduced their consumption by
                                                76 million cubic meters, and it was estimated that the campaign freed up water for alternative
                                                uses at a cost of only US$0.10 per cubic meter, or a fraction of alternative supplies.
                                                   These steps, together with the near doubling of water tariffs that also took place in
                                                2008–10, proved effective. Thus, Israel reduced urban water consumption per capita by
                                                ­
                                                    percent, to stand now at less than 100 liters per capita for domestic customers. It is
                                                24  ­
                                                ­
                                                estimated that 8 percent of this reduction was due to educational activities and 16 percent
                                                to higher water tariffs and installation of water-saving devices. Figure 4.5 illustrates the
                                                changes in water consumption in Israel from 1997 to 2013.


                                                Ninth Innovation: Creating a Supporting Environment for
                                                Water Innovation
                                                The water sector is not known around the world for being particularly innovative. This
                                                reflects the facts that it is about largely basic infrastructure, and that the public management
                                                model for water services is not particularly conducive to innovation. There are good reasons
                                                for this. This is a highly regulated, monopoly sector. Urban water utilities operate essential
                                                infrastructure and provide a critical service, so utility managers tend to be conservative and
                                                are not risk takers. They prefer to use proven systems and methodologies and not risking
                                                endangering a safe water supply in their city to try some new gadget. The statement “if it’s
                                                not broken, why fix it?” is often heard. The bottom line is that public managers are not
                                                supposed to take risks, and public water utilities do not normally seek profits.
                                                ­
                                                   This makes the challenge of developing water innovations particularly daunting. The
                                                “valley  of death” concept—coined in the general venture capital investment market, and
                                                ­


30                                              Water Management in Israel
FIGURE 4.6.    Triangle of Water Technology Innovation                          represents the long time between when an R&D depart-
                                                                                ment  comes up with a new invention and when it starts
                                                                                being commercialized—is especially wide in the water sec-
                                                                                tor. The length of time needed to pilot water-related tech-
                                                                                nology is long because the technology should be tested over
                                                                                the different times, stresses, and seasons that characterize
                                                                                water networks. Throughout this period, the entrepreneur

                                                 Go
                                                   ve
                                                                                is addressing technology and financial challenges and has a

                                                    Fin ent a titie
                                                     rm
                   ies




                                                       an nd s
               mp y
             co olog




                                                                                long way to go before achieving revenues.
                                                         cia
                 an




                                                            l s com
                                                             en
        Te echn




                                                                                 In this context, it is noteworthy that Israel has made a spe-
                                                               up me
                                                                 po
           T
          ch




                                                                                cial effort to promote innovations in the water sector, with
                                                                    rt ricia
                                                                                the  establishment of a unique industry–utility–university
                                                                            l

                                                                                ­ecosystem to support the development of innovative water
                                                                                technologies (figure 4.6).
                                                                                 This can be conceptualized through the “triangle of inno-
                                                                                vation,” which brings together private entrepreneurs, water
                         Implementation sites
                                                                                utilities, and the government, each with a different contri-
                               Utilities
                                                                                bution to ensure that water innovation can be developed
Source: Yeres 2016.                                                             and be brought to market:


                                    •• Private entrepreneurs bring new ideas and technologies: Israeli entrepreneurs have
                                       fostered many technical water innovations (e.g., drip irrigation). In recent years, with the
                                       ­
                                                                                                                   ­ oncepts
                                       advent of information and communications technologies, many high-technology c
                                       have penetrated the water sector, such as algorithm-based leak detection and cloud-based
                                       fixed leak detection. These technologies germinate in academia, private companies, or
                                       individual entrepreneurs.

                                    •• Water utilities provide trial and implementation sites: as described above, making it
                                       ­
                                       possible for water entrepreneurs to work with utilities is challenging and critical. One aspect
                                       of the Israeli water sector is that leading utilities such as Mekorot and Hagihon have estab-
                                       lished technology collaboration frameworks with the private sector, which allows entrepre-
                                       neurs to test their innovations in “real size,” gaining feedback to improve systems and
                                       optimize them before they go to market. This also allows them to gain references and
                                       enables potential customers (and investors) to see actual technology performance. The
                                       benefit for the utilities is that they can be at the forefront of performance improvement.

                                    •• Government brings financial support: because water utilities are regulated monopolies,
                                       they cannot be expected to engage in risky venture investments, even if they are willing
                                       to try innovative technologies. It is here that the financial support side comes into play.
                                       Realizing the importance of innovation development, the Government of Israel has for
                                       years supported innovation at the academic, start-up, and commercial levels. Several
                                       governmental agencies manage programs to support water innovation, including the
                                       ­


                                    Water Management in Israel                                                                             31
        Office of Chief Scientist under the Ministry of Economy (NIS 254 million 2007-15), the
        IWA (NIS 94 million since 2008), and the Chief Scientist of the Ministry of Energy and
        Water (NIS 20 million per year covering the R&D and pilot stages). Partnerships are also in
        place with EU and US research programs.

       The result of this proactive policy to support innovations in the water sector has brought
     benefits that are twofold. First, water innovations have played a major role in allowing Israel
     to achieve water scarcity. Second, they generate a sizeable source of national income through
     exportations of equipment, licenses, and services.


     Notes
     	1.	 Other noteworthy countries are Singapore (with full reuse but on a much smaller scale), and Cyprus where about
             percent of treated wastewater is reused in agriculture.
          70 ­

     	 2.	 In addition to the five large seawater desalination plants, there are many brackish water desalination plants, for a total
          capacity of 78 million cubic meters per year. Mekorot or municipal utilities operate them, and apart from the one in Eilat
          (20 million cubic meters per year), they are small and spread throughout the country.

     	 3.	 Under a BOT contract, the public sector gives a private entity a concession to finance, construct, and operate the new
          plant and pays through a fee that covers O&M and the cost of the investment. At the end of the concession period, the
          project passes to the concession giver. A BOO project is similar to a BOT, with one major difference—ownership of the
          project remains with the private entity (which also means that the cost of land has to be factored into the price). Unless
          otherwise specified, the report uses the terminology BOT generically to cover both BOT and BOO.

     	 4.	 Because adopting a PPP approach required agreement of the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Infrastructure, it is
          thought that the fact that it took place when the same person happened to be temporarily filling both positions facilitated
          this sensitive decision.

     	 5.	 In the case of the Sorek plant, this allowed energy efficiency of 3.6 kWh per m3 was achieved through the use of innovative
          16” instead of 8” reverse osmosis membranes, among other things. Membranes were installed vertically to reduce surface
          requirements and the cost of acquiring land.

     	 6.	 The formula has an extra score for a lower fixed payment, up to a threshold. In the case of the Sorek BOT, the proportion
          between fixed and variable payment is about 50-50.

     	 7.	 The average domestic electricity price from the grid stood at €0.11 per kilowatt-hour in May 2017. In practice the unit cost
          of kilowatt-hour paid by the private concessionaire is lower, either because they take advantage of high-voltage–off-peak
          tariffs, or are supplied through IPPs.

     	 8.	 This was the case for Ashkelon, Sorek, and Ashdod. So far, Gas-fueled plants under IPP are in operation under an IPP only
          in Ashkelon (80 megawatts), and one is under construction for Sorek.

     	 9.	 This type of afforestation is called savanization and differs from the larger programs in which the Aleppo pine was the tree
          of choice. The latter program has sometimes been criticized, in part because of the risks that such a monoculture entails
          and susceptibility to pests of the Aleppo pine.

     10.	 Before the 2010 tariff reform, there was a three-block water tariff (first 8 cubic meters, next 7 cubic meters and then every
          additional cubic meters) and a separate sewerage tariff.




32   Water Management in Israel
Chapter 5   Key Lessons Learned from the Israeli
            Water Sector

            After many years of reforms and massive investment, Israel has now achieved water supply
            security despite being one of the most water-stressed countries in the world. Thanks to the
            massive development of non-conventional water sources—namely irrigation and treated
            wastewater—the water production capacity of Israel now exceeds demand. Even irrigation
            water is not constrained any more by volume but only by the capacity of farmers to pay its
            price. Considering that a growing number of countries around the world are facing challenging
            conditions of increased water scarcity, the “Israel water story” holds many potentially valuable
            lessons. From the innovations outlined in this report, nine key lessons can be identified and
            are outlined below:


            First Lesson Learned: probably the first lesson is that public awareness of the value of water,
            together with demand management and moving toward pricing water at its true cost, are
            ­crucial for efficient water management under scarcity. Most Israelis understand the value of
            water and the need to use it wisely—a behavior that was reinforced by aggressive communi-
            cation campaigns. This has not only allowed Israel to implement demand management
            policies, but also has made tough reforms in water management politically more accept-
            ­
            able. If water is a scarce and valuable resource it needs to be priced accordingly (while also
            remaining affordable for all) to discourage wasteful usage of a scarce and precious resource.
            Increasing water prices sharply in 2009 in conjunction with a major awareness campaign
            proved crucial for reducing domestic per capita consumption.


            Second Lesson Learned: strong control and enforcement of water allocation has proved
            ­crucial in a context of extreme water scarcity, with proactive management of aquifers viewed
            as a valuable water resources management tools. Pricing incentives are not enough. This
            was initiated by the Water Law of 1959 that brought water under public property and state
            control and gave state organizations the full authority to regulate and allocate consumption
            for alternative uses. Control of consumption has been successful because of strong enforce-
            ment with sanctions, and this has received wide political support because a sustainable
            water balance in quantity and quality has been equated with national security. Such control
            on abstractions proved essential as the country embarked on the development of alternative
            nonconventional water resources (desalination and wastewater reuse): the switch from
            groundwater supply to nonconventional waters would not have been effective without a
            heavy-handed control of abstraction permits in parallel.


            Third Lesson Learned: comprehensive, probabilistic, and timely data are crucial for efficient
            integrated management of water under scarcity conditions. To this end, the Hydrological
            Services Unit within the Israel Water Authority (IWA) has accumulated considerable



            Water Management in Israel                                                                   33
     experience in collecting, analyzing, and modeling water data and is informed on the effects
     of global warming on Israel’s natural water resources. The IWA is able to allocate and man-
     age its natural, recycled, and manufactured water to remain within the maximum and min-
     imum upper and lower red levels. Continual vigilance and control of natural resources are
     required to provide sufficient volumes of operational water to compensate for seasonal and
     annual fluctuations in effective rainwater and variation in the demand for water. On the
     operating side, the fact that one bulk water entity, Mekorot, is dominant has facilitated col-
     lection, analysis, and interpretation of water sector data—especially for the complex inte-
            ­ anagement of aquifers.
     grated m


     Fourth Lesson Learned: a national conveyance water system can help optimize water
     ­
     management under conditions of extreme scarcity, Israel’s relatively small size made it
     possible to create a nationwide water conveyance infrastructure that effectively connects
     95 percent of the natural, marginal brackish, recycled effluent, and desalinated water
     resources. This integrated water infrastructure proved essential to bringing efficiency,
     ­
     promoting alternative water resources, and being able to mitigate hydrological varia-
     tions. It does not provide for more water, but allows Israel to better match demand and
     supply in order to avoid local shortages. While such large and costly pipeline infrastruc-
     ture may not be justified for all countries, in the case of Israel it was designed as part of a
     well-thought out plan for integrated water resources management, and developed so as
     to ensure its long-term financial sustainability.


     Fifth Lesson Learned: investing massively in new water infrastructure is not enough; this
     needs to be done in a financially sustainable manner through appropriate institutional
     reforms. This includes putting in place a clear separation of roles between policy setting,
     regulation and planning, and operation of infrastructure. In the specific case of Israel, the
     vesting of all planning and regulatory powers of the water sector (water supply and waste-
     water, irrigation, water resources management) under a single autonomous agency (IWA)
     proved a beneficial decision. With the IWA’s establishment in 2007, the water sector started
     operating within the constraints of a budget that reflected the real costs of the whole sys-
     tem, separating planning and management of the sector from the political process. The
     IWA’s sound regulation, pushing for efficiency at the service provider level (water utilities,
     Mekorot, or build-operate-transfer [BOT] concessionaires), ultimately made it possible for
     the whole system to become financially viable and sustainable, and allowed for the gradual
     decoupling of the water sector from the national budget.


     Sixth Lesson Learned: although the level of government guarantee for desalination BOT may
     not be replicable, it allowed Israel to achieve remarkably low prices of desalinated water.
     The success of the BOT schemes for Israel’s four major seawater reverse osmosis (SWRO) desali-
                        private operators has been contingent on the careful design of the public
     nation plants with ­
     private partnership (PPP) contracts, with several features introduced to reduce the risks for


34   Water Management in Israel
private investors while allowing for the introduction of technological improvements to
reduce the prices of desalinated water. This allowed prices to be obtained for desalinated
water that are among the lowest in the world (in the case of the Sorek BOT project), in turn
making large-scale access to desalination financially viable under a financial framework
based on full cost recovery through tariffs. The resource constraint has been removed since
               seawater for desalination is limitless and the development of natural gas
the supply of  ­
              economic zone of Israel in the eastern Mediterranean provides a long-term eco-
fields in the ­
        supply of energy. The more recent case of the desalination plant in Ashdod, nomi-
nomical ­
nally a BOT but where state company Mekorot was both off-taker and concessionaire and
which experienced multiple delays, cost overruns and difficulties, provides a strong count-
er-example of the benefits of the PPP approach.


Seventh Lesson Learned: while sustainable water management under scarcity conditions
makes reuse of wastewater a must, this is also costly and cannot be realistically implemented
without significant public subsidies. This has proven true even in the case of Israel, where
farmers have achieved high levels of efficiency, focusing on high-value crops, and are able to
pay significant prices for reclaimed water. Massive investments are needed not just to
achieve tertiary level of wastewater treatment, but also to convey and store reclaimed water.
Wastewater reuse is the only part in the Israeli water cycle in which full cost recovery through
tariffs has not been achieved, and the sector still requires substantial investment subsidies.


Eight Lesson Learned: corporatization and aggregation of water and sanitation services is
a  long process that requires sound regulation and rather heavy-handed supervision to be
­successful. While the reform of municipal water and sanitation services started in 2001, the
regionalization of utilities has been a gradual process that is still not completed 15 years
later. And the performance of the newly ring-fenced utilities started to improve only after
2009, when the IWA started to regulate them, putting in place a mix of financial incentives
through tariffs with enforcement of sanctions for the worst performers.


Ninth Lesson Learned: even in a country with strong capacity and where huge efforts have
been put on water reforms, this has been a long and challenging process, and there are still
areas for improvements. Also, mistakes can be made. This is unavoidable and does not
diminish the value of the innovations previously outlined, yet it is important to highlight
that not all of the Israeli water experiences can be qualified as best practice. One major weak-
ness is the adoption of a single national water tariff—first for potable water supply and since
2017 also for irrigated water—which reduces economic incentives for users since it does not
allow the price of water to reflect true local costs of water. The regionalization of municipal
utilities has proved a rather slow process. The wide-scale recourse to seawater desalination
generates a significant carbon footprint. The last desalination project in Ashdod, in which
Mekorot ended up being both off-taker and contractor in a departure from the henceforth
successful PPP approach, and which suffered multiple set-backs, is questionable.


Water Management in Israel                                                                   35
References
Israel, Government of. Israel Water Authority. 2015. Wastewater Treatment Facilities Report. Jerusalem.

Israel, Government of. 2012. “Wastewater collection and treatment and utilization Treated wastewater for irrigation - A National
Survey.” Jerusalem.

Ma’alot Standard & Poor. 2015. Mekorot Credit Rating. Tel Aviv.

Mekorot. 2016. “Shafdan MBTP (Mechanical-Biological Treatment Plant).” Presentation. Tel Aviv.

Tropp, H., and A. Jägerskog. 2006. “Water Scarcity Challenges in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA).” Human
Development Report 2006—Water for Human Development series. Stockholm International Water Institute, Stockholm.

Variance-Ascola Economic Consulting. 2017. Internal research. Tel Aviv.

Yeres, J. 2016. “Israeli Water Related Innovation.” Lecture. Jerusalem.

Zaide, M. 2017. “The Israeli Water Sector: Challenges and Solutions.” Lecture. IWA, Tel Aviv.




Water Management in Israel                                                                                                   37
SKU W17010
