         EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




Jobs For North Lebanon
                 September 2017
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




Overview of Report Objectives and Methodology

This report provides an assessment of constraints and opportunities for the creation
of more and better quality jobs for Lebanese in the more fragile and conflict-affected
regions. The geographical focus is North Lebanon, including Tripoli. This analysis,
accompanied by further dialogue with the key public and private sector professionals,
can serve to inform the design and development of a jobs-focused program of financial
support for North Lebanon. This diagnostic and program development approach can
also be replicated in other high-priority, lagging regions of the country.
	 The diagnostic followed a three-pronged approach in order to assess the gaps that
need to be overcome to respond effectively to job opportunities, foster productivity, and
increase earnings: 1) an assessment of the investment climate in North Lebanon; 2) a
value chain analysis (VCA) of selected sectors and the interventions required to unlock
competitiveness and job creation; and 3) a review of the supply of labor and skills in the
region, a stock-taking of training providers. Enterprise surveys were conducted of the
key agents in two targeted value chains, as well as a household-level skills survey of the
working age population in North Lebanon. Complementary semi-structured interviews
and focus group meetings were also undertaken. Consultations with the Government
and other stakeholders took place from May through August, 2016.


Social and Economic Characteristics of the North

The North of Lebanon faces significant structural, socio-economic challenges. The
economy of North Lebanon is largely split between agriculture, dominant in Akkar
and Minieh-Danniyeh, and the urban industrial and services economy centered in
Tripoli. Productivity in these different sectors is relatively low. Decades of political,
community, and social insecurity have impeded investment, curtailed growth, job
creation, and fostered out-migration of talent. According to the latest poverty data,
36 percent of the population in the North are poor, significantly above the national
average of 27 percent. This is second to the Bekaa, which has a lower absolute number


Jobs For North Lebanon                                                                       3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




         of poor. Areas of Tripoli and its immediate northern hinterland including also areas
         of Akkar are assessed as some of the most vulnerable localities in the country. The
         evidence suggests that this region has high levels of inequality.
         	 Employment challenges for the Lebanese in this region have been exacerbated,
         particularly for the poorest segments, by the country’s fragility and history of conflict,
         and more recently by the influx of more than 1.5 million Syrian refugees. This is
         strongly impacting Tripoli and the North, where the ratio of refugees to population
         is almost 32 percent and which houses 29 percent of total refugees (or 445,000
         individuals). This represents an increasingly unsustainable stress on social services
         and the job market.


         Key Findings

         A.The Jobs Challenge in North Lebanon
         The working age population in the North is estimated at 610,000 individuals, of which
         53 percent are inactive, leaving a total labor force of 289,000. Within the participating
         labor force, 20 percent are employers and 22 percent are self-employed – both largely
         informal. Just 49 percent of the labor force are wage employed and, of those, only 15
         percent are formal wage workers. The remaining nine percent are unemployed.
         	 Among those who are working in North Lebanon, the vast majority are in poor
         quality, low productivity jobs working in enterprises of less than ten employees. The
         majority of workers are employed in the wholesale and retail trade sector, characterized
         by low productivity.
         	 The total labor force in the North is expected to increase from 289,000 to 362,000
         people by 2025, due to existing trends in the growth rate of the Lebanese working age
         population and current labor market participation rates. This implies that the regional
         economy would need to create an average of 8,000 jobs each year simply to maintain
         a steady state situation in the labor market.
         	 Addressing the employment gap in North Lebanon to bring performance in line
         with the national average requires substantial job creation. Closing the employment
         rate gap to the national average would require almost 14,000 new jobs in the region– or
         around 2,800 annually if a five-year target was set to reach this goal. An employment
         rate above 60 percent, typical of upper middle income countries, would require more
         than 120,000 jobs or 24,000 per year over a five-year period. To improve the quality
         of jobs and bring the region in line with the national average of 62 percent of the
         employed in waged jobs, an additional 21,000 waged jobs (or more than 4,000 per
         year over five years) would need to be created to replace existing self-employment.
         	 The number of unemployed is relatively small (around 22,000 or nine percent of
         the active workforce) and they are younger and better educated than the population
         as a whole. This highlights a demand side problem – i.e. not enough good jobs are
         being created. But it also suggests that this group may be well-positioned to shift into
         employment with appropriate support.

4        Jobs For North Lebanon
                                                                             EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




B.	 The Labor Market in North Lebanon
The low labor force participation rates and low education levels limit both the
quantity and quality of the workforce in North Lebanon. The participation rate in
North Lebanon is amongst the lowest in the country, while the actual labor force
is amongst the biggest given that the majority of its population is of working-age.
This high inactivity is driven by the very low participation rates amongst women
and youth in the labor market. Amongst those who are active, the majority has low
levels of education, especially amongst the adults. Forty five percent of the active
population has elementary education or below, while 31 percent have completed
tertiary education. Youth and adults less than 34 years of age achieve higher levels
of education with 31 percent (youth) and 42 percent (adults), respectively, having a
bachelor degree or higher.

There are important variations in labor market outcomes between different population
groups, especially among women:

  •	 Only one in five working age women participate in the labor market, compared
     to 73 percent among working age men.
  •	 The majority of active women are wage employees, while self-employment is
     more prevalent among men. For women, 80 percent are wage employees and
     only 20 percent are self-employed or employers, while the latter is 40 percent
     among men.
  •	 Twenty-three percent of youth below age 25 are not in Education, Employment
     or Training (NEETs), and 13 percent are unemployed.

C.	 The Investment Climate for Job Creation in North Lebanon
Lebanon fares poorly in eight out of ten different dimensions of the doing business
life-cycle measured in the Doing Business Indicators. Even in the two areas where
Lebanon has made some progress — starting a business and getting credit ¬— it
remains far from the frontier of the best performers. Moreover, Lebanon has not made
progress in any other Doing Business Indicator since 2006. Many investment climate
constraints are more acute in the North:

  •	 Informal competition and corruption represent major obstacles to investment
     in both formal and informal firms. In the North, 84 percent of firms indicate
     they compete against informal firms versus just 57 percent of firms nationally.
     In terms of corruption, 62 percent of firms in the region report they expect to
     pay bribes to public officials compared with 21 percent of the firms for the rest
     of Lebanon.
  •	 The infrastructure constraint is greater in terms of electricity access and quality.
     Electricity connections in the North take almost twice as long as for the rest
     of Lebanon (which is already cumbersome). Additionally, firms in the North



                                                                    Jobs For North Lebanon   5
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




              also tend to have a higher number of electrical outages and a greater reliance
              on generators.
           •	 Access to finance does not appear to be a leading constraint in Lebanon,
              however this finding conceals some critical gaps. In Lebanon, as in many other
              countries in MENA, smaller and more informal enterprises have significantly
              less access to finance than large firms, disproportionately impacting a region
              dominated by such firms.

         Myriad constraints restrict firms in the North from taking sufficient advantage of
         exports as a source of growth and job creation. Close to 60 percent of all jobs in
         Lebanon are accounted for by large exporters. Yet just six percent of firms in the
         North export even one percent of their sales directly, around half the national average.
         Despite a strategic position and a production structure that aligns well with Lebanon’s
         trade comparative advantage, firms face constraints in logistics, trade facilitation, and
         quality standards, along with disruption to traditional trade routes. This contributes to
         anemic levels of foreign direct investment in the region.

         D.	 Value Chains as Sources of Inclusive Job Creation
         Two value chains were selected in consultation with the Government of Lebanon to
         assess their potential to drive inclusive job creation in the North: potatoes and solid
         waste/re-cycling. The potato sector is one of the largest agricultural activities in the
         North. It has a strong reach into the rural areas of the region (particularly Akkar),
         while also connecting to urban areas through trade and processing. Whereas, the solid
         waste and recycling sector offers the opportunity to leverage substantial investments
         being made through the Office of the Minister of State for Administrative Reform
         (OMSAR) (funded through the European Union) in solid waste and sorting facilities
         across the North.

         Potatoes
         Around 9,000 jobs exist across the potato value chain, including 1,800 permanent and
         around 7,200 seasonal jobs. Converting seasonal workers into full-time equivalent
         (FTE) positions (40 hours a week, year-round) results in close to 3,000 FTEs in the
         value chain. The majority of these jobs are in farming, accounting for two-thirds of
         permanent jobs and 85 percent of seasonal jobs. Traders also account for a sizable
         number – more than 500 FTEs and almost 400 permanent jobs.
         	 Lebanese occupy almost all high-skill jobs across the potato value chain, as well as
         the large majority of low-skill permanent positions in processing and trading activities.
         There is over 40 percent Lebanese female employment in permanent positions in input
         suppliers and processors. Most of the jobs for Lebanese youth are in trading (more
         than 80 percent of low-skill, permanent jobs). Foreign workers dominate seasonal
         employment and low-skill employment in potato farms.
         	 The assessment of the jobs creation potential for Lebanese at the higher skill end



6        Jobs For North Lebanon
                                                                           EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




of the employment spectrum resulting from growth in the potato value chain was
based on two scenarios:

  •	 An expansion of exports: Where Akkar farmers take half of the EU quota of
     50,000 Metric Tons (versus none at present) over and above existing domestic
     and other export markets. This can create an estimated 350 additional permanent
     jobs and another 1,550 seasonal jobs. Around 70 percent of jobs would be in
     farms. The remaining jobs would be in trading and inputs.
  •	 New large-scale investments in potato processing: At the high end of the
     scenario, close to 2,200 new permanent jobs can be created. This includes 1,200
     in processing, trading, and input supply that tend to employ largely Lebanese
     workers, including significant skilled positions.

In practice, the number and nature of jobs created in any growth scenario for this
value chain will depend to a large degree on the type of investment driving growth
(e.g. expansion versus greenfield investment), as well as the decisions by firms on
capital and labor mix.

Solid Waste and Recycling
A fully operational solid waste management and recycling supply chain infrastructure
has an estimated employment capacity of close to 4,600 versus approximately 1,300
workers currently employed in this value chain. Female participation is low, only 6.7
percent of the labor force across the entire value chain. Foreign workers account for
about 30 percent, mainly in low-skilled jobs.
	 Based on an annual growth rate of 1.6 percent, the estimated number of jobs along
the entire value chain can be projected to reach 5,000 by 2020 and 5,400 by 2025.
This calculation is based on the assumption that waste management facilities in North
Lebanon are fully operational, accounting for the collection of at least 99 percent of
municipal waste, and all sorting lines are operational with a functioning supply chain
infrastructure for recyclable products.
	 The highest number of jobs is expected to be concentrated around traders of
recyclable material (more than 1,900 jobs by 2025), followed by steel processing
(more than 750 by 2025). A further breakdown of jobs according to type indicates
that nearly one quarter of new jobs (approximately 475) would be permanent high-
skilled jobs, while 70 percent would be permanent low-skilled jobs. The highest
concentration of permanent high-skilled jobs (around 30 percent) is expected to be in
the trading sector, followed by the paper sector (25 percent).
	 Analysis of these two value chains indicates both have significant potential to
create better quality jobs for Lebanon, with further induced job creation effects
through the impact of wage expenditures in the local economy. These value chains
represent a relatively small share of the overall economy in North Lebanon. So, it is
not a ‘silver bullet’ to solving the jobs challenge. Moreover, substantial investment



                                                                  Jobs For North Lebanon   7
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




         and other interventions across the value chain would be required to have a pronounced
         impact on job creation and quality.


         Conclusions and Recommendations

         As elucidated in this report, job creation challenges in North Lebanon are substantial.
         The North is a very informal, high poverty-level, regional economy facing significant
         and prolonged external shocks compounding an existing situation of persistent internal
         insecurity. It is a region that has a strong sense of neglect from the central government
         that has been unable to progress with the key reforms required to provide a broad-
         based competitive improvement to its economy. Nor has it been able to provide
         sufficient targeted support to this lagging region. This sense of marginalization was
         confirmed during the unexpected reversals that the leading political parties suffered in
         the recent 2016 Tripoli municipal elections.
         	 In a labor market providing just one salaried job for every five working age
         adults, the crux of the problem lies on the demand side – a private sector that fails
         to generate productive jobs. Tens of thousands of relatively educated, working age
         adults are unemployed or outside of the labor force completely. More still are stuck
         in low quality jobs. The available evidence suggests a market dominated by small and
         micro businesses - too many in the informal sector with limited job creation capacity.
         Together with the limited growth potential currently prevalent among SMEs, future
         employment creation in the absence of new investment is highly constrained. Some
         inroads can be made through better job search and matching facilities, particularly
         for those better skilled unemployed workers. But substantial improvement will prove
         elusive without more being done to mobilize demand side investment.
         	 This report highlights where opportunities exist. But it also recognizes there is
         significant distance still to be travelled to bring the supply and demand sides of the
         market into more effective partnerships. This effort needs to be undertaken with a
         keen sense of what is possible and where the regional economy can advance over the
         short, medium and long term. It also requires innovative enticement of private sector
         risk-taking and investment in fragile settings that are traditionally seen as antithetical
         to private investment.
         	 There will be no one “transformative approach” to the jobs challenge in the North.
         A series of actions – calibrated to what is politically possible and a bit beyond – will
         need to be taken and implementation sustained over an extended period. Many of the
         significant constraints to business entry, growth, and job creation are long-standing
         problems in Lebanon. The solutions are well known but have not, for whatever
         reason, been implemented. While efforts should continue to promote such reforms,
         solutions to the regional jobs challenge should not depend in any way on these macro,
         national-level reforms coming to fruition.
         	 Different strategies will be required over time. Over the shorter term this entails



8        Jobs For North Lebanon
                                                                             EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




a focus on SMEs, taking as given the current policy and infrastructure environment.
Over the longer term, an increased focus on higher potential value chains – through
selective (i.e. “not-so-politically sensitive”) sector-specific reforms and supporting
investments – can mobilize marked new private investment. In both cases, there are
specific labor market and skills issues to be addressed and outcomes to be achieved.


Next Steps - Ways Forward for Job Creation in Lagging and
Vulnerable Regions in Lebanon

1.	 Short-Term Agenda: Supporting SMEs and Self-Employment
Starting with a shorter 3-5 year period, no significant policy change can be expected
to take full effect. This represents the time period before potentially growth-inducing
new infrastructure investments – including the Tripoli Special Economic Zone and
port and railway developments - come into effect. The challenges will be to support
SMEs to improve market performance and develop new market niches. This focus
should also include the informal sector where the majority of North Lebanon’s work
force is concentrated. Micro-level, informal, locally oriented businesses dominate the
employment landscape but lack the means to absorb even the relatively small active
labor force. Some of the potential solutions to address short-term job creation and
inclusion needs are:

  •	 Delivering new forms of finance that can improve access to key inputs needed
     to start and expand MSMEs in ways that foster job creation and help mitigate
     lending risks;
  •	 Supporting MSME and BDS/entrepreneurship;
  •	 Developing targeted programs to support female and youth business start-ups.

Respondents in the labor market survey indicated access to finance and wage
subsidies are some of the most critical elements in strengthening the performance of
this sector and, ideally, in providing the inducement for firms to formalize. Getting the
incentives right in developing such products and mitigating against market distortions
- but recognizing that jobs created in highly fragile, policy constrained regions bring
with them significant additional social externalities - requires distinct innovative
approaches to address the heightened investment risks.

2.	 Long-Term Agenda: Sustainable Jobs Through Value Chain Investments
Efforts to bring about national level policy reforms in politically fragmented fragile
settings often fall short, as the weight of politically vested interests takes its toll.
This perspective - held even by senior Lebanese policy makers and almost all private
sector stakeholders engaged in the preparation of this report - led to the focus on value
chains. It builds first on the notion that targeting sub-sectors from production to end-
market offers a more tractable reform context and more targetable and measurable

                                                                    Jobs For North Lebanon   9
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




         investment opportunities. It also allows for a better calculation of winners and losers.
         In other words, it is less threatening to the political and institutional rigidities that
         block wider change efforts.
         	 The value chains analysis also indicated that while not a panacea, substantial job
         potential for Lebanese exists in selected value chains, provided that downstream value-
         adding activities can be instigated. To be successful, this requires clear determination
         of market opportunities, associated with new investments in facilities, labor force
         skills development, and some core infrastructure improvements. Far greater attention
         is also required to establish effective partnerships and networking within value chains
         and clusters operating in the region.
         	 Interventions to support the development of competitive value chains need to be
         complemented with efforts to bring labor force supply closer to private sector needs.
         This means raising skills levels and making them more relevant to the evolving
         demands of the private sector. It also requires improving matching between workers
         and jobs through more effective registration and profiling of the labor force and
         improved information flows between public employment and training institutions and
         the private sector.
         	 The value chain development approach proposed as part of a multi-phased job
         development program recognizes the specific enabling conditions on the ground in the
         North. To achieve larger-scale job creation, private sector investors willing to invest in
         the North as a base to serve wider markets are needed. This means building on sources
         of comparative advantage in the North. These include its strategic geographical
         position where the port of Tripoli provides connectivity to the wider region, as well
         as specific value chains (mainly agricultural). Serving wider markets is not simply
         about exporting, but also serving markets nationally and within the region. This, too,
         requires increasing connectivity (including to Beirut) and re-establishing Tripoli’s
         central role in the regional and national economy.

         3.	Ongoing Imperative: Strengthening the Competitive Position of North
         Lebanon
         It will be critical to build on the new infrastructure investments already underway
         and then look to the region’s other key economic assets. This includes the further
         development of a relatively deep-birth seaport that can strengthen the region’s longer-
         term competitive edge in terms of the GCC export market and the previously mentioned
         future reconstruction of Syria. Solutions to reinforce the strategic positioning of
         Tripoli and the North include:

           •	 Continued investments (including customs) to develop the Port of Tripoli as a leading
              container terminal for regional shipping and, to the extent feasible, expanding
              private investment in various aspects of port development and operations;
           •	 Investments in transport infrastructure to improve connectivity between Tripoli
              and other regions of Lebanon, as well as between Tripoli and key districts in
              the North;

10       Jobs For North Lebanon
                                                                           EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




  •	 Investments in industrial infrastructure, such as special economic zones and
     industrial parks, to support a competitive manufacturing sector;
  •	 Investments in urban infrastructure and municipal capacity to promote improved
     “livability” for residents of Tripoli;
  •	 Investments to position Tripoli to support post-conflict reconstruction in Syria.

At some point, value chain development and associated targeted infrastructure
development will experience diminishing returns, both in terms of private investment
and jobs. Further attracting investment to establish and expand outward-oriented
businesses in Tripoli and the North will, eventually, require addressing significant,
long-standing investment climate constraints. This includes issues of governance and,
most notably, electricity. Operating competitively without a robust and supportive
investment climate is almost impossible, particularly for firms attempting to compete
in export markets.




                                                                  Jobs For North Lebanon   11
