                                                                                             June 2017

   Agriculture Finance Note #1 - Lessons Learned from World Bank Projects Using Matching Grants

Panos Varangis, Rachel Sberro-Kessler, and Mazen Bouri (Finance and Markets Global Practice)


This note aims at analyzing lessons learned from Matching Grants projects for farmers and agricultural
SMEs and providing guidance to TTLs on successful design. It is part of a series of agriculture finance
policy notes. This note has benefited from peer review comments by Mike Goldberg, Diane Hristova, and
Simon Bell.




                                                                                                      1
Background
For over two decades, many World Bank projects have used matching grants as a means to promote
private sector development. A World Bank (2016) study finds that the design and implementation of
matching grants vary, and it identifies several different modalities used in recent projects. Based on a
review of 106 projects, the study finds that no single core design feature has a systematic impact on
project outcome and success. In the absence of a clear blueprint, then, matching grant projects need to
be tailored to local conditions and need to target specific market failures in order to be successful. Of
the 106 projects considered in the study, 75 percent were rated successful; but the study finds that this
measure of success varies dramatically between projects.

The World Bank (2016) study looked at projects with matching grants across sectors, mostly focusing on
projects that sought to promote development of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and that used
the matching grant mainly to provide advisory services to targeted SMEs. In an effort to better
understand the role of matching grants in agricultural projects, we used the data from the same study
and further analyzed projects that focused on agriculture. This sample includes 21 projects, 15 of which
have closed. The detailed analysis is based on information obtained from Project Appraisal Documents
(PADs), Implementation Completion Reports (ICRs), Implementation Status Reports (ISRs), and
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) reports.

Matching Grants in Agricultural Projects
In examining our sample of 21 projects, we made a number of observations about the use of matching
grants in projects related to agriculture

   Regional distribution. Over the period 1996–2015, most agriculture matching grant projects have
    focused on Africa, although Latin America and the Caribbean is the region with the largest volume of
    matching grant components overall.
   Ratings. Matching grants projects for agriculture generally have higher ratings than non-agriculture
    projects. Among rated matching grants projects for agriculture, 73 percent have ratings of
    “satisfactory? or above for the matching grant component, compared to 47 percent for non-
    agriculture projects.
   Size. Matching grants projects for agriculture are generally larger than nonagricultural projects. The
    average fund amount is US$46 million for closed agriculture projects compared to US$8 million for
    closed non-agriculture projects.
   Economic justification. Most projects lack a strong economic justification for the use of matching
    grants. Many projects identify the lack of rural finance as a sufficient rationale for matching grants,
    without fully identifying the relevant market failure or seeming to consider whether other
    instruments might be more appropriate to unlock rural and agriculture finance.
   Objectives. Most projects do not set appropriate outcome and impact objectives. The 14 closed
    agriculture projects used a total of 31 monitoring and evaluation (M&E) indicators, 60 percent of
    which were output indicators such as “number of funded projects? or “number of beneficiaries.?
    Only a few projects included the mobilization of private sector financing in outcome indicators.
   Outcome. Matching grants generally have positive impact on productivity and agricultural income.
    However, these impacts are not always well monitored.



                                                                                                         2
     Matching grants and groups. While non-agriculture projects sometimes restrict eligibility to single
      firms,1 all of the agriculture projects in the sample allow groups of farmers or SMEs to apply for a
      common project or to benefit jointly from Business Development Services (BDS).
     Matching grants and level of match. A majority of agriculture projects in the sample (60 percent)
      offered a level of matching of 50 percent or above. In addition, a majority (60 percent) offered
      different levels of matching depending of the type of beneficiary or activity, an approach that seems
      to be linked to positive outcomes. Most rated projects that had various levels of matching (86
      percent) had ratings of satisfactory or above, compared to 50 percent for projects that had a single
      level of matching.
     Eligible expenses:
            There are generally two types of eligible expenses under agriculture matching grant projects:
               (1) agricultural infrastructure investments (such as irrigation equipment in Mali), and (2)
               technical assistance (TA; such as efforts in Panama to form productive alliances).
            Equipment. All agriculture projects allowed the purchase of equipment through matching
               grants, compared to under a third (31 percent) of non-agriculture projects. Agriculture
               projects include equipment as an eligible expense because investments in equipment (e.g.,
               irrigation infrastructure, storage facilities, processing, farm machinery etc.)) are both highly
               necessary for farmers and agricultural SMEs and very hard to finance with purely commercial
               funding, since lenders are often reluctant to lend to agriculture, particularly for long-term
               horizons. Although there is still some debate around financing equipment through matching
               grants2 such investments generally carry positive externalities as they are often allowed for
               village groups and cooperatives, with spillover effects on the overall rural economy and also
               often have environmental and social benefits (positive externalities).
            Other expenses. In some cases, the project design allowed incremental working capital to be
               subsidized, but land acquisition, operating expenses, and civil works were usually not
               allowed. Incremental working capital financing is especially desirable when it is for a pilot
               production run or as a demonstration for asset use. Beyond that, it is preferable that bank
               commercial financing is sought which would be of lower amount and shorter time horizon
               than equipment hence more easily accessible (particularly if the equipment can be used as
               collateral).
     Technical assistance. A majority of projects (73 percent) offered a form of diagnostic or technical
      assistance that could be carried out before and/or after the matching grant application. Such
      support included a mandatory initial diagnostic to verify eligibility, TA to prepare sound business
      plans (provided free of charge or for a fee), a complementary project component to create a pipeline
      of applicants, and continuous provision of TA to support beneficiaries from application to
      implementation. The World Bank (2016) review of 106 projects identifies this feature as the design
      modality most often correlated to positive outcomes. The sample of agriculture projects also shows
      that of rated agriculture matching grant projects that include diagnostics and/or TA, 70 percent are
      rated satisfactory or above.
     Matching grants and own contributions. While in most cases matching grant beneficiaries are
      expected to bring their own contribution in cash, some projects also allowed in-kind own


1
    This restriction is included in 28 percent of 106 projects reviewed in World Bank (2016).
2
    See for instance Phillips (2001)

                                                                                                             3
    contributions. In a few other cases, projects required beneficiaries to contribute to local funds to
    finance future common projects, usually rural development projects.
   Matching grants and selection mechanisms. A vast majority of agriculture projects (86 percent)
    selected applicants on a first-come, first-served basis and not on a competitive basis. Of the projects
    that employed the first-come, first-served mechanism, 80 percent have ratings satisfactory or above.
    But given the small number of projects selected on a competitive basis, it is hard to determine
    whether the choice of selection mechanism brings any systematic benefits.
   Link to other project components. Matching grants are generally part of larger projects with other
    components, which in some cases include access to finance. Only 27 percent of agriculture matching
    grants projects included an access-to-finance component, compared to 34 percent for all World Bank
    Group projects (including non-agriculture). This specific component may include setting up a line of
    credit for financial institutions, offering a partial credit guarantee, or providing technical assistance
    to financial institutions. By addressing the root cause of the lack of agriculture and rural finance, such
    a feature may be very effective at ensuring the sustainability of matching grant projects. Such a
    feature also seems to be associated with positive outcomes, as 75 percent of rated projects that
    included an access-to-finance component had ratings of satisfactory or above. However, including an
    access-to-finance component is not necessarily the only way to ensure links with the financial sector.
   Links with financial sector. While most matching grant projects do not include a specific access-to-
    finance component, some projects have promoted links between matching grant beneficiaries and
    financial institutions. They have done so through four major approaches: (1) financial institutions
    advise beneficiaries in the preparation of their business plans; (2) financial institutions are involved
    in managing grants, including appraising and disbursing grants; (3) financial institutions are required
    or incentivized to provide credit to finance part of the grant activities; and (4) financial institutions
    are deposit takers, and beneficiaries are required to save a specific amount and/or at a specific
    frequency from the proceeds of their activities. Projects that promote such links with financial
    institutions generally show a positive impact on access to and usage of financial services.

Lessons Learned and Recommendations
The following recommendations reflect emerging good practices for improving the additionality and
sustainability of agriculture matching grant projects.

    1. Before designing a project with a matching grant component, a strong economic rationale
       must be established for including such a component, and market failures must be properly
       described (e.g., lack of demand for or supply of business development services, limited supply of
       financial services, limited bankable demand for financial services). The following are among the
       market failures that are encountered in projects with matching grants:
            Uncertainty over benefits and externalities. Situations in which farmers and
               agricultural SMEs are unaware or uncertain of the benefits of investments in
               technology. Matching grants could aim to introduce new technologies and practices that
               contribute to higher productivity and at the same time generate positive environmental
               and social externalities that benefit the broader rural society and not just the
               beneficiaries of the project.
            Lack of longer term finance and perceived riskier profile of beneficiary and project.
               Situations in which longer-term funding to finance assets is unavailable, either because
               longer-term liquidity is lacking or because banks and financial institutions wish to focus


                                                                                                            4
            on short-term working capital and perceive riskier the longer-term gestation of the
            project as well as the beneficiary’s credit risk profile (in many cases they do not have
            sufficient information to assess it).
         Lack of acceptable collateral. Situations in which targeted beneficiaries lack collateral
            acceptable to developing country banks and financial institutions, many of which lend
            only against a fixed asset, usually real estate, as collateral.
2. If an identified market failure is the lack of access to finance for farmers and agricultural SMEs,
   improving access to agricultural and rural finance should be one of the project’s objectives. This
   could include explicit mechanisms in the project implementation design that would facilitate the
   exposure and linkages between financial institutions and project beneficiaries. For example,
   financial institutions could have a role in the implementation of the matching grant component.
   Even in the cases where financial institutions may refrain from lending to these beneficiaries, at
   least their exposure to them will enable them to collect data and familiarize themselves with
   such clients which could lead to eventually lending to them.

3. In order to judge whether a matching grant is the most cost-effective instrument to improve
   access to agricultural and rural finance, constraints on agricultural and rural finance should be
   systematically assessed through an agriculture finance diagnostic, and various alternative
   instruments should be considered to replace or complement matching grants. Where a
   matching grant component is included, moreover, criteria for targeting beneficiaries and
   activities should be transparent, carefully chosen, and clearly justified.

4. Matching grants design features should be determined carefully to foster links with the
   financial sector. Specifically,
    A matching grant should target specific investments and types of beneficiaries,
       particularly those with limited access to finance; by the end of the project, however, banks
       and financial institutions should be familiar with these investments and types of
       beneficiaries and should continue providing financial services to them.
    The size of the grant and level of grant matching should vary by type of beneficiary
       (microenterprises and farmer groups, small enterprises, or medium enterprises) and by type
       of investment (training, technical assistance, assets) so as to ensure take-up and
       additionality.
    Beneficiaries’ contribution must be set high enough to ensure ownership and to crowd in
       commercial credit. If one of the market failures is lack of finance and the matching grant
       aims to promote private sector financing, then having the grant component represent a very
       large percentage of the investment may discourage the use of financial markets. Matching
       grant components should be sufficient to encourage participation and investments, but not
       so large that they allow the client to finance a very large percentage of the project free of
       charge and without needing to tap into financial markets.
    Matching grants should aim to finance longer term investments, particularly with
       sufficient environmental and social externalities, and capacity building/advisory services
       for farmers and agricultural SMEs that require longer-term funds, which may not exist at
       all or may prove difficult to find for the purpose of funding these needs. Where the new
       assets require additional (or incremental) working capital, it may be justifiable for the first
       year to cover part of this additional working capital with a matching grant, as long as the

                                                                                                    5
           working capital does not exceed a certain level. One possibility is to cap it as a percentage of
           the total eligible investment for additional working capital. Regardless of the actual amount
           allocated to working capital, the matching grant should be used for a transformation in
           activities undertaken, with the working capital contribution essentially to ensure funds for a
           first test run or pilot of the new product being offered. If the percentage of grant is very
           high, it may be preferable then to focus exclusively on financing the assets and business
           advisory services; the working capital should be left for financial institutions to finance.
          Financial institutions can play a role in matching grants projects through various
           modalities:
                 For beneficiaries who have no relationships with financial institutions, a path
                    toward financial inclusion should be promoted as a key activity within the
                    matching grants project. This path could include financial institutions as deposit
                    takers in parallel to legal formalization of beneficiaries’ enterprises, and preparation
                    of business plans and financial accounts.
                 For beneficiaries who have existing relationships with financial institutions , a
                    stronger financial discipline may be required. Such approach could crowd in
                    commercial credit through lower level of matching or by offering varying level of
                    matching based on commercial credit obtained.
                 For beneficiaries who have lost access to finance, financial institutions could play a
                    leading role in the identification and selection of matching grants beneficiaries.
                 Where financial institutions’ lack of agriculture-related information and expertise
                    is identified as one of the key market failures, engaging financial institutions in the
                    advisory or management of matching grants should be considered. This would
                    expose financial institutions to information and data about beneficiaries that could
                    use eventually to lend to them.
          Technical assistance to help matching grants beneficiaries prepare business plans and
           proposals for financing can help ensure that the matching grant is successfully executed. It
           can also help financial institutions understand these projects and enable them to finance
           them (to complement the grant and beneficiaries’ own contribution). Ideally, the technical
           assistance would also include promoting the program, ensuring that applicants meet
           established project criteria, and providing ongoing support and mentoring beyond the initial
           business plan and financing proposals.
          Matching grants should explore synergies with other parts of the larger project. For
           example, investment climate reforms could address the market failures that preclude
           farmers and farmer organizations from using nontraditional (e.g., moveable) collateral for
           borrowing. Likewise, coordinating grants with partial credit guarantees and TA to banks and
           financial institutions could aim at promoting private sector financing and introduce banks
           and financial institutions to new types of clients and bankable investments.

Other key good practices in the implementation of matching grants include the following:
    Projects that include matching grants should include an appropriate M&E framework,
       indicators, and some guidelines for impact evaluation to justify the use of public funds to
       subsidize private sector investments. In addition to the usual indicators that measure
       absorption of project funds and reach (beneficiaries, investments, etc.), suggested additional
       indicators should include three broad categories:

                                                                                                          6
     Access to financial markets. Such indicators to an extend would depend on the financial
         market failure identified in the project as part of the justification for matching grants, but
         could potentially include access to credit through financial institutions by targeted
         beneficiaries, access to savings accounts, etc.
     Cost-efficiency: should focus on the cost efficiency of the use of matching grants for
         example, by comparing the matching grant size to its operating costs, benefits generated,
         etc.
     Spillovers and Increased Business Activity: Indicators should focus to measure impact
         beyond direct project beneficiaries and also capturing potential environmental and social
         benefits from investments promoted by matching grants.
   Although there is no clear evidence of the best way to select projects and investments for
    matching grants, a competitive mechanism with specific time-bound windows for applications
    is useful for limiting availability and for enabling choice among several competing projects.
   Projects with matching grant components should have a specific matching grant manual
    setting out the process for grant application, evaluation, disbursement, and monitoring, and also
    including forms/templates to be used and dedicated sections for financial management and
    procurement. Where possible, simplified procurement rules should be used for the acquisition
    of good and services under matching grants.
   Involving the matching grants PIU in the drafting and adjustment of the matching grants
    manual is important to strengthen the capacity of the PIU, ensure project ownership, and to
    ensure that processes are flexible. Throughout the project, the matching grants manual should
    be a working document that can be adjusted according to circumstances.
   Contracts with Business Development Service (BDS) providers should be designed to ensure
    quality and results. For instance, TORs may include a payment schedule where most of the
    payment is made at the end of the contract based on the achievement of specific objectives
    (e.g. productivity improved, website built etc.)
   A strong communication plan about matching grants since the beginning of the
    implementation is key to ensure uptake, equal access to grants, accountability and to foster
    spillovers. For instance, showcasing matching grants beneficiaries on local television, radio and
    social media increases project ownership and decreases the risk of grant misuse. Additionally, it
    can foster innovation and technology adoption among non-beneficiaries which is a key expected
    impact of matching grants projects. TTLs should work in coordination with social development
    specialists to ensure communication material and information reaches indigenous populations.
    this strategy should include partnering with organizations at the local level, such as district
    agencies, rural associations, and cooperatives




                                                                                                     7
References and Background Sources
CTA (Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation). 2016. Blending 4AG Conference
       Proceedings. Innovative Partnerships for Agricultural Finance, Brussels, Belgium.
Goldberg, Michael, and Daniel Ortiz del Salto. 2009. “Matching Grants: A Review of Matching Grants
       Systems in Private Sector Development Projects.? Unpublished memo. World Bank, Washington,
       DC.
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2014. The Big Business of Small Enterprises: Evaluation of the
        World Bank Group Experience with Targeted Support to Small and Medium-Size Enterprises,
        2006–2012. Washington, DC: World Bank.
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development). 2012. Matching Grants: Technical Note.
        International Fund for Agricultural Development.
Phillips, David. 2001. “Implementing the Market-Based Approach to Enterprise Support: An Evaluation
          of Ten Matching Grant Schemes.? Policy Research Working Paper 2589, World Bank,
          Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2016. “How to Make Grants a Better Match for Private Sector Development: Review of
       World Bank Matching Grants Projects.? Competitive Industries and Innovation Program, World
       Bank, Washington, DC.
       http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/693731491973004765/pdf/ACS20984-WP-
       P155294-PUBLIC.pdf.
———. Forthcoming. “How Can Matching Grants in Agriculture Facilitate Access to Finance? Learning
     from the World Bank Group’s Experience with Matching Grants for Agriculture.? World Bank,
     Washington, DC.




                                                                                                      8
Annex: List of Core Agricultural Matching Grants projects

Project   Project Name                             Fiscal Year Country          Matching         Expected number of beneficiaries                                            Is there an Percent of match      Implied MG
ID                                                 Approved                     grant fund                                                                                   access to   (%) (fill in)         component rating
                                                                                amount                                                                                       finance
                                                                                (mUS$)                                                                                       component
                                                                                (number)                                                                                     (Y/N)
                                                                                                                                                                                         50% for small
                                                                                             Irrigation: 33,000 small individual producers                                               farmers, 70% for
                                                                                             Dairy: 10,000 groups and 51,000 producers                                                   poverty targeted
                                                                                             Improed pasture: 110,000 producers                                                          rural development
P048505 MX AGRICULTURAL PRODUCT                          1999 Mexico                     343 750,000 poor and small producers                                                No          program                Satisfactory
                                                                                             20k community investment projects,                                                                                 Moderately
P076467 IN: Chatt DRPP                                   2003 India                       53 2k Panchayat (village) plans supported                                          No                            95% Satisfactory
P063622 NG-Fadama SIL 2 (FY04)                           2004 Nigeria                   58.2                                                                                 No          90% for rural          Satisfactory
                                                                                                                                                                                         infrastructure
                                                                                                                                                                                         development
                                                                                                                                                                                         (beneficiaries to
                                                                                                                                                                                         contribute 10% in
                                                                                                                                                                                         cash or kind)
                                                                                                                                                                                         60% for Productive
                                                                                                                                                                                         Asset Acquisition
                                                                                                                                                                                         (increased to 70%
                                                                                                                                                                                         during
                                                                                                                                                                                         implementation)
                                                                                                                                                                                         50% for irrigation
                                                                                                                                                                                         and mechanization
                                                                                             80k groups of 3-4 farmers for irrigation projects                                           (iniitally 30%0, 70%
                                                                                             2.2k groups of 10-20 farmers for mechanization projects                                     for drainage, 50 to
P084792 IN: Assam Agric Competitiveness                  2005 India                     37.8 15k farm families for micro-watershed drainage projects                         No          90% for fisheries      Satisfactory
                                                                                                                                                                                         40% for post-
                                                                                                                                                                                         harvest infra          Moderately
P049721 AGRIC COMPETITIVENESS                            2005 Kazakhstan               26.69 800 subprojects                                                                  No         projects,              Satisfactory
P104567 CO-Second Rural Productive Partnerships          2008 Colombia                  24.8 300 PP with 25,300 farmers                                                       No                             40 Satisfactory
P064918 PA Rural Productivity (former 2nd Rur Po         2007 Panama                    19.8 70 business plans of rural producer associations, representing 5,000 small-scale No         90% max
                                                                                             producers                                                                                   (association
                                                                                                                                                                                         provides minimum
                                                                                                                                                                                         10% in cash or in
                                                                                                                                                                                         kind)                  Satisfactory
P108885 VN - Agriculture Competitiveness Project         2009 Vietnam                   10.6 100 partnerships                                                                No                            40% Moderately
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Satisfactory
P081704 ML:Agr Compet & Diversif (FY06) - (PCDA)         2006 Mali                       9.9                                                                            550 Yes                            67% Highly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Satisfactory
P096105 SL-Rural Dev & Priv Sec Dev SIL                  2007 Sierra Leone                   8                                                                               No          75% for domestic
                                                                                                                                                                                         market
                                                                                                                                                                                         improvement
                                                                                                                                                                                         component, 50%
                                                                                                                                                                                         for agricultural
                                                                                                                                                                                         export promotion,
                                                                                                                                                                                         90% for support to
                                                                                                                                                                                         farmers
                                                                                                                                                                                         associations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Moderately
P087925 BO Land for Agricultural Dev                     2008 Bolivia                    7.8 2,200 families                                                                  Yes                           80% Satisfactory
P070063 ZM-Agr Dev Support Program (FY06)                2006 Zambia                       3 40k beneficiaries, 40 projects                                                  Yes         50% (Extension and Satisfactory
                                                                                                                                                                                         technology
                                                                                                                                                                                         development)
                                                                                                                                                                                         60% (Studies and
                                                                                                                                                                                         pilot)
                                                                                                                                                                                         75% (Support to
                                                                                                                                                                                         smallholder
                                                                                                                                                                                         producer
                                                                                                                                                                                         organizations)

                                                                                                                                                                                         30% match to
                                                                                                                                                                                         cooperatives, the
                                                                                                                                                                                         other 70% loan
                                                                                                                                                                                         from PFIs who
                                                                                                                                                                                         administer program
                                                                                                                                                                                         - match only paid
P049724 AGRIBUSINESS & MARKETING                         2005 Kyrgyz Republic            1.3                                                                                 Yes         after loan is repaid Satisfactory
P110588 Sudan Gum Arabic Export Marketing Projec         2010 Sudan                     0.75 30 producer associations                                                        No          33% for private      Satisfactory
                                                                                                                                                                                         companies and 67%
                                                                                                                                                                                         for public
                                                                                                                                                                                         agencies/producer
                                                                                                                                                                                         associations
P083609 SN-Agr Markets & Agribus Dev (FY06)              2006 Senegal                                                                                                        No          Variable for small
                                                                                                                                                                                         producers and
                                                                                                                                                                                         SMEs. Business
                                                                                                                                                                                         partnerships: 80%
                                                                                                                                                                                         for smallholders,
                                                                                                                                                                                         50% for SMEs.
                                                                                                                                                                                         Irrigation: 50% for
                                                                                                                                                                                         family-farms, 20%
                                                                                                                                                                                         for SMEs. Red meat
                                                                                                                                                                                         50%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9
